Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


P ERSONAS AS A WAY TO M ODEL T RUTHFULNESS IN
L ANGUAGE M ODELS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Large Language Models (LLMs) are trained on vast amounts of text from the
         internet, which contains both factual and misleading information about the world.
         Can language models discern truth from falsehood in this contradicting data?
         Expanding on the view that LLMs can model different communicative agents,
         we present the persona hypothesis: LLMs can cluster agents into personas using
         common features of their generations. For instance, a truthful persona is a group
         of agents that are likely to produce truthful text and that share similar features
         like formal writing styles and scientific references. By modeling this persona,
         LLMs can generalize truthfulness beyond the specific contexts in which each
         agent generated the training text. For example, the model can infer that the agent
         “Wikipedia” will behave truthfully on topics that were only generated by “Science”
         because they both belong to the truthful persona. We show evidence for the persona
         hypothesis via two observations: (1) we can probe whether a model’s answer
         will be truthful before it is generated; (2) finetuning a model on a set of facts
         improves its truthfulness on unseen topics. Next, using arithmetics as a synthetic
         environment, we show that language models can separate true and false statements,
         and generalize truthfulness across agents; but only if agents in the training data
         share a truthful generative process that enables the creation of a truthful persona.
         Overall, our findings suggest that models can exploit hierarchical structures in the
         data to learn abstract concepts like truthfulness.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Large Language Models (LLMs) are pretrained on increasing amounts of data from the internet
(Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022)—a noisy, and mostly uncurated corpus—which contains
both truthful statements about the world and untruthful statements such as misconceptions and
conspiracy theories. The false claims in the data pose a risk of misinformation as they can be
propogated by the model (Lin et al., 2021). Intriguingly, recent work shows that the truth value of a
statement can be elicited from its embeddings (Burns et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023). This motivates the
main question of this work: how do LLMs distinguish truth from falsehood?
Consider two contradicting statements: "COVID vaccines are extremely deadly" (false) and "most
studies suggest COVID vaccines are safe" (true). When asked about the safety of COVID vaccines,
the classic view of language models suggests that models should generate the most frequent statement
in the training data, regardless of whether this is true. However, we observe that slight changes in the
question can steer the model to produce any of the two (Figure 1). This suggests that frequency alone
is not sufficient to explain model behavior. Andreas (2022) hypothesizes that LLMs can infer the
agent who produced the text and generate continuations according to the agent’s goals and beliefs. In
this example, given the question "Why is the COVID vaccine so deadly?" with a false presupposition
(Kim et al., 2022), the model may infer that the agent who asks the question already believes that the
vaccine is deadly, and thus generate an answer following this (false) belief. If the question is instead
framed as "Are COVID vaccines safe for humans?", the model generates the true answer.
We build upon the above agent modeling view of language models (Andreas, 2022) and argue that
LLMs could additionally benefit from modeling personas—groups of agents.
Agent generates text in our training data based on their beliefs that a set of propositions A is true.
This set can be different for each agent. We stick to the definition by Andreas (2022).


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         Agents are clustered into personas during LLM training                        During inference, answers match the inferred persona

      Agent 1: InfoWars
                                                                                    Q: Why is the COVID vaccine         Q: Are COVID vaccines safe for


                                                                   😈
      MODERNA ADMITS VAX CAUSES CANCER! Huge                                        so deadly?                          humans?
      Development As Millions Die From Covid Injections.
                                                                                      LLM                                   LLM
      Agent 2: Before It’s News
                                                                 Untruthful
      Bombshell! 95% COVID Deaths Among Vaccinated.               Persona
                                                                                                          “Which persona is more
                                                                                                       likely to generate this text?”
                                                  Agent 3: The New York Times
                                                                                               😈                                        😇
        😇
                          Feeling Terrible After Your Covid Shot? Then It’s
                          Probably Working.

       Truthful                                                 Agent 4: BBC        A: The COVID vaccine is so          A: Yes, COVID vaccines have
                                                                                    deadly because it is a live         been shown to be safe for
       Persona            Covid vaccines being given to millions of people in
                                                                                    attenuated vaccine.                 humans.
                          the UK are extremely safe.


Figure 1: Our main hypothesis is that LLMs can discern truth from falsehood due to the presence
of truthful personas—cluster of agents who are likely to be truthful. The model can infer the agent
from the question, map it to an (un)truthful persona (emojis in the figure), and respond (un)truthfully
accordingly.


Persona: a latent variable that emerges during LLM training that clusters sets of agents according
to their commonalities. Intuitively, a persona helps the model infer that an agent is likely to believe
proposition p ∈
              / A is true if similar agents with the same persona believed so.
We introduce the persona hypothesis, in the context of truthfulness, as a bridge to explain how the
hypothesis from Andreas (2022) can explain the empirical results from Burns et al. (2022); Li et al.
(2023).

               Persona hypothesis: Language models can cluster agents into personas using
               common features of their generations. There exists a group of agents who are
               more truthful than others, and they can be clustered into a truthful persona; e.g.,
               Wikipedia and Science can be grouped by their formal tones and extensive use of
               citations. By modeling this truthful persona, language models can distinguish true
               from false statements, and generate truthful text from the persona.

We first provide evidence for the persona hypothesis by showing that it can explain two surprising
observations on the TruthfulQA benchmark (Lin et al., 2021). First, using linear probing, we can
predict whether the generated answer will be truthful or not from embeddings of the question alone.
This observation is consistent with the hypothesis that the model infers the agent and its persona from
the context (question) even before generation begins.
Second, finetuning an LLM on a set of true question-answer pairs significantly improves truthfulness
on unrelated topics. This is surprising because knowledge from the finetuning examples (e.g., blood
type has no influence on personality) does not generalize to test examples (e.g., the temperature of a
single day cannot accurately reflect the climate). However, with a truthful persona, the model can tie
these facts together and generalize the truthful behavior to unseen topics.
Next, we establish a direct connection between personas and model truthfulness through a synthetic
environment of arithmetics, where different agents have either true or false beliefs about the semantics
of each operator. We train language models on equations generated by these agents. By controlling
the data generating process, we show that models can separate true and false equations, and generalize
truthful behavior of an agent to unseen operators, but this is only possible when there exists a truthful
persona, i.e. a set of truthful agents that can be clustered by common features.

2      E VIDENCE OF LLM S M ODELING P ERSONAS
2.1       P ERSONAS CAN BE INFERRED FROM CONTEXT

As a first step to test our persona hypothesis, we verify if the model can infer a truthful persona from
the context by probing its internal activations.


                                                                                2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    0.70           Probes performance predicting truthfulness                                0.70       Probes performance across context tokens
                    0.65                                                                                     0.65

Weighted F1-Score


                                                                                         Weighted F1-Score
                    0.60                                                                                     0.60
                    0.55                                                                                     0.55
                    0.50                                                                                     0.50
                    0.45                                                                                     0.45
                                                               All questions
                    0.40                                       Random Guessing                               0.40                                    Random Guessing
                    0.35                                                                                     0.35
                             0        5       10      15     20      25         30                                  Instruction Question start Mid-Question   Last Token
                                             Embedding from layer                                                                 Token used for probing
                           (a) Probing from last token across layers.                                        (b) Probing across different tokens at layer 17.

Figure 2: (Left) Mean and standard deviation for F1 of linear probes trained on each layer of the
model to predict if response will be truthful over 20 randomized executions. (Right) F1 obtained
when training and evaluating probes at different input token embeddings. Best F1 is obtained when
using the entire question. Additional metrics and ablations are reported in Appendix ??


                                 Hypothesis: LLMs can infer truthful or untruthful personas from context, and
                                 generate text according to the persona.
                                 Evidence: Truthfulness of the answer to a question can be predicted from model
                                 activations before the answer is generated.

Experimental setup. We use the TruthfulQA dataset and the instruction-tuned Alpaca model (Taori
et al., 2023). We randomly split the dataset into 50% for training and 50% for testing. We prompt
Alpaca with each question (see Appendix A for the detailed prompt) and obtain: (1) the embedding
of the last token of the question prompt at each layer and (2) the answer to the question using greedy
decoding. We then label if the answer is truthful or not using GPT-judge (Lin et al., 2021) in line with
previous work (Nakano et al., 2021; Rae et al., 2021; Askell et al., 2021) (see Appendix C for details).
We finally train a linear classifier to predict truthfulness of an answer given the question embedding.
To account for the imbalance in labels (there are more untruthful generations than truthful ones), we
report the weighted F1-score.

Results. We run the experiment (data splitting, training, evaluation) over 20 random seeds. Figure
2 shows the average and standard deviation of the F1-score of the probe using embedding from each
layer. The probing result is significantly above random guessing from very early layers in the model
and peaks at layer 17 at approximately 65% F1, suggesting that the model encodes a latent variable
correlated with truthfulness of the answer.
Next, we visualize the persona inference process by plotting the probe performance as we incorporate
more context from the prompt. Specifically, we train linear probes on (1) a random token in the
instruction part of the prompt before the question is given, (2) the first token of the question—often
a “Wh-” clause, and (3) the seventh token of the question (on average, the middle token). Figure
2b shows the results using the representation from layer 17 where we observed a peak. Probing the
prompt instruction performs as well as random guessing. As we incorporate more context from the
question, performance increases, peaking when the entire question is observed by the model.
In addition, we look at how the probe performs across categories. We find that performance depends
on the question category. For instance, F1 for history questions peaks at 80% in late layers; while the
maximum F1 for questions about stereotypes is only 55% in very early layers. This suggests that
for certain topics the truthful statements can be harder to separate from the false ones. Appendix
B contains detailed results for the 5 largest topics in the dataset. Nevertheless, for most topics we
observe that the probe performs better than random guessing ruling out the possibility that the probe
is solely relying on the topic.

2.2                        T RUTHFULNESS CAN BE GENERALIZED ACROSS TOPICS

Now that we have seen models are able to infer a truthful persona from context, we next test whether
the model can use this persona to generalize truthfulness from one topic to another. We finetune


                                                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         TruthfulQA                    BigBench-misconceptions
                                 GPT-judge Human evaluation                  Human evaluation
       No Finetuning                39.0± 7.4              31.7± 7.1                      54.2± 10.7
       Truthful finetuning          74.4± 6.6              58.0± 7.5                      59.4± 10.5
       Untruthful finetuning         9.8± 4.5               6.7± 3.8                       30.7± 9.9
       TriviaQA                     24.4± 6.5              15.2± 5.4                      45.3± 10.7
       MS MARCO                     37.8± 7.4              21.3± 6.2                      49.2± 10.7

Table 1: Percentage of truthful model responses evaluated by the GPT-judge evaluator and human
judges on 164 test questions with 95% confidence intervals. Finetuning on (un)truthful QA pairs
makes the model more (un)truthful on unrelated questions.


LLMs on pairs of questions and truthful answers. Since all questions in TruthfulQA are factually
unrelated (i.e. there is no information that can be transferred from training to test questions), changes
in truthfulness can be attributed to a latent persona that guides model behavior.

         Hypothesis: Finetuning on true answers associates the inferred (untruthful) agent
         with the truthful persona, which helps the model generalize to unseen topics.
         Evidence: Finetuning LLMs to generate true answers for misleading questions
         improves truthfulness on unseen topics.

Experimental setup. We finetune the Alpaca model on question-answer pairs from TruthfulQA
using LoRA (Hu et al., 2021). We split TruthfulQA into 80% for finetuning and 20% for evaluation.
In Truthful finetuning (TF), the model is trained to output each truthful answer provided in the dataset
given a question. To test our hypothesis in both directions, we also perform untruthful finetuning (UF)
where untruthful answers are used as the targets. To ensure that the model is not relying on features
specific to TruthfulQA,1 we further test the model on the misconceptions dataset from BigBench
(Srivastava et al., 2022). We transform this dataset to fit our prompt format, resulting in 83 questions
(details in Appendix C). To evaluate truthfulness of the generated answers, we again use GPT-Judge
and the authors provided additional human evaluation.

Model generalizes to unseen topics and domains. In Table 1, we observe substantial changes
in truthfulness after both TF and UF on TruthfulQA: Truthfulness of model generations increases
from 39% to 74% after TF, and decreases to 10% after UF; a similar trend holds according to human
evaluation. Further, we evaluate a stronger form of generalization across categories. We train models
on TruthfulQA while holding out one of the following categories: misconceptions (104 examples),
specialized domains (economics, education, finance, health, law, nutrition, politics, psychology,
science, sociology, statistics; 283 examples), and falsehoods (stereotypes, conspiracies, superstitions,
myths, and fairy tales, misinformation; 104 examples). In Figure 3a, we see that improvement in
truthfulness on held-out categories is comparable to the TF baseline trained on all categories.
To ensure that the improvements do not come from general question-answering abilities (e.g., better
adaptation to the QA format), we finetune the model on random splits from TriviaQA (Joshi et al.,
2017) and MS Marco (Nguyen et al., 2016) of the same size as our finetuning set. We hypothesize that
these questions are unlikely to exhibit (un)truthful personas as there are no common misconceptions
on these topics. Thus, finetuning should provide a similar boost in QA abilities, but not modify the
(un)truthful behavior we are studying. The results in Table 1 show that models finetuned on these
datasets have similar truthfulness as the initial model.

Model generalizes from small sample size. If finetuning mainly helps the model identify an
already existing truthful persona, it should not require many examples to reach good performance.
Thus, we finetune the model with varying sample sizes and investigate whether in-context learning
(ICL) similarly guides the model to be more (un)truthful. We run TF with smaller splits (5% , 20%,
and 50%) and in-context learning with 10 (1.5%) and 20 (3%) examples. Results in Figure 3b show
  1
    TruthfulQA may contain superficial patterns that can be exploited to increase truthfulness. For example,
many questions contain false presuppositions, and “no” is often the correct answer.


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          100 Truthful generalization to heldout categories                                  90 Truthful generalization to unseen questions


 % truthful generations


                                                                                    % truthful generations
                                                                                                             80
                           80                                                                                70
                           60                                                                                60
                           40                                                                                50
                                                 TF baseline                                                                              No finetuning
                                                                                                             40                           In-context learning
                           20                    TF (- category)
                                                 No Finetuning                                               30                           Truthful finetuning
                            0                                                                                20
                                Falsehoods    Misconceptions Specialized dom.                                    0    10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
                                             Heldout category                                                             % truthfulQA examples
                                (a) Evaluating on heldout categories                                          (b) Evaluating on in-distribution questions

Figure 3: Generalization of Alpaca to unseen TruthfulQA questions. (Left) Results of models
finetuned with heldout categories (TF - category), all categories (TF), and the original model (No
finetuning). (Right) Results of small sample learning using ICL (10 and 25 examples) and finetuning.


that, aside from ICL with 10 examples, all methods achieve a substantial increase in truthfulness.
Finetuning on 20% of the data already matches the performance of finetuning on 80% of the data.
Overall, our results support the hypothesis that LLMs model truthful personas in the data. We show
this by predicting whether the generation will be truthful from only the question embeddings, and with
generalization experiments where finetuning improves truthfulness on unseen topics and domains.

3                         A RITHMETIC L ABORATORY: C ONNECTING P ERSONAS TO T RUTHFULNESS

In the previous section, we have shown evidence of LLMs modeling (un)truthful personas. In this
section, we establish a direct connection between personas and model truthfulness by controlling the
data generating process in a synthetic environment inspired by Power et al. (2022).
Dataset generation. We design the synthetic data to simulate real pretraining data that contains
a mixture of truthful and untruthful statements generated by various agents (e.g. Wikipedia and
Twitter). The synthetic data consists of arithmetic equations generated by different agents. Each
agent a ∈ S has “belief” about the meaning of each arithmetic operator op ∈ O, which takes in two
integer operands x, y ∈ N+ and returns z. The agent may have a correct belief about op, denoted by
opT , or a false belief denoted by opF . For example, an agent may believe that op means addition
(e.g., op(3, 2) = 5), which is the assigned true semantics of op, whereas another agent has the
false belief that op means subtraction (e.g., op(3, 2) = 1). Each data point follows the format:
a | x op y = z where z is either opT (x, y) or opF (x, y) depending on the agent, and | is a separator
token. Specifically, we use the following generative process:


                                                                                                                               opT (x, y) w.p. p(a,op)

                            a ∼ U(S) ; op ∼ U(O) ; x, y ∼ U({1, 2, .., n}) ; z =                                                                                (1)
                                                                                                                               opF (x, y) otherwise

where p(a,op) ∈ (0, 1)2 is the probability the agent a has correct belief about op and U denotes the
uniform distribution. We say that an agent a is truthful on op if p(a,op) is high. The exact operations
of the truthful and untruthful operators can be found in Appendix D.

Experimental setup. In each experiment, we train a 4-layer Transformer with 4 attention heads
on the synthetic data using the causal language modeling objective. The hidden dimension and the
embedding dimension are set to 128. All models are trained with a batch size of 512 and learning rate
of 0.001 using the Adam optimizer Kingma & Ba (2014) for a total of 20k steps. We use a custom
tokenizer where the vocabulary contains agent tokens, operator tokens, digit tokens and special tokens
(e.g., the separator). Numbers are tokenized so that each digit is a separate token in the sequence. For
more training details, see Appendix C.
    2
      We never set p(a,op) to be exactly 0 (completely untruthful) or 1 (completely truthful) to stay closer to the
real setting.


                                                                                5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.1   P ROBING FOR T RUTHFULNESS

Motivated by the observations on LLMs, we train probes to predict whether a model’s answer for an
incomplete equation (e.g., a | x op y =) will be truthful. We expect that it would only be possible to
probe for truthfulness if there is a truthful persona in the generative process. That is, agents who are
likely to produce truthful outputs share some common features that can be clustered. We thus create
two pretraining setups with and without truthful personas as follows:

1. Truthful persona. We use four agents (A, B, C, and D) and m operators. A and B are truthful
   agents who are truthful on all m operators, whereas C and D are untruthful on all m operators.
   Thus, the model can use the shared belief among A and B, and C and D respectively to cluster
   these agents and form (un)truthful personas. We vary m ∈ {8, 12, 16, 20}.
2. No truthful persona. Same as in (1), we have four agents and m operators. However, none of
   the agents is truthful across all the operators; each agent is truthful on only m
                                                                                   4 operators (disjoint
   among the four agents). We similarly vary m ∈ {8, 12, 16, 20}. Since all agents are (un)truthful
   on disjoint sets of operators, there are no features the model can use to cluster them hence no
   (un)truthful personas.

In both cases, we first generate synthetic data according to Equation 1 covering all agents, operators,
and operands (i.e. 4 · m · 10k data points in total with n = 100). We then randomly split this dataset
into 70% training data and 30% test data and train a language model.
Then, we train probes to predict whether the model’s prediction given an input expression a | x op y =
is truthful or not. The probe is a linear model that takes in the embedding of ‘=’ from a particular
layer. Analogous to the LLM probing experiments, we train the probes on half of the operators and
evaluate them on the other half to ensure that they do not simply learn which combinations of agents
and operators are truthful, but rather rely on features that generalize across agents (i.e. personas). We
run the experiment 3 times using different random seeds to select which half of the operators to train
(and test) the probe on, where for each run we select 5k examples for training and testing the probe
respectively. In initial experiments, we observe that probes trained on different layers can achieve
very different performance. To account for this, we report the maximum probing F1 across layers on
the test set.
We report the F1 score for the probes in both setups in Figure 4a. Across all values of m, probes get
higher F1 in the truthful persona training setup. We observe especially large variance in the setting
with no truthful persona — we hypothesize that this happens because in the absence of a truthful
persona, the probe can have widely varying generalization on the unseen half of the operators. This
result supports our persona hypothesis where we can discern true and false statements only if truthful
agents are clustered to form a truthful persona.

3.2   G ENERALIZING AGENT B ELIEFS TO U NSEEN O PERATORS

To test our hypothesis that personas can be used to generalize an agent’s behavior to unseen contexts,
we evaluate if models trained on the synthetic data can generalize a (un)truthful agent’s belief to
unseen operators. We expect the model will generalize (un)truthfully for the (un)truthful agents only
in the presence of a truthful persona. We create two training setups, as illustrated in Figure 5:

1. Truthful persona. The training data consists of seven agents, from A to G, and four different
   operators, from op1 to op4 . Agents A and B are truthful (T) on all four operators whereas agent
   C is untruthful (U) on all the four operators. The model can use the shared belief between A and
   B (i.e. the shared truthful interpretation opT from both agents) to cluster them into a truthful
   persona. The rest of the agents (D, E, F , G) are used for evaluation on the unseen operator op4 .
   Truthfulness increases from agent D to G where D is untruthful on three operators, whereas G is
   truthful on the three operators. The semantics of opT and opF for each operator can be found in
   Appendix D.
2. No truthful persona. The data consists of seven agents, from A to G, and four different operators,
   from op1 to op4 . In contrast to the previous setup, none of the agents A, B or C are truthful
   or untruthful across all four operators. Each of A, B, and C are truthful on two out of the four
   operators as illustrated in Figure 5. In this setup, there are no features the model can use to cluster


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                          Truthful Persona
                                                                                           1.0                                            No Truthful Persona
                    0.8
                                                                                           0.8                                      0.8

   Max Probing F1   0.7


                                                                              p_truthful


                                                                                                                       p_truthful
                                                                                           0.6                                      0.6
                    0.6

                    0.5                                                                    0.4                                      0.4

                    0.4                                                                                                             0.2
                                                                                           0.2
                                Truthful Persona
                    0.3         No Truthful Persona
                                                                                           0.0                                      0.0
                          8      10       12    14    16       18   20                                D E     F G                          D E      F G
                                      m: Number of operators                                           Agent Truthfulness Increases
                              (a) Probing for truthfulness                                       (b) Generalization to unseen operator

Figure 4: (left) Maximum F1 score across layer with std. deviation. A linear probe can predict if
model will be truthful in the presence of truthful personas but it is harder when there is no truthful
persona in the data; (right) Probability that the model assigns to the truthful answer (with std.
deviation) as described in Section 3.2. It increases with truthfulness of the agent when there are
truthful persona, but we see high variancein the absence of a truthful persona.

                                                A     B    C
                                         op1    T     T    U                 Agent truthfulness increases →
                                         op2    T     T    U
                                                                                                 D      E       F     G
                                         op3    T     T    U
                                         op4    T     T    U                    op1              U      U      U       T

                                                                                op2              U      U       T      T
                                           Truthful Persona
                                                                                op3              U       T      T      T
                                                A     B    C
                                         op1    T     U    U                   op4                ?      ?      ?      ?
                                         op2    T     U    T
                                         op3    U     T    U                               Seen                     Unseen
                                         op4    U     T    T
                                                                             T - Truthful                    U - Untruthful
                                          No Truthful Persona

Figure 5: Illustration of the synthetic setup used to test generalization. The first setup (top) has a
truthful persona in the data (A, B) whereas the second one (bottom) does not. We evaluate whether
models generalize truthfully by testing with 4 new agents (D, E, F, G) which exhibit varying degrees
of truthfulness.


   the agents since they are truthful on subsets of operators with no (e.g., A and B) or little (e.g., A
   and C) overlap. Similar to the previous setup, the other agents (D, E, F , G) are used to evaluate
   generalization to the unseen operator op4 where truthfulness increases from D to G.

In both setups, we first generate synthetic data according to Equation 1, and randomly split it into 70%
training and 30% test data. We repeat the experiment 4 times, by randomly selecting the definitions
of the operators. To evaluate the model on an unseen agent-operator operator combination, we
compute the average probability assigned by the model to the truthful and untruthful answers across
all held-out equations for that operator. We use ptruthful and puntruthful to denote the average model
likelihood for the truthful and untruthful answers respectively.

Results. In each of the two setups, we report ptruthful for the unseen operators across the four
agents D, E, F , G in Figure 4b. We observe that in the setting with a truthful persona, the model
generalizes truthfully for the truthful agent G on the unseen operator. Similarly, the model generalizes
untruthfully for the untruthful agent D3 —both have much smaller variance than the intermediate
agents where the agents are not (un)truthful on all operators. On the other hand, in the setup with
   3
       See Appendix D for the graph of puntruthful .


                                                                         7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             D           E           F          G
                   Truthful Answer        92.66%       91.88%    97.84%       100%
                   Control Answer         47.82%       45.36%    45.29%      46.33%
                   Untruthful Answer      96.38%       94.73%    90.78%      79.33%
                   Control Answer         24.58%       25.03%    24.98%      23.91%

Table 2: Probing accuracy for the equations involving op4 to either predict the truthful answer, the
untruthful answer or a control answer. Models encode both the truthful and untruthful answer much
better than the control answer, irrespective of whether the equation involves a truthful or an untruthful
agent.


no truthful persona, we observe very high variance in ptruthful . This happens because the model
generalization widely varies over different runs (e.g. ptruthful ≈ 0 in some runs and ptruthful ≈ 1 in
others). For models to generalize as expected in the setting with truthful persona, the model clusters
agents who are mostly truthful (e.g. A, B, G), which can be used to determine which function to use
for the unseen agent-operator combination (G on op4 ). Thus, consistent with our hypothesis, we
observe that models can generalize to produce (un)truthful output for (un)truthful agents, only in the
presence of a truthful persona.

3.3   M ECHANISM FOR PERSONA - BASED COMPUTATION

Our hypothesis in this work is that LLMs can infer the agent based on the input context, map it to an
(un)truthful persona based on the cluster the agent belongs to, and generate (un)truthful continuations
accordingly. An interesting question here is the mechanism of how LLMs perform the persona-based
computation — do they first infer the persona and then compute the corresponding answer? Or do
they compute all possible answers and then pick one depending on the inferred persona?
To answer this question, we perform some preliminary experiments in the synthetic setup. Specifically,
we train two linear probes on the representation to predict the truthful answer and the untruthful
answer to the equation respectively. We use the model from Figure 5 with truthful personas (top),
and use the representation from the last layer to train the probes. Both the probes are trained on 50k
randomly sampled examples, and evaluated on held-out equations for op4 . We also train control
probes to predict an answer of an unrelated operation as a baseline — this helps to control for the
possibility of the LLM encoding all numbers in the representation, or the probe learning to perform
the task. More experimental details can be found in Appendix C.
In Table 2, we find that irrespective of whether we condition on a truthful or an untruthful agent,
models encode both the truthful and untruthful answers much better than the control answer. This
indicates that models compute and store all possible answers of an input and then ‘pick’ an answer
based on the inferred persona. This could also help explain the success of supervised finetuning in
making models truthful (Ouyang et al., 2022), since the finetuning procedure only has to change
which answer the model picks instead of teaching it a new answer. We leave more investigation along
this direction for future work.
Limitations of the synthetic setting. We note that even though we observe results consistent with
our hypothesis in the synthetic setting, it has certain limitations and gaps compared to real LLMs.
First, we explicitly represent the agent producing the data with a token. In real LLMs, models would
have to infer the agent from the text and may not be able to do it as easily as in the synthetic setting.
Second, in the synthetic setting, we assumed that both truthful and untruthful answers are equally easy
or equally hard to compute — this leaves open the possibility that truthful (or untruthful) answers are
‘simpler’ and easier to model. Additionally, we assumed that truthful agents share common beliefs
across most if not all operators — in practice, truthful agents do not necessarily agree on every fact.


4     D ISCUSSION

Have LLMs robustly learnt what is truthful? In this work, we investigate the question of whether
LLMs can distinguish true and false statements. Note that this does not necessarily mean that LLMs


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


have perfectly learnt the concept of truthfulness. First, as we observed in both the LLM finetuning
and probing experiments, even though models perform much better than chance there is a still a
considerable gap; e.g., we can probe with only up to ≈70% accuracy whether the model will make
a truthful prediction. Second, our experiments only provide evidence of the existence of truthful
personas, i.e. there exist features that the model can use to cluster truthful agents. Without knowing
the nature of these latent features (and whether they are spurious), it would be hard to conclude
if LLMs robustly learn the concept of truthfulness. Nevertheless, the evidence that finetuning for
truthfulness generalizes to out-of-distribution data suggests that these features might be at least
somewhat meaningful. Additionally, according to our hypothesis, models would not be able to
generalize to contexts where no truthful statements are observed in the training data.
Other hypotheses of how LLMs can learn truthfulness. Firstly, we note that we only provide
one hypothesis of how LLMs might learn the concept of truthfulness which is consistent with our
observations. Nevertheless, the definition of personas is general enough to capture some other
hypotheses of the mechanism behind truthfulness. For example, it could be possible that a small
number of truthful and untruthful statements in the pretraining data have annotations, say in the
form of comments in forums indicating whether the statement was truthful. A model could use this
annotation to cluster truthful and untruthful statements.


5    R ELATED W ORK

Evaluating truthfulness of LLMs. Lin et al. (2021) showed that LLMs mimic human falsehoods
and larger models are generally less truthful. However a follow-up (Wei et al., 2022) showed that this
behaviour is in fact U-shaped — beyond a certain scale, truthfulness seems to increase as we increase
the scale of models.
Improving truthfulness. Recent work has shown that despite LLMs mimicking human falsehoods
and not always being truthful, it is possible to perform model interventions to make the model
more truthful. Burns et al. (2022) showed that using an unsupervised consistency-based method
can help elicit truthful answers beyond what the LLM outputs. Similarly, Li et al. (2023) showed
that interventions on specific attention heads which are responsible for truthfulness can make the
model more truthful during inference. Chuang et al. (2023) showed that decoding by contrasting
across layers can increase truthfulness. Recent work has also shown, similar to our probing results,
that we can detect whether an answer produced by LLM is truthful either using its internal state
representation (Azaria & Mitchell, 2023) or using linguistic features of the answer (Lee et al., 2023).
All of this work provides evidence of LLMs having some notion of truthfulness. We build on this
literature to do more controlled generalization and probing experiments, and propose a hypothesis of
how LLMs could learn the concept of truthfulness.
Personas and Agents in LLMs. Despite conflicting information in the data (Chen et al., 2022),
Andreas (2022) argued that LLMs can serve as models of agents where they can infer properties of
the agent and predict the next word accordingly. There has been some empirical evidence suggesting
the same — Durmus et al. (2023) show that we can steer LLMs to express opinions similar to people
from some countries; Safdari et al. (2023) find that personality tests for LLMs under specific prompts
are valid and reliable; Zhou et al. (2023); Lin et al. (2021) show that adopting a persona of a professor
can improve truthfulness in LLMs; Deshpande et al. (2023) showed that LLMs have learnt personas
and certain personas can increase toxicity; Cheng et al. (2023) showed that we can use persona to
measure stereotypes in LLMs. Our work builds on these to show how LLMs modeling agents and
inferring personas can help it to discern true and false statements.


6    C ONCLUSION

We introduce a hypothesis of how LLMs can model truthfulness: persona hypothesis — LLMs can
group agents that share common features into personas that can be used to distinguish true from
false statements, and generalize agent behavior beyond the context in which it was observed during
training. We provide evidence that supports this hypothesis in both LLMs and a synthetic setup,
and the implications this might have for truthfulness. A better understanding of such a potential
mechanism in LLMs may enable more effective strategies to build trustworthy language models.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Jacob Andreas. Language models as agent models. In Findings of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics: EMNLP 2022, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022. Association for
  Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.findings-emnlp.423.
Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, T. J. Henighan, Andy Jones,
 Nicholas Joseph, Benjamin Mann, Nova DasSarma, Nelson Elhage, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny
 Hernandez, John Kernion, Kamal Ndousse, Catherine Olsson, Dario Amodei, Tom B. Brown, Jack
 Clark, Sam McCandlish, Christopher Olah, and Jared Kaplan. A general language assistant as a
 laboratory for alignment. ArXiv, abs/2112.00861, 2021. URL https://api.semanticscholar.
 org/CorpusID:244799619.

Amos Azaria and Tom M. Mitchell. The internal state of an llm knows when its lying. ArXiv,
 abs/2304.13734, 2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:258352729.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel
  Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, T. J. Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler,
  Jeff Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray,
  Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever,
  and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. ArXiv, abs/2005.14165, 2020.
Collin Burns, Hao-Tong Ye, Dan Klein, and Jacob Steinhardt. Discovering latent knowledge in
  language models without supervision. ArXiv, abs/2212.03827, 2022.
Hung-Ting Chen, Michael J.Q. Zhang, and Eunsol Choi. Rich knowledge sources bring complex
  knowledge conflicts: Recalibrating models to reflect conflicting evidence. In Conference on Em-
  pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2022. URL https://api.semanticscholar.
  org/CorpusID:253107178.

Myra Cheng, Esin Durmus, and Dan Jurafsky. Marked personas: Using natural language prompts
 to measure stereotypes in language models. ArXiv, abs/2305.18189, 2023. URL https://api.
 semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:258960243.

Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh,
  Kensen Shi, Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek Rao, Parker Barnes, Yi Tay, Noam M.
  Shazeer, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Benton C. Hutchinson, Reiner Pope,
  James Bradbury, Jacob Austin, Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin, Toju Duke, Anselm
  Levskaya, Sanjay Ghemawat, Sunipa Dev, Henryk Michalewski, Xavier García, Vedant Misra,
  Kevin Robinson, Liam Fedus, Denny Zhou, Daphne Ippolito, David Luan, Hyeontaek Lim, Barret
  Zoph, Alexander Spiridonov, Ryan Sepassi, David Dohan, Shivani Agrawal, Mark Omernick,
  Andrew M. Dai, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Marie Pellat, Aitor Lewkowycz, Erica
  Moreira, Rewon Child, Oleksandr Polozov, Katherine Lee, Zongwei Zhou, Xuezhi Wang, Brennan
  Saeta, Mark Díaz, Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason Wei, Kathleen S. Meier-Hellstern, Douglas
  Eck, Jeff Dean, Slav Petrov, and Noah Fiedel. Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways.
 ArXiv, abs/2204.02311, 2022.
Yung-Sung Chuang, Yujia Xie, Hongyin Luo, Yoon Kim, James R. Glass, and Pengcheng He.
  Dola: Decoding by contrasting layers improves factuality in large language models. ArXiv,
  abs/2309.03883, 2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:261582463.
A. Deshpande, Vishvak Murahari, Tanmay Rajpurohit, A. Kalyan, and Karthik Narasimhan. Toxicity
  in chatgpt: Analyzing persona-assigned language models. ArXiv, abs/2304.05335, 2023. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:258060002.

Esin Durmus, Karina Nyugen, Thomas Liao, Nicholas Schiefer, Amanda Askell, Anton Bakhtin,
  Carol Chen, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Nicholas Joseph, Liane Lovitt, Sam McCan-
  dlish, Orowa Sikder, Alex Tamkin, Janel Thamkul, Jared Kaplan, Jack Clark, and Deep Ganguli.
  Towards measuring the representation of subjective global opinions in language models. ArXiv,
  abs/2306.16388, 2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:259275051.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


J. Edward Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, and Weizhu
   Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. ArXiv, abs/2106.09685, 2021. URL
   https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:235458009.

Mandar Joshi, Eunsol Choi, Daniel Weld, and Luke Zettlemoyer. TriviaQA: A large scale distantly
 supervised challenge dataset for reading comprehension. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual
 Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 1601–
 1611, Vancouver, Canada, July 2017. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/
 v1/P17-1147. URL https://aclanthology.org/P17-1147.
Najoung Kim, Phu Mon Htut, Samuel R. Bowman, and Jackson Petty. (QA)2 : Question answering
  with questionable assumptions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10003, 2022.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. CoRR,
  abs/1412.6980, 2014. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:6628106.
Bruce W. Lee, Benedict Florance Arockiaraj, and Helen Jingshu Jin. Linguistic properties of truthful
  response. ArXiv, abs/2305.15875, 2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  258887816.

Kenneth Li, Oam Patel, Fernanda Vi’egas, Hans-Rüdiger Pfister, and Martin Wattenberg. Inference-
  time intervention: Eliciting truthful answers from a language model. ArXiv, abs/2306.03341,
  2023.
Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. Truthfulqa: Measuring how models mimic human
  falsehoods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.07958, 2021.
Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, S. Arun Balaji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christopher
  Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, Xu Jiang, Karl Cobbe, Tyna Eloundou,
  Gretchen Krueger, Kevin Button, Matthew Knight, Benjamin Chess, and John Schulman. Webgpt:
  Browser-assisted question-answering with human feedback. ArXiv, abs/2112.09332, 2021. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:245329531.

Tri Nguyen, Mir Rosenberg, Xia Song, Jianfeng Gao, Saurabh Tiwary, Rangan Majumder, and
  Li Deng. Ms marco: A human-generated machine reading comprehension dataset. 2016.
Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton,
  Luke E. Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Francis Christiano, Jan Leike,
  and Ryan J. Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. ArXiv,
  abs/2203.02155, 2022. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:246426909.
Alethea Power, Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Igor Babuschkin, and Vedant Misra. Grokking:
  Generalization beyond overfitting on small algorithmic datasets. ArXiv, abs/2201.02177, 2022.
Jack W. Rae, Sebastian Borgeaud, Trevor Cai, Katie Millican, Jordan Hoffmann, Francis Song, John
  Aslanides, Sarah Henderson, Roman Ring, Susannah Young, Eliza Rutherford, Tom Hennigan,
  Jacob Menick, Albin Cassirer, Richard Powell, and George van den Driessche et al. Scaling
  language models: Methods, analysis & insights from training gopher. ArXiv, abs/2112.11446,
  2021. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:245353475.
Mustafa Safdari, Greg Serapio-Garc’ia, Cl’ement Crepy, Stephen Fitz, Peter Romero, Luning Sun,
 Marwa Abdulhai, Aleksandra Faust, and Maja J Matari’c. Personality traits in large language
 models. ArXiv, abs/2307.00184, 2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
 259317218.

Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao, Abu Awal Md Shoeb, Abubakar Abid, Adam
  Fisch, Adam R. Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya Gupta, and Adrià Garriga-Alonso et al. Beyond
  the imitation game: Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities of language models. ArXiv,
  abs/2206.04615, 2022. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:249538544.
Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Stanford alpaca: An instruction-following llama model.
  https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca, 2023.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jason Wei, Yi Tay, and Quoc V. Le. Inverse scaling can become u-shaped. ArXiv, abs/2211.02011,
  2022. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:253265047.
Yongchao Zhou, Andrei Ioan Muresanu, Ziwen Han, Keiran Paster, Silviu Pitis, Harris Chan, and
  Jimmy Ba. Large language models are human-level prompt engineers. In The Eleventh International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  92gvk82DE- .


A    A LPACA P ROMPTS
To prompt Alpaca in a 0-shot setting, we adapt the prompt used by the original Alpaca authors to
finetune the model (Taori et al., 2023) for question answering. We also use this prompt for our
probing and finetuning experiments.

         ### Instruction:
         Answer the following question

         ### Input:
         {question}

         ### Response:

where {question} is the placeholder for the question. In our probing experiments, we use the
embedding of the last prompt token before the response sampling starts.
For in-context learning (ICL), however, we use a shorter prompt for the examples to fit in the context
window.

         Q: {example question 1}
         A: {example answer 1}
         ...
         Q: {example question N}
         A: {example answer N}

         Q: {test question}
         A:


B    P ROBING A BLATIONS
We run some additional experiments to better understand the probing results from Section 2.1. First,
as described before, we analyze the performance of the probe across different topics in Figure 6. We
observe that the performance of the probe varies by topic e.g. it is much easier to detect if model
will be truthful for question from economics compared to questions involving stereotypes. This
potentially suggests that personas may not be perfectly defined over all topics, and there could in fact
be much smaller clusters of truthful agents.
Next, to expand on the results in Figure 2b, we use the same tokens to obtain the representation but
instead of using a specific layer (layer 17), we plot the performance of the probe across different
layers in Figure 7.
Figure 8 reports accuracy as an alternative probing metric for Figure 2.
Finally, Figure 9 reports probing results over the generated tokens as a baseline for results in Figure
2b. Probing the embedding of the last generated token in the answer obtains a better performance than
probing only the question context. However, the difference is small and suggests that the question is
already very informative for truthfulness of the generation.


                                                  12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               0.9                    Probes performance per topic
                               0.8
                               0.7
                               0.6



                    F1-Score
                               0.5
                               0.4
                               0.3
                               0.2        Economics      Health            Misconceptions    Random Guessing
                                          Law            Sociology         Stereotypes
                               0.1
                                      0          5        10          15           20       25        30
                                                                      Layer

Figure 6: Variation of the F1 score of the probe trained across different layers for different topics.
It it easier to predict if model will be truthful for certain topics (e.g. Economics) than others (e.g.
Stereotypes).


Figure 7: F1 score of the probe when trained on different tokens of the prompt. As more context is
incorporated, the performance of the probe increases.


                               0.70          Probes performance predicting truthfulness
                               0.65
                               0.60
                   Accuracy


                               0.55
                               0.50
                               0.45
                                                                                      All questions
                               0.40                                                   Random Guessing
                               0.35
                                      0           5        10             15        20      25        30
                                                          Embedding from layer
Figure 8: Mean and standard deviation for accuracy of linear probes trained on each layer of the
model to predict if the response will be truthful over 20 randomized executions.


                                                                     13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             0.75                      Probes performance across context tokens
                             0.70
                             0.65
         Weighted F1-Score


                             0.60
                             0.55
                             0.50
                             0.45
                             0.40
                             0.35                                                                 Random Guessing
                             0.30
                                    Instruction   Quest. start   Mid-Quest.   Quest. end   Mid-Gen.      Gen. end
                                                                 Token used for probing
Figure 9: F1 obtained when training and evaluating linear probes at different input and generation
token embeddings as an extension of results in Figure 2b.


                                                                        14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C     E XPERIMENT D ETAILS

TruthfulQA Evaluation. We use GPT-Judge for automatically evaluating if the model generation is
truthful, in line with previous work (Nakano et al., 2021; Rae et al., 2021; Askell et al., 2021). To
obtain the GPT-Judge model, we use the OpenAI finetuning API at https://platform.openai.
com/docs/guides/finetuning using the datasets released in the TruthfulQA work - https://
github.com/sylinrl/TruthfulQA. We use the default hyperparameters and prompt suggested by
the original authors.
Finetuning for TruthfulQA. In all the finetuning experiments, we train Alpaca for 30 epochs with a
batch size of 48. We use the Adam optimizer Kingma & Ba (2014) with a learning rate of 9e − 5 and
a warmup ratio of 0.03. To finetuning models with a smaller compute, we use LORA Hu et al. (2021)
— we apply it to the query and key projection matrices where we set the rank to 16, a dropout rate of
0.05.
Transforming the BigBench misconceptions dataset. This dataset contains statements for classifi-
cation instead of question-answer pairs. We covert these statements into QA pairs using GPT-3.5
(Brown et al., 2020), and manually correct some generated questions which were not correct. Addi-
tionally, we manually filter questions about topics contained in TruthfulQA to avoid overlap between
them. The resulting dataset contains 83 examples.
Training in the synthetic setup. As mentioned before, we train 4-layer transformer models on the
generated synthetic data with the language modeling objective. The hidden dimension as well as the
embedding dimension are set to 128 and each layer contains 4 self-attention heads. All models are
trained with a batch size of 512 and learning rate of 0.001 using the Adam optimizer Kingma & Ba
(2014) for a total of 20k steps. We create a custom tokenizer to ensure that each digit is tokenized
separately. Specifically, the tokenizer contains the following tokens — one token for each agent,
separator token (‘|’), start of sequence token, end of sequence token, tokens corresponding to each
digit (0-9), one token for each operator in the data and a token for ‘=’.
Mechanism for agent-based computation. To train the linear probes for Section 3.3, since the
answers can span multiple digits, we train the probe to predict the first different digit between the
truthful and untruthful answers. e.g. if the truthful answer is 23 and the untruthful answer is 26, the
two probes will be trained on the representation of ‘2’ to predict ‘3’ or ‘6’ respectively. This is done
to reduce the output space of the probe. The probe is a linear model. To train the control probe for the
truthful answer, we select an answer based on the truthful operator for a different randomly sampled
operator. Similarly to train the control probe for the untruthful answer, we sample an answer based
on a untruthful interpretation of a different operator.


D     S YNTHETIC DATASET G ENERATION

In this section, we describe the details of the exact semantics of each operator in the synthetic setup
as well as the hyperparameters used to generate the data.


D.1    P ROBING FOR T RUTHFULNESS

In this experiment we have two training data setups, one with truthful persona and one without
a truthful persona as described in Section 2.1. In each setup, we have m operators where m ∈
{8, 12, 16, 20}. Instead of manually defining all the operators, we use the following to sample truthful
and untruthful interpretations of the operators:


                                       opT (x, y) = x + y + r1                                       (2)
                                         F
                                       op (x, y) = x + y + r2                                        (3)
where r1 , r2 are randomly sampled for each of the operators from the range (0, 70). Note that r1 and
r2 are different for all the operators.


                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We use n = 100 (i.e. range 100 for x, y) and randomly select the generation parameters. Specifically,
if an agent a is truthful on operator op, we set p(a,op) to be a random value > 0.8 and vice versa we
set it to < 0.2 if the agent is untruthful.

D.2    G ENERALIZATION TO U NSEEN O PERATORS

This experiment contains two setups, one with truthful persona and one without truthful persona as
described in Section 3.2. Both setups contain four operators, op1 to op4 .
Notation. In the following, first() and last() are used for functions that denote the first and last
digit of the argument respectively. We use ‘;’ to denote the concatenation of the two numbers (e.g.
2; 3 → 23). We use first2 () for the function denoting the first two digits of the argument (e.g.
first2 (123) = 12).
The exact semantics of the four operators of the truthful interpretations of the operators are as below:

      1. op1 T (x, y) = first(x + 4) + first(y + y)
      2. op2 T (x, y) = last(x) + last(y + y)
      3. op3 T (x, y) = first(x); last(y + y)
      4. op3 T (x, y) = first2 (x + x)

Similarly, the untruthful interpretaion for each of the four operators are:

      1. op1 F (x, y) = last(y + y) + first2 (x)
      2. op2 F (x, y) = first(x + x) + last(y)
      3. op3 F (x, y) = first2 (x + y) + first(y)
      4. op3 F (x, y) = last(x + y) + first2 (y)

We designed these operators, so that the models we are using can learn these operations. We also
ensured that all interpretations are distinct and unrelated to each other, although all of them are
similarly ‘complex’ allowing the model to learn the operations at similar times during training.
We use n = 200 (i.e. range 200 for x, y) and randomly set the generation parameters. Specifically, if
an agent a is truthful on operator op, we set p(a,op) to be a random value > 0.8 and vice versa we set
it to < 0.2 if the agent is untruthful.

E     G ENERALIZATION TO UNSEEN AGENT- OPERATOR COMBINATIONS

                                                                                      Truthful Persona
                                                                                      No Truthful Persona
                                             0.8                                0.8
                                                                                0.7
                                             0.6                                0.6
                              p_untruthful


                                                                 p_untruthful


                                                                                0.5
                                             0.4                                0.4
                                                                                0.3
                                             0.2                                0.2
                                                                                0.1
                                             0.0                                0.0
                                                   D E    F G                          D E      F G
                                                    Agent Truthfulness Increases

Figure 10: Probability that the model assigns to the untruthful answer — puntruthful decreases as the
truthfulness of agent increases in the first setup, whereas the behavior widely varies in the second
setup.

In Section 3.2, we demonstrated that models can generalize (un)truthfully for (un)truthful agents only
in the presence of a truthful persona. To do so, we looked at ptruthful across all agents for the unseen


                                                                16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


operator. Here, we additionally plot puntruthful , the average probability assigned by the model to the
untruthful answer in Figure 10.


                                                  17
