Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I NTRIGUING P ROPERTIES
OF G ENERATIVE C LASSIFIERS

 Priyank Jaini∗                      Kevin Clark                       Robert Geirhos∗
 Google DeepMind                     Google DeepMind                   Google DeepMind



                                             A BSTRACT

           What is the best paradigm to recognize objects—discriminative inference (fast but
           potentially prone to shortcut learning) or using a generative model (slow but poten-
           tially more robust)? We build on recent advances in generative modeling that turn
           text-to-image models into classifiers. This allows us to study their behavior and to
           compare them against discriminative models and human psychophysical data. We
           report four intriguing emergent properties of generative classifiers: they show a
           record-breaking human-like shape bias (99% for Imagen), near human-level out-
           of-distribution accuracy, state-of-the-art alignment with human classification er-
           rors, and they understand certain perceptual illusions. Our results indicate that
           while the current dominant paradigm for modeling human object recognition is
           discriminative inference, zero-shot generative models approximate human object
           recognition data surprisingly well.


Figure 1: Zero-shot generative classifiers achieve a human-level shape bias: 99% for Imagen, 93%
for Stable Diffusion, 92% for Parti and 92–99% for individual human observers (96% on average).
Most discriminative models are texture biased instead.

  ∗
      Equal contribution


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Classification with a diffusion generative classifier. Given a test image, such as a
dog with clock texture (1), a text-to-image generative classifier adds random noise (2) and then
reconstructs the image conditioned on the prompt “A bad photo of a <class>” for each class (3).
The reconstructed image closest to the test image in L2 distance is taken as the classification decision
(4); this estimates the diffusion variational lower bound (Clark & Jaini, 2023). For visualization
purposes, icons corresponding to the prompt class are superimposed on the reconstructed images.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Many discriminative classifiers perform well on data similar to the training distribution, but struggle
on out-of-distribution images. For instance, a cow may be correctly recognized when photographed
in a typical grassy landscape, but is not correctly identified when photographed on a beach (Beery
et al., 2018). In contrast to many discriminatively trained models, generative text-to-image models
appear to have acquired a detailed understanding of objects: they have no trouble generating cows
on beaches or dog houses made of sushi (Saharia et al., 2022). This raises the question: If we could
somehow get classification decisions out of a generative model, how well would it perform out-of-
distribution? For instance, would it be biased towards textures like most discriminative models or
towards shapes like humans (Baker et al., 2018; Geirhos et al., 2019; Wichmann & Geirhos, 2023)?
We here investigate perceptual properties of generative classifiers, i.e., models trained to generate
images from which we extract zero-shot classification decisions. We focus on two of the most
successful types of text-to-image generative models—diffusion models and autoregressive models—
and compare them to both discriminative models (e.g., ConvNets, vision transformers, CLIP) and
human psychophysical data. Specifically, we focus on the task of visual object recognition (also
known as classification) of challenging out-of-distribution datasets and visual illusions.
On a broader level, the question of whether perceptual processes such as object recognition are best
implemented through a discriminative or a generative model has been discussed in various research
communities for a long time. Discriminative inference is typically described as fast yet potentially
prone to shortcut learning (Geirhos et al., 2020a), while generative modeling is often described
as slow yet potentially more capable of robust inference (DiCarlo et al., 2021). The human brain
appears to combine the best of both worlds, achieving fast inference but also robust generaliza-
tion. How this is achieved, i.e. how discriminative and generative processes may be integrated has
been described as “the deep mystery in vision” (Kriegeskorte, 2015, p. 435) and seen widespread
interest in Cognitive Science and Neuroscience (see DiCarlo et al., 2021, for an overview). This
mystery dates back to the idea of vision as inverse inference proposed more than 150 years ago by


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Out-of-distribution accuracy across 17 challenging datasets (Geirhos et al., 2021). De-
tailed results for all parametric datasets are plotted in Figure 5; Table 3 lists accuracies.


von Helmholtz (1867), who argued that the brain may need to infer the likely causes of sensory
information—a process that requires a generative model of the world. In machine learning, this
idea inspired approaches such as the namesake Helmholtz machine (Dayan et al., 1995), the concept
of vision as Bayesian inference (Yuille & Kersten, 2006) and other analysis-by-synthesis methods
(Revow et al., 1996; Bever & Poeppel, 2010; Schott et al., 2018; Zimmermann et al., 2021). How-
ever, when it comes to challenging real-world tasks like object recognition from photographs, the
ideas of the past often lacked the methods (and compute power) of the future: until very recently,
it was impossible to compare generative and discriminative models of object recognition simply
because the only models capable of recognizing challenging images were standard discriminative
models like deep convolutional networks (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; He et al., 2015) and vision trans-
formers (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021). Excitingly, this is changing now and thus enables us to compare
generative classifiers against both discriminative models and human object recognition data.
Concretely, in this work, we study the properties of generative classifiers based on three different
text-to-image generative models: Stable Diffusion (SD), Imagen, and Parti on 17 challenging OOD
generalization datasets from the model-vs-humans toolbox (Geirhos et al., 2021). We compare the
performance of these generative classifiers with 52 discriminative models and human psychophysi-
cal data. Based on our experiments, we observe four intriguing properties of generative classifiers:

      1. a human-like shape bias (Subsection 3.1),
      2. near human-level out-of-distribution accuracy (Subsection 3.2),
      3. state-of-the-art error consistency with humans (Subsection 3.3),
      4. an understanding of certain perceptual illusions (Subsection 3.4).


2   M ETHOD : G ENERATIVE M ODELS AS Z ERO -S HOT C LASSIFIERS

We begin with a dataset, Dn := {(x1 , y1 ), (x2 , y2 ) · · · , (xn , yn )} of n images where each image
belongs to one of K classes [yK ] := {y1 , · · · , yk }. Our method classifies an image by predicting
the most probable class assignment assuming a uniform prior over classes:

 ỹ = arg max p(y = yk |x) = arg max p(x|y = yk ) · p(y = yk ) = arg max log p(x|y = yk ) (1)
         yk                        yk                                     yk

A generative classifier (Ng & Jordan, 2001) uses a conditional generative model to estimate the
likelihood pθ (x|y = yk ) where θ are the model parameters.

Generative models: We study the properties of three different text-to-image generative models
namely Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022) which is a pixel space based diffusion model, Stable Diffusion
(SD) (Rombach et al., 2022) which is a latent space based diffusion model, and Parti (Yu et al., 2022)
which is a sequence-to-sequence based autoregressive model. Since these models are conditioned


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: Error consistency across 17 challenging datasets (Geirhos et al., 2021). This metric
measures whether errors made by models align with errors made by humans (higher is better).


on text prompts rather than class labels, we modify each label, yk , to a text prompt using the tem-
plate yk → A bad photo of a yk . to generate classification decisions. Conceptually, our approach to
obtain classification decisions is visualized in Figure 2.
Following Clark & Jaini (2023), we generate classification decisions from diffusion models like
Stable Diffusion and Imagen by approximating the conditional log-likelihood log pθ (x|y = yk )
using the diffusion variational lower bound (see Appendix A for a background on diffusion models):

              ỹ = arg max log pθ (x|y = yk ) ≈ arg min E ,t wt kx − x̃θ (xt , yk , t)k22 ]

                                                                                              (2)
                     yk                               yk

For SD, x is a latent representations whereas for Imagen x consists of raw image pixels.
Evaluating pθ (x|y = yk ) for Parti amounts to performing one forward pass of the model since it
is an autoregressive model that provides an exact conditional likelihood. Thus, for each of these
models we evaluate the conditional likelihood, pθ (x|y = yk ), for each class yk ∈ [yK ] and assign
the class with the highest likelihood obtained via Equation (1).

Model-vs-human datasets: We study the performance of these generative classifiers on 17 chal-
lenging out-of-distribution (OOD) datasets proposed in the model-vs-human toolbox (Geirhos et al.,
2021). Of these 17 datasets, five correspond to a non-parametric single manipulation (sketches,
edge-filtered images, silhouettes, images with a texture-shape cue conflict, and stylized images
where the original image texture is replaced by the style of a painting). The other twelve datasets
consist of parametric image distortions like low-pass filtered images, additive uniform noise, etc.
These datasets are designed to test OOD generalization for diverse models in comparison to hu-
man object recognition performance. The human data consists of 90 human observers with a total
of 85,120 trials collected in a dedicated psychophysical laboratory on a carefully calibrated screen
(see Geirhos et al., 2021, for details). This allows us to compare classification data for zero-shot
generative models, discriminative models and human observers in a comprehensive, unified setting.

Preprocessing: We preprocess the 17 datasets in the model-vs-human toolbox by resizing the
images to 64 × 64 resolution for Imagen, 256 × 256 for Parti, and 512 × 512 for SD since these are
the resolutions for the each of the base models respectively. We use the prompt, A bad photo of a yk ,
for each dataset and every model. Although Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022) is a cascaded diffusion
model consisting of a 64 × 64 low-resolution model and two super-resolution models, we only use
the 64 × 64 base model for our experiments here. We use v1.4 of SD (Rombach et al., 2022) for our
experiments that uses a pre-trained text encoder from CLIP to encode text and a pre-trained VAE to
map images to a latent space. Finally, we use the Parti-3B model (Yu et al., 2022) consisting of an
image tokenizer and an encoder-decoder transformer model that converts text-to-image generation
to a sequence-to-sequence modeling problem.


                                                  4
        Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                          1.0                                                                  1.0                                                                      1.0                                                                        1.0
                          0.8                                                                  0.8                                                                      0.8


                                                                                                                                              Classification accuracy
Classification accuracy


                                                                     Classification accuracy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.8


                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Classification accuracy
                          0.6                                                                  0.6                                                                      0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.6
                          0.4                                                                  0.4                                                                      0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.4
                          0.2                                                                  0.2                                                                      0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.2
                          0.0                                                                  0.0                                                                      0.0
                                colour                   greyscale                                   true                      opponent                                       original                       equalised                             0.0
                                               Colour                                                              Colour                                                                   Power spectrum                                               0        90        180      270
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Rotation angle [ ]
           (a) Colour / greyscale                                              (b) True / false colour                                                                  (c) Power equalised                                                               (d) Rotation
                          1.0                                                                  1.0                                                                      1.0                                                                        1.0

                          0.8                                                                  0.8                                                                      0.8                                                                        0.8


                                                                     Classification accuracy
Classification accuracy


                                                                                                                                              Classification accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Classification accuracy
                          0.6                                                                  0.6                                                                      0.6                                                                        0.6

                          0.4                                                                  0.4                                                                      0.4                                                                        0.4

                          0.2                                                                  0.2                                                                      0.2                                                                        0.2

                          0.0                                                                  0.0                                                                      0.0                                                                        0.0
                                 0.0 .03 .05 .1 .2 .35 .6 .9                                         100 50 30 15 10 5 3           1                                             0       1 3 5 7 10 15 40                                                inf 3.0 1.5 1.0 .7 .55 .45 .4
                                        Uniform noise width                                                Contrast in percent                                                           Filter standard deviation                                            Filter standard deviation
                           (e) Uniform noise                                                              (f) Contrast                                                           (g) Low-pass                                                            (h) High-pass
                          1.0                                                                  1.0                                                                      1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1.0
                          0.8                                                                  0.8                                                                      0.8
Classification accuracy


                                                                     Classification accuracy


                                                                                                                                              Classification accuracy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.8


                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Classification accuracy
                          0.6                                                                  0.6                                                                      0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.6
                          0.4                                                                  0.4                                                                      0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.4
                          0.2                                                                  0.2                                                                      0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.2
                          0.0                                                                  0.0                                                                      0.0
                                  0      30 60 90 120 150 180                                         0      1 2 3 4 5 6 7                                                       0    1 2 3 4 5 6 7                                                0.0
                                          Phase noise width [ ]                                             Log2 of 'reach' parameter                                                Log2 of 'reach' parameter                                           0    1 2 3 4 5 6 7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Log2 of 'reach' parameter
                                 (i) Phase noise                                                       (j) Eidolon I                                                             (k) Eidolon II                                                          (l) Eidolon III

        Figure 5: Detailed out-of-distribution accuracy for Imagen, Stable Diffusion and Parti in com-
        parison to human observers. While not always aligning perfectly with human accuracy, the overall
        robustness achieved by Imagen and Stable Diffusion is comparable to that of human observers even
        though these models are zero-shot, i.e. neither designed nor trained to do classification.


        Baseline models for comparison: As baseline discriminative classifiers, we compare Imagen, SD,
        and Parti against 52 diverse models from the model-vs-human toolbox (Geirhos et al., 2021) that are
        either trained or fine-tuned on ImageNet, three ViT-22B variants (Dehghani et al., 2023) (very large
        22B parameter vision transformers) and CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) as a zero-shot classifier baseline.
        The CLIP model is based on the largest version, ViT-L/14@224px, and consist of vision and text
        transformers trained with contrastive learning. We use the CLIP model that uses an ensemble of 80
        different prompts for classification (Radford et al., 2021). We plot all baseline discriminative models
        in grey and human subject data in red.


        Metrics: We compare all the models over the 17 OOD datasets based on three metrics: (a) shape
        bias, (b) OOD accuracy and, (c) error consistency. Shape bias is defined by Geirhos et al. (2019)
        as the fraction of decisions that are identical to the shape label of an image divided by the fraction
        of decisions for which the model output was identical to either the shape or the texture label on a
        dataset with texture-shape cue conflict. OOD accuracy is defined as the fraction of correct decisions
        for a dataset that is not from the training distribution. Error consistency (see Geirhos et al., 2020b,
        for details) is measured in Cohen’s kappa (Cohen, 1960) and indicates whether two decision makers
        (e.g., a model and a human observer) systematically make errors on the same images. If that is the
        case, it may be an indication of deeper underlying similarities in terms of how they process images
        and recognize objects. Error consistency between models f1 and f2 is defined over a dataset on
        which both models are evaluated on exactly the same images and output a label prediction; the metric
        indicates the fraction of images on which 1f1 (x)=yx is identical to 1f2 (x)=yx (i.e., both models are
        either correct or wrong on the same image) when corrected for chance agreement. This ensures that
        an error consistency value of 0 corresponds to chance agreement, positive values indicate beyond-
        chance agreement (up to 1.0) and negative values indicate systematic disagreement (down to -1.0).


                                                                                                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


model                                    model type      shape bias    OOD accuracy      error consist.
Imagen (1 prompt)                         zero-shot         99%             0.71              0.31
StableDiffuson (1 prompt)                 zero-shot         93%             0.69              0.26
Parti (1 prompt)                          zero-shot         92%             0.58              0.23
CLIP (1 prompt)                           zero-shot         80%             0.55              0.26
CLIP (80 prompts)                         zero-shot         57%             0.71              0.28
ViT-22B-384 trained on 4B images        discriminative      87%             0.80              0.26
ViT-L trained on IN-21K                 discriminative      42%             0.73              0.21
RN-50 trained on IN-1K                  discriminative      21%             0.56              0.21
RN-50 trained w/ diffusion noise        discriminative      57%             0.57              0.24
RN-50 train+eval w/ diffusion noise     discriminative      78%             0.43              0.18

Table 1: Benchmark results for model-vs-human metrics (Geirhos et al., 2021). Within each model
type (zero-shot vs. discriminative), the best result for each category is shown in bold.


3     R ESULTS : F OUR INTRIGUING PROPERTIES OF G ENERATIVE C LASSIFIERS

3.1   H UMAN - LIKE SHAPE BIAS

Introduced by Geirhos et al. (2019), the shape bias of a model indicates to which degree the model’s
decisions are based on object shape, as opposed to object texture. We study this phenomenon us-
ing the cue-conflict dataset which consists of images with shape-texture cue conflict. As shown in
Geirhos et al. (2021), most discriminative models are biased towards texture whereas humans are
biased towards shape (96% shape bias on average; 92% to 99% for individual observers). Interest-
ingly, we find that all three zero-shot generative classifiers show a human-level shape bias: Imagen
achieves a stunning 99% shape bias, Stable Diffusion 93% and Parti a 92% shape bias.
As we show in Figure 1, Imagen closely matches or even exceeds human shape bias across nearly
all categories, achieving a previously unseeen shape bias of 99%. In Table 1, we report that all three
generative classifiers significantly outperform ViT-22B (Dehghani et al., 2023), the previous state-
of-the-art method in terms of shape bias, even though all three models are smaller in size, trained on
less data, and unlike ViT-22B were not designed for classification.


3.2   N EAR HUMAN - LEVEL OOD ACCURACY

Humans excel at recognizing objects even if they are heavily distorted. Do generative classifiers also
possess similar out-of-distribution robustness? We find that Imagen and Stable Diffusion achieve
an overall accuracy that is close to human-level robustness (cf. Figure 3) despite being zero-shot
models; these generative models are outperformed by some very competitive discriminative models
like ViT-22B achieving super-human accuracies. The detailed plots in Figure 5 show that on most
datasets (except rotation and high-pass), the performance of all three generative classifiers approx-
imately matches human responses. Additional results are in Table 3 and Figure 11 and 12 in the
appendix. Notably, all three models are considerably worse than humans in recognizing rotated
images. Curiously, these models also struggle to generate rotated images when prompted with the
text “A rotated image of a dog.” / “An upside − down image of a dog.” etc. This highlights an ex-
citing possibility: evaluating generative models on downstream tasks like OOD datasets may be a
quantitative way of gaining insights into the generation capabilities and limitations of these models.
On high-pass filtered images, Imagen performs much worse than humans whereas SD and Parti ex-
hibit more robust performance. The difference in performance of Imagen and SD may be attributed
to the weighting function used in Equation (2). Our choice of weighting function, wt := exp(−7t),
as used in Clark & Jaini (2023) tends to give higher weight to the lower noise levels and is thus bad
at extracting decisions for high-frequency images. SD on the other hand operates in the latent space
and thus the weighting function in Equation (2) effects its decisions differently than Imagen. Never-
theless, this indicates that even though Imagen and SD are diffusion-based models, they exhibit very
different sensitivities to high spatial frequencies. Despite those two datasets where generative clas-


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 6: Model-to-model error consistency for ‘cue conflict’ images. The matrix is sorted accord-
ing to mean error consistency with humans (higher consistency from left to right / top to bottom).


sifiers show varied performance, they overall achieve impressive zero-shot classification accuracy
(near human-level performance as shown in Figure 3).

3.3   SOTA ERROR CONSISTENCY WITH HUMAN OBSERVERS

Humans and models may both achieve, say, 90% accuracy on a dataset but do they make errors on
the same 10% of images, or on different images? This is measured by error consistency (Geirhos
et al., 2020b). In Figure 4, we show the overall results for all models across the 17 datasets. While a
substantial gap towards human-to-human error consistency remains, Imagen shows the most human-
aligned error patterns, surpassing previous state-of-the-art (SOTA) set by ViT-22B, a large vision
transformer (Dehghani et al., 2023). SD also exhibits error consistency closer to humans but trails
significantly behind Imagen. These findings appear consistent with the MNIST results by Golan
et al. (2020) reporting that a generative model captures human responses better than discriminative
models.
Additionally, a matrix plot of error consistency of all the models on cue-conflict images is shown
in Figure 6. Interestingly, the plot shows a clear dichotomy between discriminative models that
exhibit error patterns similar to each other, and generative models whose error patterns more closely
match humans, thus they end up in the human cluster. While overall a substantial gap between
the best models and human-to-human consistency remains (Figure 4), Imagen best captures human
classification errors despite never being trained for classification. We report more detailed results in
the appendix in Table 2 and Figures 11-18.

3.4   U NDERSTANDING CERTAIN VISUAL ILLUSIONS

Beyond quantitative benchmarking, we investigated a more qualitative aspect of generative models:
whether they can understand certain visual illusions. In human perception, illusions often reveal as-
pects of our perceptual abilities that would otherwise go unnoticed. We therefore tested generative
models on images that are visual illusions for humans. In contrast to discriminative models, gener-
ative classifiers offer a straightforward way to test illusions: for bistable images such as the famous


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 7: Generative classifiers understand certain visual illusions as indicated by their ability
to reconstruct ambiguous images in a way that aligns with how humans perceive those images.
For instance, they reconstruct a right-facing rabbit vs. a left-facing duck in the case of the bistable
rabbit-duck illusion and place the face in the right location and pose for an image where humans
show pareidolia (seeing patterns in things, like a face in a rock). Image attribution: Appendix D


rabbit-duck, we can prompt them to reconstruct based on ‘an image of a duck’ and ‘an image of a
rabbit’. If they can (a) reconstruct images resembling the respective animal and (b) they place the
reconstructed animal in the same location and pose as humans would, this can be seen as evidence
that they “understand” the illusion. We find that this is indeed the case for generative models like
Imagen, Stable Diffusion, and Muse (Chang et al., 2023). Since Parti cannot directly be used for
image editing, we used Muse—a masking-based generative model that operates on VQ-VAE tokens
similar to Parti—for this analysis instead of Parti; Muse on the other hand cannot be used as a clas-
sifier as explained in Appendix B. This ensures that our conclusions are not limited to diffusion
models but cover generative models more broadly.
In Figure 7, we use four different images that are either bistable illusions for humans or images
for which humans exhibit pareidolia (a tendency to see patterns in things, like a face in a rock). In
all cases, the text-to-image generative models are able to recognize the illusion and recreate correct
images conditioned on the respective text prompts. This indicates that these generative models share
certain bistable illusions and pareidolia with human visual perception.

4   A NALYSIS : W HERE DOES THE INCREASED SHAPE BIAS ORIGINATE FROM ?
In Section 3, we highlighted four intriguing properties of generative classifiers. The most striking
emergent property amongst the four is the human-level shape bias demonstrated by these generative
classifiers; a bias that no discriminative models so far was able to show. A natural question to ask is
thus: What aspect of these generative models causes such an increase in shape bias?
We observed that for diffusion models like Imagen and Stable Diffusion, the recreated images used
for classification were usually devoid of texture cues (for example see Figure 2). We posit that
the denoising process used for classification (cf. Equation (2)) of the diffusion model might bias
it towards capturing low-frequency information and thereby focuses on the global structure of the
image as captured by the shape of an object. Indeed, in Figure 5, we observe that while generative
classifiers are well within the range of other models for most datasets, they demonstrate very dis-
tinctive results on low-pass filtered images (also known as blurred); Imagen—the most shape-biased
model—is on par with humans. Conversely, Imagen struggles to classify high-pass images. Could
it be the case that these generative models put more emphasis on lower spatial frequencies whereas
most textures are high frequency in nature?


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


If this is indeed the case, then performance on blurred images and shape bias should have a signif-
icant positive correlation. We tested this hypothesis empirically and indeed found a strong positive
and highly significant correlation between the two (Pearson’s r(58) = .59, p < 0.001; Spearman’s
r(58) = .64, p < 0.001); a finding consistent with Subramanian et al. (2023) observing a signif-
icant correlation between shape bias and spatial frequency channel bandwidth. While correlations
establish a connection between the two, they are of course not evidence for a causal link. We hy-
pothesized that the noise applied during diffusion training might encourage models to ignore high-
frequency textures and focus on shapes. To test this prediction, we trained a standard ResNet-50
on ImageNet-1K (Russakovsky et al., 2015) by adding diffusion-style noise as a data augmentation
during both training and evaluation. Interestingly, such a model trained with data augmented with
diffusion style noise causes an increase in shape bias from 21% for a standard ResNet-50 to 78% as
shown in Figures 1 and 14 and Table 1. This simple trick achieves a substantially higher shape bias
than the 62% observed by prior work when combining six different techniques and augmentations
(Hermann et al., 2020).
This result shows that (i) diffusion style training biases the models to emphasize low spatial fre-
quency information and (ii) models that put emphasis on lower spatial frequency noise exhibit in-
creased shape bias. Other factors such as generative training, the quality and quantity of data, and
the use of a powerful language model might also play a role. However, given the magnitude of the
observed change in shape bias this indicates that diffusion-style training is indeed a crucial factor.

5   D ISCUSSION
Motivation. While generative pre-training has been prevalent in natural language processing, in
computer vision it is still common to pre-train models on labeled datasets such as ImageNet (Deng
et al., 2009) or JFT (Sun et al., 2017). At the same time, generative text-to-image models like Stable
Diffusion, Imagen, and Parti show powerful abilities to generate photo-realistic images from diverse
text prompts. This suggests that these models learn useful representations of the visual world, but
so far it has been unclear how their representations compare to discriminative models. Furthermore,
discriminative models have similarly dominated computational modeling of human visual percep-
tion, even though the use of generative models by human brains has long been hypothesized and
discussed. In this work, we performed an empirical investigation on out-of-distribution datasets to
assess whether discriminative or generative models better fit human object recognition data.
Key results. We report four intriguing human-like properties of generative models: (1) Generative
classifiers are the first models that achieve a human-like shape bias (92–99%); (2) they achieve
near human-level OOD accuracy despite being zero-shot classifiers that were neither trained nor
designed for classification; (3) one of them (Imagen) shows the most human-aligned error patterns
that machine learning models have achieved to date; and (4) all investigated models qualitatively
capture the ambiguities of images that are perceptual illusions for humans.
Implications for human perception. Our results establish generative classifiers as one of the lead-
ing behavioral models of human object recognition. While we certainly don’t resolve the “deep
mystery of vision” (Kriegeskorte, 2015, p. 435) in terms of how brains might combine generative
and discriminative models, our work paves the way for future studies that might combine the two.
Quoting Luo (2022, p. 22) on diffusion, “It is unlikely that this is how we, as humans, naturally
model and generate data; we do not seem to generate novel samples as random noise that we itera-
tively denoise.”—we fully agree, but diffusion may just be one of many implementational ways to
arrive at a representation that allows for powerful generative modeling. Human brains are likely to
use a different implementation, but they still may (or may not) end up with a similar representation.
Implications for machine perception. We provide evidence for the benefits of generative pre-
training, particularly in terms of zero-shot performance on challenging out-of-distribution tasks.
In line with recent work on using generative models for depth estimation (Zhao et al., 2023) or
segmentation (Burgert et al., 2022; Brempong et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023), this makes the case
for generative pre-training as a compelling alternative to contrastive or discriminative training for
vision tasks. Additionally, our experiments provide a framework to find potential bugs of generative
models through classification tasks. For example, all the generative models performed poorly on
the rotation dataset; those models also struggled to generate “rotated” or “upside-down” images of
objects. Similar experiments could be used to evaluate generative models for undesirable behaviour,
toxicity and bias.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Limitations. A limitation of the approach we used in the paper is the computational speed (as
we also alluded to in Section 1). The approach does not yield a practical classifier. Secondly,
all three models have different model sizes, input resolutions, and are trained on different datasets
for different amounts of time, so the comparison is not perfect. Furthermore, different models
use different language encoders which may be a confounding factor. Through including diverse
generative models, our comparisons aim to highlight the strengths and weaknesses of generative
models. We explore a number of ablations and additional analyses in the appendix, including shape
bias results for image captioning models that are of generative nature, but not trained for text-to-
image modeling.
Future directions. Beyond the questions regarding how biological brains might combine generative
and discriminative models, we believe it will be interesting to study how, and to what degree, lan-
guage cross-attention influences the intriguing properties we find. Moreover, is denoising diffusion
training a crucial component that explains the impressive performance of Imagen and SD? We hope
our findings show how intriguing generative classifiers are for exploring exciting future directions.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to express our gratitude to the following colleagues (in alphabetical order) for helpful
discussions and feedback: David Fleet, Katherine Hermann, Been Kim, Alex Ku, Jon Shlens, and
Kevin Swersky. Furthermore, we would like to thank Michael Tschannen and Manoj Kumar for
suggesting the CapPa model analysis and providing the corresponding models.

R EFERENCES
Nicholas Baker, Hongjing Lu, Gennady Erlikhman, and Philip J Kellman. Deep convolutional
  networks do not classify based on global object shape. PLoS Computational Biology, 14(12):
  e1006613, 2018.
Sara Beery, Grant Van Horn, and Pietro Perona. Recognition in terra incognita. In Proceedings of
  the European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 456–473, 2018.
Thomas G Bever and David Poeppel. Analysis by synthesis: a (re-) emerging program of research
  for language and vision. Biolinguistics, 4(2-3):174–200, 2010.
Emmanuel Asiedu Brempong, Simon Kornblith, Ting Chen, Niki Parmar, Matthias Minderer, and
  Mohammad Norouzi. Denoising Pretraining for Semantic Segmentation. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 4175–4186, 2022.
Ryan Burgert, Kanchana Ranasinghe, Xiang Li, and Michael S Ryoo. Peekaboo: Text to Image
  Diffusion Models are Zero-Shot Segmentors. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.13224, 2022.
Huiwen Chang, Han Zhang, Jarred Barber, AJ Maschinot, Jose Lezama, Lu Jiang, Ming-Hsuan
  Yang, Kevin Murphy, William T Freeman, Michael Rubinstein, et al. Muse: Text-To-Image
  Generation via Masked Generative Transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.00704, 2023.
Kevin Clark and Priyank Jaini. Text-to-image diffusion models are zero-shot classifiers. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2303.15233, 2023.
Jacob Cohen. A coefficient of agreement for nominal scales. Educational and Psychological Mea-
  surement, 20(1):37–46, 1960.
Peter Dayan, Geoffrey E Hinton, Radford M Neal, and Richard S Zemel. The Helmholtz machine.
  Neural Computation, 7(5):889–904, 1995.
Mostafa Dehghani, Josip Djolonga, Basil Mustafa, Piotr Padlewski, Jonathan Heek, Justin Gilmer,
 Andreas Peter Steiner, Mathilde Caron, Robert Geirhos, Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin, et al. Scaling
 vision transformers to 22 billion parameters. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
 pp. 7480–7512. PMLR, 2023.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hi-
   erarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


James J DiCarlo, Ralf Haefner, Leyla Isik, Talia Konkle, Nikolaus Kriegeskorte, Benjamin Peters,
  Nicole Rust, Kim Stachenfeld, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Doris Tsao, et al. How does the brain
  combine generative models and direct discriminative computations in high-level vision? 2021.

Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszko-
  reit, and Neil Houlsby. An Image is Worth 16x16 Words: Transformers for Image Recognition at
  Scale. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.

Robert Geirhos, Patricia Rubisch, Claudio Michaelis, Matthias Bethge, Felix A. Wichmann, and
  Wieland Brendel. ImageNet-trained CNNs are biased towards texture; increasing shape bias
  improves accuracy and robustness. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2019.

Robert Geirhos, Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen, Claudio Michaelis, Richard Zemel, Wieland Brendel,
  Matthias Bethge, and Felix A Wichmann. Shortcut Learning in Deep Neural Networks. Nature
  Machine Intelligence, 2:665–673, 2020a.

Robert Geirhos, Kristof Meding, and Felix A Wichmann. Beyond accuracy: quantifying trial-
  by-trial behaviour of CNNs and humans by measuring error consistency. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 33, 2020b.

Robert Geirhos, Kantharaju Narayanappa, Benjamin Mitzkus, Tizian Thieringer, Matthias Bethge,
  Felix A Wichmann, and Wieland Brendel. Partial success in closing the gap between human and
  machine vision. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:23885–23899, 2021.

Tal Golan, Prashant C Raju, and Nikolaus Kriegeskorte. Controversial stimuli: Pitting neural net-
  works against each other as models of human cognition. Proceedings of the National Academy of
  Sciences, 117(47):29330–29337, 2020.

Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Delving deep into rectifiers: Surpassing
  human-level performance on ImageNet classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE International
  Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 1026–1034, 2015.

Katherine Hermann, Ting Chen, and Simon Kornblith. The origins and prevalence of texture bias in
  convolutional neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:19000–
  19015, 2020.

Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.

Diederik Kingma, Tim Salimans, Ben Poole, and Jonathan Ho. Variational diffusion models. Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:21696–21707, 2021.

Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding Variational Bayes. International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2014.

Nikolaus Kriegeskorte. Deep neural networks: a new framework for modeling biological vision and
  brain information processing. Annual Review of Vision Science, 1:417–446, 2015.

Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. ImageNet classification with deep convo-
  lutional neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 1097–1105,
  2012.

Daiqing Li, Huan Ling, Amlan Kar, David Acuna, Seung Wook Kim, Karsten Kreis, Antonio Tor-
  ralba, and Sanja Fidler. DreamTeacher: Pretraining Image Backbones with Deep Generative
  Models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  16698–16708, 2023.

Calvin Luo.    Understanding diffusion models:        A unified perspective.     arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2208.11970, 2022.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Andrew Ng and Michael Jordan. On discriminative vs. generative classifiers: A comparison of
  logistic regression and naive Bayes. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 14,
  2001.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Michael Revow, Christopher KI Williams, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Using generative models for
 handwritten digit recognition. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
 18(6):592–606, 1996.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
  ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng
  Huang, Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, Alexander C Berg, and Li Fei-Fei.
  ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge. International Journal of Computer Vision,
  115(3):211–252, 2015.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed Kam-
  yar Seyed Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, S Sara Mahdavi, Rapha Gontijo Lopes, et al.
  Photorealistic Text-to-Image Diffusion Models with Deep Language Understanding. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Lukas Schott, Jonas Rauber, Matthias Bethge, and Wieland Brendel. Towards the first adversarially
  robust neural network model on MNIST. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2018.
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International Conference on Machine Learn-
  ing, pp. 2256–2265. PMLR, 2015.
Yang Song and Stefano Ermon. Improved techniques for training score-based generative models.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:12438–12448, 2020.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2011.13456, 2020.
Ajay Subramanian, Elena Sizikova, Najib J Majaj, and Denis G Pelli. Spatial-frequency channels,
  shape bias, and adversarial robustness. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2023.
Chen Sun, Abhinav Shrivastava, Saurabh Singh, and Abhinav Gupta. Revisiting unreasonable ef-
  fectiveness of data in deep learning era. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on
  computer vision, pp. 843–852, 2017.
Michael Tschannen, Manoj Kumar, Andreas Steiner, Xiaohua Zhai, Neil Houlsby, and Lucas Beyer.
 Image Captioners Are Scalable Vision Learners Too. In Advances in Neural Information Process-
 ing Systems, 2023.
Hermann von Helmholtz. Handbuch der physiologischen Optik: mit 213 in den Text eingedruckten
  Holzschnitten und 11 Tafeln, volume 9. Voss, 1867.
Felix A Wichmann and Robert Geirhos. Are Deep Neural Networks Adequate Behavioral Models
  of Human Visual Perception? Annual Review of Vision Science, 9, 2023.
Jiahui Yu, Yuanzhong Xu, Jing Yu Koh, Thang Luong, Gunjan Baid, Zirui Wang, Vijay Vasudevan,
   Alexander Ku, Yinfei Yang, Burcu Karagol Ayan, et al. Scaling autoregressive models for content-
   rich text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.10789, 2(3):5, 2022.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alan Yuille and Daniel Kersten. Vision as Bayesian inference: analysis by synthesis? Trends in
  Cognitive Sciences, 10(7):301–308, 2006.
Wenliang Zhao, Yongming Rao, Zuyan Liu, Benlin Liu, Jie Zhou, and Jiwen Lu. Unleashing Text-
 to-Image Diffusion Models for Visual Perception. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.02153, 2023.
Roland S Zimmermann, Lukas Schott, Yang Song, Benjamin A Dunn, and David A Klindt. Score-
  based generative classifiers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.00473, 2021.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Appendix
Table of Contents
      A Background on diffusion models                                                           14

      B Muse as a classifier                                                                     15

      C Limitations                                                                              15

      D Image attribution                                                                        15

      E Details on ResNet-50 training with diffusion noise                                       17

      F Shape bias of image captioning models                                                    17

      G Additional plots for model-vs-human benchmark                                            18

      H Quantitative benchmark scores and rankings                                               19



A    BACKGROUND ON DIFFUSION MODELS
Diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020; Song & Ermon,
2020) are latent variable generative models defined by a forward and reverse Markov chain. Given
an unknown data distribution, q(x0 ), over observations, x0 ∈ Rd , the forward process corrupts
the data into a sequence of noisy latent variables, x1:T := {x1 , x2 , · · · , xT }, by gradually adding
Gaussian noise with a fixed schedule defined as:
                                                      T
                                                      Y
                                    q(x1:T |x0 ) :=         q(xt |xt−1 )                              (3)
                                                      t=1
                                    √
where q(xt |xt−1 ) := Normal(xt ; 1 − βt xt−1 , βt I). The reverse Markov process gradually de-
noises the latent variables to the data distribution with learned Gaussian transitions starting from
Normal(xT ; 0, I) i.e.
                                                          −1
                                                         TY
                                pθ (x0:T ) := p(xT ) ·         pθ (xt−1 |xt )
                                                         t=0

pθ (xt−1 |xt ) := Normal xt−1 ; µθ (xt , t), Σθ (xt , t) . The aim of training is for the forward process
distribution {xt }Tt=0 to match that of the reverse process {x̃t }Tt=0 i.e., the generative model pθ (x0 )
closely matches the data distribution q(x0 ). Specifically, these models can be trained by optimizing
the variational lower bound of the marginal likelihood (Ho et al., 2020; Kingma et al., 2021):
                     − log pθ (x0 ) ≤ −VLB(x0 ) := LPrior + LRecon + LDiffusion
LPrior and LRecon are the prior and reconstruction loss that can be estimated using standard tech-
niques in the literature (Kingma & Welling, 2014). The (re-weighted) diffusion loss can be written
as:
                                                  h                         i
                             LDiffusion = Ex0 ,ε,t wt kx0 − x̃θ (xt , t)k22

with x0 ∼ q(x0 ), ε ∼ Normal(0, I), and t ∼ U([0, T ]). Here, wt is a weight assigned to the
timestep, and x̃θ (xt , t) is the model’s prediction of the observation x0 from the noised observation
xt . Diffusion models can be conditioned on additional inputs like class labels, text prompts, seg-
mentation masks or low-resolution images, in which case x̃θ also takes a conditioning signal y as
input.


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Design choices zero-shot classification using diffusion models: We follow the exact experiment
setting here as in Clark & Jaini (2023) for Imagen and Stable Diffusion to obtain classification
decisions. Specifically, we use the heuristic weighting function wt := exp(−7t) in Equation (2) to
aggregate scores across multiple time steps. We use a single prompt for each image instead of an
ensemble of prompts as used in CLIP to keep the experiments simple.

Loss function: We use the L2 loss function for diffusion-based models since it approximates the
diffusion variational lower bound (see Equation (2)) and thus results in a Bayesian classifier. Fur-
thermore, both Stable Diffusion and Imagen are trained with the L2 loss objective. Thus, a different
loss function will no longer result in a Bayesian classifier and will not work well due to differences
from the training paradigm.

Algorithm 1 Classification using diffusion models.
    given: Example to classify x, diffusion model w/ params θ, weighting function w.
    Map from classes to diffusion model scores.
    scores = {yi : [] for yi ∈ [yK ]}
    n=0
    n < max scores:
       n=n+1
      Noise the image
       t ∼ U([0, 1])
       xt ∼ q(xt |x)
      Score against the remaining classes.
       for yi ∈ scores:
         add wt kx − x̃θ xt , φ(yi ), t k22
         to scores[yi ]
    return ỹ


B     M USE AS A CLASSIFIER

In Figure 8, we visualize why we were not able to include Muse as a (successful) classifier in our
experiments. Even on clean, undistorted images Muse achieved only approximately chance-level
accuracy. This may, however, just be a limitation on how we attempted to extract classification
decisions out of the model; it is very well possible that other approaches might work better.

C     L IMITATIONS

As mentioned in the introduction, using a generative model comes with advantages and disadvan-
tages: potentially better generalization currently comes at the cost of being slower computationally
compared to standard discriminative models. While this doesn’t matter much for the purpose of anal-
yses, it is a big drawback in practical applications and any approaches that improve speed would be
most welcome—in particular, generating at least one prediction (i.e., image generation) per class as
we currently do is both expensive and slow.
Furthermore, the models we investigate all differ from another in more than one ways. For instance,
their training data, architecture, and training procedure is not identical, thus any differences between
the models cannot currently be attributed to a single factor. That said, through the inclusion of a set
of diverse models covering pixel-based diffusion, latent space diffusion, and autoregressive models
we seek to at least cover a variety of generative classifiers in order to ensure that the conclusions we
draw are not limited to a narrow set of generative models.

D     I MAGE ATTRIBUTION

Rabbit-duck image:
Attribution: Unknown source, Public domain, via Wikimedia Commons.


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 8: Muse as a classifier. This figure illustrates why Muse reconstructions are often chal-
lenging to use for classification. Given a starting image of a bottle with bear texture, we here plot
16 reconstructions each prompted with a different label. The L2 distance to the original image is
shown in red for all categories except the one with the lowest distance (here: top left), for which the
distance is plotted in green. The images with the lowest distance (row 1 column 1: airplane; row
2 column 3: car, row 4 column 4: truck) appear to be categories for which the model is unable to
generate a realistic reconstruction, and thus simply sticks close to the original image. The image
generated by prompting with the correct shape category (bottle) is shown in row 2 column 2. Since
Muse returns images fairly close to the original one if it is not able to generate a realistic reconstruc-
tion, the approach of measuring L2 distance between original and reconstruction is not a feasible
classification approach for Muse.


Link:         https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/9/96/
Duck-Rabbit.png
Rock image:
Attribution: Mirabeau, CC BY-SA 3.0, via Wikimedia Commons.
Link: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Visage_dans_un_rocher.
jpg
Vegetable portrait image:
Attribution: Giuseppe Arcimboldo, Public domain, via Wikimedia Commons.
Link:               https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/49/
Arcimboldo_Vegetables.jpg
Woman image:
Attribution: W. E. Hill, Public domain, via Wikimedia Commons.
Link:     https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/5/5f/My_Wife_
and_My_Mother-In-Law_%28Hill%29.svg


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E     D ETAILS ON R ES N ET-50 TRAINING WITH DIFFUSION NOISE

We trained a ResNet-50 in exactly the same way as for standard, 90 epoch JAX ImageNet train-
ing with the key difference that we added diffusion noise as described by the code below. Since
this makes the training task substantially more challenging, we trained the model for 300 instead
of 90 epochs. The learning rate was 0.1 with a cosine learning rate schedule, 5 warmup epochs,
SGD momentum of 0.9, weight decay of 0.0001, and a per device batch size of 64. For diffusion
style denoising we used a flag named “sqrt alphas” which ensures that the noise applied doesn’t
completely destroy the image information in most cases. The input to the AddNoise method is in
the [0, 1] range; the output of the AddNoise method exceeds this bound due to the noise; we did
not normalize / clip it afterwards but instead directly fed this into the network. We did not perform
ImageNet mean/std normalization. The training augmentations we used were 1. random resized
crop, 2. random horizontal flip, 3. add diffusion noise. We did not optimize any of those settings
with respect to any of the observed findings (e.g., shape bias) since we were interested in generally
applicable results.

    Listing 1: Python example of how diffusion noise was added as a data augmentation technique.
        # C o p y r i g h t 2023 DeepMind T e c h n o l o g i e s L i m i t e d .
        #SPDX−L i c e n s e − I d e n t i f i e r : Apache −2.0

       import d a t a c l a s s e s
       from t y p i n g import Sequence , T u p l e
       import g r a i n . t e n s o r f l o w a s t f g r a i n
       import j a x
       import t e n s o r f l o w a s t f

        @ d a t a c l a s s e s . d a t a c l a s s ( f r o z e n =True )
        c l a s s AddNoise ( t f g r a i n . MapTransform ) :
            ””” Adds d i f f u s i o n − s t y l e n o i s e t o t h e image . ”””
            s q r t a l p h a s : bool = True

           d e f map ( s e l f , f e a t u r e s : F l a t F e a t u r e s ) −> F l a t F e a t u r e s :
               image = f e a t u r e s [ ” image ” ]
               a l p h a = t f . random . u n i f o r m ( [ ] )
               if self . sqrt alphas :
                   alpha = t f . sqrt ( alpha )
               std = t f . s q r t (1 − alpha ∗ alpha )
               image = image ∗ a l p h a + s t d ∗ t f . random . n o r m a l ( image . s h a p e )
               f e a t u r e s [ ” image ” ] = image
               features [ ” noise level ” ] = std
               return f e a t u r e s


F     S HAPE BIAS OF IMAGE CAPTIONING MODELS

We discovered that text-to-image generative models, when turned into classifiers, have a high shape
bias. We were interested in understanding whether other forms of generative modeling (beyond
text-to-image) could lead to similar results. As an initial step towards exploring this question, we
tested the CapPa models from Tschannen et al. (2023); those models are of generative nature too but
instead of text-to-image modeling they are trained to produce image captions. The results are shown
in Figure 9. Both CapPa variants (B16 and L16) are more shape biased than most discriminative
models, but at the same time both are less shape biased than the text-to-image generative classifiers
we tested. This could indicate that generative modeling is helpful when it comes to shape bias, while
the objective function and data determine how strong the shape bias is.

Method details for CapPa evaluation. We obtained the original B16 and L16 checkpoints
from the CapPa paper.       We used the identical prompt as for the generative classifiers,
A bad photo of a class where “class” is substituted for e.g. “car” (and using ‘an’ for classes starting


                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


with a vowel). We only used this single prompt since initial experiments showed that CapPa Ima-
geNet validation accuracy decreases when using the 80 CLIP ImageNet template prompts (w.r.t. just
using a single prompt). This could be attributed to the fact that the CapPa models were not designed
to handle different prompts well.

                                       Fraction of 'shape' decisions
           Shape categories   1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 0


                              0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
                                       Fraction of 'texture' decisions
Figure 9: Shape bias of CapPa models. This plot is identical to Figure 1 but contains two additional
datapoints: the CapPa models which are trained to produce text captions for images. The grey stars
correspond to CapPa B16; the black stars correspond to CapPa L16. Both models are trained on 9B
image-text pairs.


G    A DDITIONAL PLOTS FOR MODEL - VS - HUMAN BENCHMARK

We here plot detailed performance for all models with respect to a few different properties of interest
/ metrics:

      • Aggregated performance across 17 datasets: Figure 10
      • Out-of-distribution accuracy: Figure 11 for parametric datasets and Figure 12 for nonpara-
        metric datasets
      • Model-to-human error consistency: Figure 11
      • Human-to-human, model-to-model error consistency (for nonparametric datasets): Fig-
        ures 6 and 15 to 18
      • Shape bias: Figure 13 and Figure 14

All metrics are based on the model-vs-human toolbox and explained in more detail in (Geirhos et al.,
2021).


                                                  18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     observed consistency                                                                                                         OOD accuracy


                                                                                                            H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.9


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        squeezenet1_0                                                                                                      squeezenet1_0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        shufflenet_v2_x0_5                                                                                                 squeezenet1_1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        squeezenet1_1                                                                                                      alexnet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        InsDis: ResNet-50                                                                                                  shufflenet_v2_x0_5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        alexnet                                                                                                            InsDis: ResNet-50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PIRL: ResNet-50                                                                                                    mnasnet0_5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MoCo: ResNet-50                                                                                                    PIRL: ResNet-50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mnasnet0_5                                                                                                         vgg11_bn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        vgg13_bn                                                                                                           vgg13_bn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        vgg11_bn                                                                                                           ResNet-50 L2 eps 5.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mobilenet_v2                                                                                                       MoCo: ResNet-50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mnasnet1_0                                                                                                         mobilenet_v2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        resnet18                                                                                                           resnet18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ResNet-50 L2 eps 5.0                                                                                               mnasnet1_0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        vgg16_bn                                                                                                           vgg16_bn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ResNet-50 L2 eps 0.0                                                                                               ResNet-50 L2 eps 3.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        InfoMin: ResNet-50                                                                                                 ResNet-50 L2 eps 0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MoCoV2: ResNet-50                                                                                                  vgg19_bn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        vgg19_bn                                                                                                           ResNet-50 L2 eps 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        resnet34                                                                                                           CLIP: ViT-B (400M), 1 prompt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        wide_resnet50_2                                                                                                    ResNet-50 L2 eps 0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ResNet-50 L2 eps 3.0                                                                                               resnet34
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        resnet50                                                                                                           resnet50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        resnext50_32x4d                                                                                                    wide_resnet50_2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SimCLR: ResNet-50x1                                                                                                resnext50_32x4d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ResNet-50 L2 eps 0.5                                                                                               InfoMin: ResNet-50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ResNet-50 L2 eps 1.0                                                                                               inception_v3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        densenet121                                                                                                        MoCoV2: ResNet-50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        resnet101                                                                                                          densenet121
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        resnext101_32x8d                                                                                                   ViT-S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        resnet152                                                                                                          Parti
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        wide_resnet101_2                                                                                                   resnet101
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        inception_v3                                                                                                       wide_resnet101_2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Parti                                                                                                              resnet152
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ViT-S                                                                                                              resnext101_32x8d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SimCLR: ResNet-50x2                                                                                                SimCLR: ResNet-50x1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        densenet169                                                                                                        densenet169
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CLIP: ViT-B (400M), 1 prompt                                                                                       densenet201
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        densenet201                                                                                                        ViT-22B_ft-560 (4B)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SimCLR: ResNet-50x4                                                                                                SimCLR: ResNet-50x2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ViT-B (14M)                                                                                                        BiT-M: ResNet-50x1 (14M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BiT-M: ResNet-50x1 (14M)                                                                                           ViT-B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ViT-B                                                                                                              ViT-B (14M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BiT-M: ResNet-101x3 (14M)                                                                                          BiT-M: ResNet-101x1 (14M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BiT-M: ResNet-50x3 (14M)                                                                                           SWSL: ResNet-50 (940M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SWSL: ResNet-50 (940M)                                                                                             SimCLR: ResNet-50x4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BiT-M: ResNet-152x4 (14M)                                                                                          BiT-M: ResNet-50x3 (14M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BiT-M: ResNet-101x1 (14M)                                                                                          BiT-M: ResNet-101x3 (14M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (a) OOD accuracy (higher = better).


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BiT-M: ResNet-152x2 (14M)                                                                                          BiT-M: ResNet-152x4 (14M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ViT-L                                                                                                              StableDiffusion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ViT-22B_ft-560 (4B)                                                                                                BiT-M: ResNet-152x2 (14M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        StableDiffusion                                                                                                    SWSL: ResNeXt-101 (940M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ViT-L (14M)                                                                                                        ViT-L


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (c) Observed consistency (higher = better).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SWSL: ResNeXt-101 (940M)                                                                                           Imagen
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CLIP: ViT-B (400M), 80 prompts                                                                                     CLIP: ViT-B (400M), 80 prompts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Imagen                                                                                                             humans
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     latter focusing on out-of-distribution accuracy.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Noisy Student: ENetL2 (300M)                                                                                       ViT-L (14M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ViT-22B_ft-224 (4B)                                                                                                ViT-22B_ft-384 (4B)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ViT-22B_ft-384 (4B)                                                                                                Noisy Student: ENetL2 (300M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        humans                                                                                                             ViT-22B_ft-224 (4B)


19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          error consistency                                                                                                accuracy difference
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.14


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        InsDis: ResNet-50                                                                                                   squeezenet1_0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PIRL: ResNet-50                                                                                                     InsDis: ResNet-50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MoCo: ResNet-50                                                                                                     squeezenet1_1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        squeezenet1_0                                                                                                       shufflenet_v2_x0_5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        shufflenet_v2_x0_5                                                                                                  PIRL: ResNet-50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        alexnet                                                                                                             alexnet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        InfoMin: ResNet-50                                                                                                  mnasnet0_5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Noisy Student: ENetL2 (300M)                                                                                        MoCo: ResNet-50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mnasnet0_5                                                                                                          vgg11_bn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        squeezenet1_1                                                                                                       vgg13_bn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        wide_resnet50_2                                                                                                     mnasnet1_0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MoCoV2: ResNet-50                                                                                                   mobilenet_v2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ResNet-50 L2 eps 0.0                                                                                                resnet18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SimCLR: ResNet-50x4                                                                                                 vgg16_bn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SimCLR: ResNet-50x1                                                                                                 resnet50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SimCLR: ResNet-50x2                                                                                                 ResNet-50 L2 eps 5.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        vgg13_bn                                                                                                            InfoMin: ResNet-50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        resnext101_32x8d                                                                                                    ResNet-50 L2 eps 0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        resnext50_32x4d                                                                                                     resnet34
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        wide_resnet101_2                                                                                                    wide_resnet50_2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mnasnet1_0                                                                                                          MoCoV2: ResNet-50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        resnet152                                                                                                           vgg19_bn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        resnet101                                                                                                           SimCLR: ResNet-50x1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        vgg11_bn                                                                                                            ResNet-50 L2 eps 3.0
                                                                                                            Q UANTITATIVE BENCHMARK SCORES AND RANKINGS                                                                                                                                 mobilenet_v2                                                                                                        resnext50_32x4d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ViT-22B_ft-224 (4B)                                                                                                 ResNet-50 L2 eps 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        vgg16_bn                                                                                                            ResNet-50 L2 eps 0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        densenet121                                                                                                         densenet121
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        vgg19_bn                                                                                                            resnet152
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        resnet18                                                                                                            resnet101
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ResNet-50 L2 eps 0.5                                                                                                resnext101_32x8d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BiT-M: ResNet-101x3 (14M)                                                                                           SimCLR: ResNet-50x2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        resnet34                                                                                                            SimCLR: ResNet-50x4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ViT-L (14M)                                                                                                         wide_resnet101_2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        densenet169                                                                                                         ViT-S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        resnet50                                                                                                            inception_v3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ViT-B (14M)                                                                                                         densenet169
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        inception_v3                                                                                                        densenet201
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SWSL: ResNet-50 (940M)                                                                                              CLIP: ViT-B (400M), 1 prompt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        densenet201                                                                                                         ViT-B (14M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ViT-S                                                                                                               ViT-B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ViT-L                                                                                                               Parti
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ViT-B                                                                                                               BiT-M: ResNet-50x1 (14M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ResNet-50 L2 eps 1.0                                                                                                SWSL: ResNet-50 (940M)
                                                                                                                                                          Figure 10: Benchmark results for different models, aggregated over datasets.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BiT-M: ResNet-50x3 (14M)                                                                                            BiT-M: ResNet-101x3 (14M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Parti                                                                                                               BiT-M: ResNet-50x3 (14M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BiT-M: ResNet-152x4 (14M)                                                                                           Noisy Student: ENetL2 (300M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SWSL: ResNeXt-101 (940M)                                                                                            BiT-M: ResNet-152x4 (14M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ResNet-50 L2 eps 3.0                                                                                                BiT-M: ResNet-152x2 (14M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ResNet-50 L2 eps 5.0                                                                                                ViT-L (14M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (d) Error consistency (higher = better).


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BiT-M: ResNet-50x1 (14M)                                                                                            BiT-M: ResNet-101x1 (14M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (b) Accuracy difference (lower = better).


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BiT-M: ResNet-152x2 (14M)                                                                                           ViT-L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BiT-M: ResNet-101x1 (14M)                                                                                           ViT-22B_ft-224 (4B)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CLIP: ViT-B (400M), 1 prompt                                                                                        SWSL: ResNeXt-101 (940M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ViT-22B_ft-384 (4B)                                                                                                 CLIP: ViT-B (400M), 80 prompts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        StableDiffusion                                                                                                     Imagen
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CLIP: ViT-B (400M), 80 prompts                                                                                      StableDiffusion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ViT-22B_ft-560 (4B)                                                                                                 ViT-22B_ft-560 (4B)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Imagen                                                                                                              ViT-22B_ft-384 (4B)
     the former focusing on metrics related to “most human-like object recognition behavior” and the
     Table 2 and Table 3 list the detailed performance aggregated across 17 datasets for each model, with


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        humans                                                                                                              humans
        Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                      Accuracy                                            Error consistency                                                                                                Accuracy                                                 Error consistency
                          1.0                                                                       1.0                                                                                       1.0                                                                             1.0

                          0.8                                                                       0.8                                                                                       0.8                                                                             0.8
Classification accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                    Classification accuracy
                                                                        Error consistency (kappa)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Error consistency (kappa)
                                                                                                    0.6                                                                                                                                                                       0.6
                          0.6                                                                                                                                                                 0.6
                                                                                                    0.4                                                                                                                                                                       0.4
                          0.4                                                                                                                                                                 0.4
                                                                                                    0.2                                                                                                                                                                       0.2
                          0.2                                                                       0.0                                                                                       0.2                                                                             0.0

                          0.0                                                                       0.2
                                                                                                          colour                                   greyscale                                  0.0                                                                             0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     true                                   opponent
                                colour                      greyscale                                                          Colour                                                                true                             opponent                                                             Colour
                                                Colour                                                                                                                                                                Colour
           (a) Colour / greyscale                                                                                                                                             (b) True / false colour
                          1.0                                                                       1.0                                                                                       1.0                                                                             1.0

                          0.8                                                                       0.8                                                                                       0.8                                                                             0.8
Classification accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                    Classification accuracy
                                                                        Error consistency (kappa)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Error consistency (kappa)
                                                                                                    0.6                                                                                                                                                                       0.6
                          0.6                                                                                                                                                                 0.6
                                                                                                    0.4                                                                                                                                                                       0.4
                          0.4                                                                                                                                                                 0.4
                                                                                                    0.2                                                                                                                                                                       0.2
                          0.2                                                                       0.0                                                                                       0.2                                                                             0.0

                          0.0                                                                       0.2
                                                                                                           0.0 .03 .05 .1 .2 .35               .6     .9                                      0.0                                                                             0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0       1        3 5 7 10 15             40
                                 0.0 .03 .05 .1 .2 .35 .6 .9                                                       Uniform noise width                                                                 0       1 3 5 7 10 15 40                                                                     Filter standard deviation
                                        Uniform noise width                                                                                                                                                    Filter standard deviation
                           (c) Uniform noise                                                                                                                                                           (d) Low-pass
                          1.0                                                                       1.0                                                                                       1.0                                                                             1.0

                          0.8                                                                       0.8                                                                                       0.8                                                                             0.8
Classification accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                    Classification accuracy
                                                                        Error consistency (kappa)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Error consistency (kappa)
                                                                                                    0.6                                                                                                                                                                       0.6
                          0.6                                                                                                                                                                 0.6
                                                                                                    0.4                                                                                                                                                                       0.4
                          0.4                                                                                                                                                                 0.4
                                                                                                    0.2                                                                                                                                                                       0.2
                          0.2                                                                       0.0                                                                                       0.2                                                                             0.0

                          0.0                                                                       0.2                                                                                       0.0                                                                             0.2
                                 100 50 30 15 10 5 3            1                                          100 50        30 15 10 5            3       1                                              inf 3.0 1.5 1.0 .7 .55 .45 .4                                                   inf 3.0 1.5 1.0 .7 .55 .45                .4
                                                                                                                         Contrast in percent                                                                                                                                                 Filter standard deviation
                                       Contrast in percent                                                                                                                                                 Filter standard deviation
                                      (e) Contrast                                                                                                                                                     (f) High-pass
                          1.0                                                                       1.0                                                                                       1.0                                                                             1.0

                          0.8                                                                       0.8                                                                                       0.8                                                                             0.8
Classification accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                    Classification accuracy
                                                                        Error consistency (kappa)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Error consistency (kappa)
                                                                                                    0.6                                                                                                                                                                       0.6
                          0.6                                                                                                                                                                 0.6
                                                                                                    0.4                                                                                                                                                                       0.4
                          0.4                                                                                                                                                                 0.4
                                                                                                    0.2                                                                                                                                                                       0.2
                          0.2                                                                       0.0                                                                                       0.2                                                                             0.0

                          0.0                                                                       0.2                                                                                       0.0                                                                             0.2
                                  0       1 2 3 4 5 6 7                                                     0      1      2 3 4 5 6                    7                                               0       30 60 90 120 150 180                                                    0       30      60 90 120 150 180
                                                                                                                       Log2 of 'reach' parameter                                                                                                                                                     Phase noise width [ ]
                                         Log2 of 'reach' parameter                                                                                                                                              Phase noise width [ ]
                                   (g) Eidolon I                                                                                                                                                     (h) Phase noise
                          1.0                                                                       1.0                                                                                       1.0                                                                             1.0

                          0.8                                                                       0.8                                                                                       0.8                                                                             0.8
Classification accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                    Classification accuracy
                                                                        Error consistency (kappa)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Error consistency (kappa)


                                                                                                    0.6                                                                                                                                                                       0.6
                          0.6                                                                                                                                                                 0.6
                                                                                                    0.4                                                                                                                                                                       0.4
                          0.4                                                                                                                                                                 0.4
                                                                                                    0.2                                                                                                                                                                       0.2
                          0.2                                                                       0.0                                                                                       0.2                                                                             0.0

                          0.0                                                                       0.2
                                                                                                            0      1      2 3 4 5 6                    7                                      0.0                                                                             0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    original                                equalised
                                  0       1 2 3 4 5 6 7                                                                Log2 of 'reach' parameter                                                    original                          equalised                                                        Power spectrum
                                         Log2 of 'reach' parameter                                                                                                                                                Power spectrum
                                  (i) Eidolon II                                                                                                                            (j) Power equalisation
                          1.0                                                                       1.0                                                                                       1.0                                                                             1.0

                          0.8                                                                       0.8                                                                                       0.8                                                                             0.8
Classification accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                    Classification accuracy
                                                                        Error consistency (kappa)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Error consistency (kappa)


                                                                                                    0.6                                                                                                                                                                       0.6
                          0.6                                                                                                                                                                 0.6
                                                                                                    0.4                                                                                                                                                                       0.4
                          0.4                                                                                                                                                                 0.4
                                                                                                    0.2                                                                                                                                                                       0.2
                          0.2                                                                       0.0                                                                                       0.2                                                                             0.0

                          0.0                                                                       0.2                                                                                       0.0                                                                             0.2
                                  0       1 2 3 4 5 6 7                                                     0      1      2 3 4 5 6                    7                                               0           90        180         270                                           0               90           180         270
                                                                                                                       Log2 of 'reach' parameter                                                                                                                                                      Rotation angle [ ]
                                         Log2 of 'reach' parameter                                                                                                                                               Rotation angle [ ]
                                 (k) Eidolon III                                                                                                                                                           (l) Rotation

        Figure 11: OOD accuracy and error consistency across all twelve parametric datasets from Geirhos
        et al. (2021). Error consistency results for nonparametric datasets are plotted in Figures 6 and 15
        to 18.


                                                                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                                                                      shape bias                                                                                                                                                                         OOD accuracy                                                                                            OOD accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1.0


                                                                                                                                                    0.0
                                                                                                                                                          0.5
                                                                                                                                                                   1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      InsDis: ResNet-50                                                                                       InsDis: ResNet-50
                                                                                                                                         alexnet                                                                                                                                                                      MoCo: ResNet-50                                                                                         PIRL: ResNet-50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      squeezenet1_0                                                                                           squeezenet1_0
                                                                                                                                      vgg11_bn                                                                                                                                                                        PIRL: ResNet-50                                                                                         shufflenet_v2_x0_5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      squeezenet1_1                                                                                           alexnet
                                                                                                                                      vgg13_bn                                                                                                                                                                        vgg13_bn                                                                                                MoCo: ResNet-50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      shufflenet_v2_x0_5                                                                                      squeezenet1_1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      InfoMin: ResNet-50                                                                                      mnasnet0_5
                                                                                                                                      vgg16_bn                                                                                                                                                                        mnasnet0_5                                                                                              mobilenet_v2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      densenet121                                                                                             vgg11_bn
                                                                                                                                      vgg19_bn                                                                                                                                                                        alexnet                                                                                                 ResNet-50 L2 eps 5.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      resnet34                                                                                                vgg13_bn
                                                                                                                                squeezenet1_0                                                                                                                                                                         vgg19_bn                                                                                                MoCoV2: ResNet-50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      vgg11_bn                                                                                                vgg16_bn
                                                                                                                                squeezenet1_1                                                                                                                                                                         MoCoV2: ResNet-50                                                                                       mnasnet1_0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      mobilenet_v2                                                                                            SimCLR: ResNet-50x1
                                                                                                                                  densenet121                                                                                                                                                                         vgg16_bn                                                                                                resnet18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      resnet18                                                                                                InfoMin: ResNet-50
                                                                                                                                  densenet169                                                                                                                                                                         ResNet-50 L2 eps 0.0                                                                                    ResNet-50 L2 eps 3.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      mnasnet1_0                                                                                              resnet50
                                                                                                                                  densenet201                                                                                                                                                                         resnet101                                                                                               wide_resnet50_2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SimCLR: ResNet-50x1                                                                                     SimCLR: ResNet-50x2
                                                                                                                                  inception_v3                                                                                                                                                                        wide_resnet101_2                                                                                        ResNet-50 L2 eps 0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      densenet201                                                                                             resnet34
                                                                                                                                       resnet18                                                                                                                                                                       wide_resnet50_2                                                                                         resnext50_32x4d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SimCLR: ResNet-50x2                                                                                     inception_v3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      densenet169                                                                                             densenet121
                                                                                                                                       resnet34                                                                                                                                                                       CLIP: ViT-B (400M), 1 prompt                                                                            vgg19_bn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      inception_v3                                                                                            resnet101
                                                                                                                                       resnet50                                                                                                                                                                       resnext50_32x4d                                                                                         ResNet-50 L2 eps 1.0


                                                                                                                                                                         ruption type and strength).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      resnet50                                                                                                ViT-S
                                                                                                                                     resnet101                                                                                                                                                                        ResNet-50 L2 eps 0.5                                                                                    ResNet-50 L2 eps 0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      resnext101_32x8d                                                                                        SimCLR: ResNet-50x4
                                                                                                                                     resnet152                                                                                                                                                                        resnet152                                                                                               densenet169
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ViT-S                                                                                                   wide_resnet101_2
                                                                                                                          shufflenet_v2_x0_5                                                                                                                                                                          SimCLR: ResNet-50x4                                                                                     resnet152
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BiT-M: ResNet-152x4 (14M)                                                                               densenet201
                                                                                                                                  mobilenet_v2                                                                                                                                                                        BiT-M: ResNet-50x1 (14M)                                                                                resnext101_32x8d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SWSL: ResNet-50 (940M)                                                                                  BiT-M: ResNet-50x1 (14M)
                                                                                                                             resnext50_32x4d                                                                                                                                                                          ResNet-50 L2 eps 1.0                                                                                    Parti
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ResNet-50 L2 eps 5.0                                                                                    BiT-M: ResNet-101x1 (14M)
                                                                                                                           resnext101_32x8d                                                                                                                                                                           ViT-B                                                                                                   ViT-B (14M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ResNet-50 L2 eps 3.0                                                                                    ViT-B
                                                                                                                              wide_resnet50_2                                                                                                                                                                         BiT-M: ResNet-152x2 (14M)                                                                               BiT-M: ResNet-50x3 (14M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BiT-M: ResNet-101x3 (14M)                                                                               BiT-M: ResNet-101x3 (14M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ViT-B (14M)                                                                                             BiT-M: ResNet-152x2 (14M)
                                                                                                                            wide_resnet101_2                                                                                                                                                                          BiT-M: ResNet-50x3 (14M)                                                                                BiT-M: ResNet-152x4 (14M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (a) Accuracy on ‘sketch’ images.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SWSL: ResNeXt-101 (940M)                                                                                ViT-L
                                                                                                                                   mnasnet0_5                                                                                                                                                                         ViT-L                                                                                                   StableDiffusion


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (c) Accuracy on ‘silhouette’ images.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BiT-M: ResNet-101x1 (14M)                                                                               ViT-L (14M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ViT-L (14M)                                                                                             Imagen


     way of visualizing the data from Figure 1.
                                                                                                                                   mnasnet1_0                                                                                                                                                                         Parti                                                                                                   CLIP: ViT-B (400M), 1 prompt
                                                                                                                            InsDis: ResNet-50                                                                                                                                                                         ViT-22B_ft-560 (4B)                                                                                     SWSL: ResNet-50 (940M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CLIP: ViT-B (400M), 80 prompts                                                                          SWSL: ResNeXt-101 (940M)
                                                                                                                             MoCo: ResNet-50                                                                                                                                                                          StableDiffusion                                                                                         Noisy Student: ENetL2 (300M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      humans                                                                                                  CLIP: ViT-B (400M), 80 prompts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                               PIRL: ResNet-50                                                                                                                                                                        Noisy Student: ENetL2 (300M)                                                                            humans
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ViT-22B_ft-384 (4B)                                                                                     ViT-22B_ft-560 (4B)
                                                                                                                         MoCoV2: ResNet-50                                                                                                                                                                            ViT-22B_ft-224 (4B)                                                                                     ViT-22B_ft-384 (4B)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Imagen                                                                                                  ViT-22B_ft-224 (4B)
                                                                                                                          InfoMin: ResNet-50


21
                                                                                                                       SimCLR: ResNet-50x1                                                                                                                                                                                               OOD accuracy                                                                                            OOD accuracy
                                                                                                                       SimCLR: ResNet-50x2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1.0


                                                                                                                       SimCLR: ResNet-50x4                                                                                                                                                                            squeezenet1_0                                                                                           InsDis: ResNet-50
                                                                                                                       ResNet-50 L2 eps 0.0                                                                                                                                                                           vgg13_bn                                                                                                shufflenet_v2_x0_5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      InsDis: ResNet-50                                                                                       resnet50
                                                                                                                       ResNet-50 L2 eps 0.5                                                                                                                                                                           PIRL: ResNet-50                                                                                         vgg11_bn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      alexnet                                                                                                 PIRL: ResNet-50
                                                                                                                       ResNet-50 L2 eps 1.0                                                                                                                                                                           vgg11_bn                                                                                                squeezenet1_1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      vgg16_bn                                                                                                squeezenet1_0
                                                                                                                       ResNet-50 L2 eps 3.0                                                                                                                                                                           squeezenet1_1                                                                                           resnet34
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      InfoMin: ResNet-50                                                                                      mnasnet1_0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MoCo: ResNet-50                                                                                         mnasnet0_5
                                                                                                                       ResNet-50 L2 eps 5.0                                                                                                                                                                           vgg19_bn                                                                                                resnet18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CLIP: ViT-B (400M), 1 prompt                                                                            SimCLR: ResNet-50x1
                                                                                                                                            ViT-S                                                                                                                                                                     Parti                                                                                                   ResNet-50 L2 eps 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ResNet-50 L2 eps 0.0                                                                                    resnet152
                                                                                                                                            ViT-B                                                                                                                                                                     shufflenet_v2_x0_5                                                                                      wide_resnet50_2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      mnasnet0_5                                                                                              MoCoV2: ResNet-50
                                                                                                                                            ViT-L                                                                                                                                                                     ViT-22B_ft-560 (4B)                                                                                     vgg16_bn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      wide_resnet50_2                                                                                         mobilenet_v2
                                                                                                                SWSL: ResNeXt-101 (940M)                                                                                                                                                                              mobilenet_v2                                                                                            ResNet-50 L2 eps 0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MoCoV2: ResNet-50                                                                                       resnext101_32x8d
                                                                                                                   SWSL: ResNet-50 (940M)                                                                                                                                                                             resnet50                                                                                                resnext50_32x4d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      resnet18                                                                                                ResNet-50 L2 eps 0.0
                                                                                                                 BiT-M: ResNet-152x4 (14M)                                                                                                                                                                            densenet121                                                                                             resnet101
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      wide_resnet101_2                                                                                        SimCLR: ResNet-50x2
                                                                                                                 BiT-M: ResNet-152x2 (14M)                                                                                                                                                                            resnext50_32x4d                                                                                         densenet121
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ResNet-50 L2 eps 5.0                                                                                    MoCo: ResNet-50
                                                                                                                 BiT-M: ResNet-101x3 (14M)                                                                                                                                                                            mnasnet1_0                                                                                              vgg13_bn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SimCLR: ResNet-50x1                                                                                     ResNet-50 L2 eps 3.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      resnet152                                                                                               InfoMin: ResNet-50
                                                                                                                 BiT-M: ResNet-101x1 (14M)                                                                                                                                                                            resnet101                                                                                               ResNet-50 L2 eps 5.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ResNet-50 L2 eps 3.0                                                                                    inception_v3
                                                                                                                  BiT-M: ResNet-50x3 (14M)                                                                                                                                                                            resnet34                                                                                                vgg19_bn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      densenet201                                                                                             SimCLR: ResNet-50x4
                                                                                                                  BiT-M: ResNet-50x1 (14M)                                                                                                                                                                            densenet169                                                                                             alexnet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      resnext101_32x8d                                                                                        densenet169
                                                                                                                                    ViT-L (14M)                                                                                                                                                                       ResNet-50 L2 eps 0.5                                                                                    wide_resnet101_2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ResNet-50 L2 eps 1.0                                                                                    ViT-S
                                                                                                                                    ViT-B (14M)                                                                                                                                                                       inception_v3                                                                                            densenet201
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SimCLR: ResNet-50x4                                                                                     ViT-B (14M)
                                                                                                              Noisy Student: ENetL2 (300M)                                                                                                                                                                            SimCLR: ResNet-50x2                                                                                     ViT-B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SWSL: ResNet-50 (940M)                                                                                  BiT-M: ResNet-50x1 (14M)
                                                                                                               CLIP: ViT-B (400M), 1 prompt                                                                                                                                                                           StableDiffusion                                                                                         BiT-M: ResNet-50x3 (14M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      humans                                                                                                  BiT-M: ResNet-101x3 (14M)
                                                                                                             CLIP: ViT-B (400M), 80 prompts                                                                                                                                                                           ViT-S                                                                                                   Parti
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BiT-M: ResNet-50x1 (14M)                                                                                BiT-M: ResNet-152x2 (14M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BiT-M: ResNet-101x3 (14M)                                                                               ViT-L (14M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (b) Accuracy on ‘edge’ images.


                                                                                                                          ViT-22B_ft-560 (4B)                                                                                                                                                                         BiT-M: ResNet-101x1 (14M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ViT-B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BiT-M: ResNet-101x1 (14M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ViT-L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (d) Accuracy on ‘stylized’ images.


                                                                                                                          ViT-22B_ft-384 (4B)                                                                                                                                                                         BiT-M: ResNet-152x4 (14M)                                                                               BiT-M: ResNet-152x4 (14M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ViT-L                                                                                                   CLIP: ViT-B (400M), 80 prompts
                                                                                                                          ViT-22B_ft-224 (4B)                                                                                                                                                                         BiT-M: ResNet-50x3 (14M)                                                                                ViT-22B_ft-560 (4B)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ViT-B (14M)                                                                                             SWSL: ResNet-50 (940M)
                                                                                                                                            Parti                                                                                                                                                                     BiT-M: ResNet-152x2 (14M)                                                                               SWSL: ResNeXt-101 (940M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CLIP: ViT-B (400M), 80 prompts                                                                          CLIP: ViT-B (400M), 1 prompt
                                                                                                                                StableDiffusion                                                                                                                                                                       SWSL: ResNeXt-101 (940M)                                                                                humans
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ViT-L (14M)                                                                                             ViT-22B_ft-384 (4B)
                                                                                                                                        Imagen                                                                                                                                                                        ViT-22B_ft-384 (4B)                                                                                     StableDiffusion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Imagen                                                                                                  ViT-22B_ft-224 (4B)
                                                                                                                                        humans                                                                                                                                                                        Noisy Student: ENetL2 (300M)                                                                            Imagen


     This figure shows boxplots highlighting the spread across 16 categories for each model as a different
     for Stable Diffusion, 92% for Parti and 92–99% for individual human observers (96% on average).
     Figure 13: Zero-shot generative classifiers achieve a human-level shape bias: 99% for Imagen, 93%
                                                                                                                                                                         Figure 12: OOD accuracy on all four nonparametric datasets (i.e., datasets with only a single cor-


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ViT-22B_ft-224 (4B)                                                                                     Noisy Student: ENetL2 (300M)
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                       Fraction of 'shape' decisions
                              1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 0
           Shape categories


                              0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
                                       Fraction of 'texture' decisions
Figure 14: Shape bias before and after training with diffusion noise: This figure shows how ResNet-
50 shape bias increases from 21% for a vanilla model (dark grey circles) to 78% when trained and
evaluated with diffusion noise (black circles). Horizontal lines indicate the average shape bias across
categories. Other models as in Figure 13.


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                   alexnet
                                vgg11_bn
                                vgg13_bn
                                vgg16_bn
                                vgg19_bn
                          squeezenet1_0
                          squeezenet1_1
                            densenet121
                            densenet169
                            densenet201
                            inception_v3
                                 resnet18
                                 resnet34
                                 resnet50
                               resnet101
                               resnet152
                     shufflenet_v2_x0_5                                                             1.0
                            mobilenet_v2
                        resnext50_32x4d
                      resnext101_32x8d
                        wide_resnet50_2
                      wide_resnet101_2
                             mnasnet0_5                                                             0.8
                             mnasnet1_0
                       InsDis: ResNet-50
                       MoCo: ResNet-50
                        PIRL: ResNet-50
                    MoCoV2: ResNet-50
                     InfoMin: ResNet-50
                  SimCLR: ResNet-50x1                                                               0.6
                  SimCLR: ResNet-50x2
                  SimCLR: ResNet-50x4
                   ResNet-50 L2 eps 0.0
                   ResNet-50 L2 eps 0.5
                   ResNet-50 L2 eps 1.0
                   ResNet-50 L2 eps 3.0
                   ResNet-50 L2 eps 5.0                                                             0.4
                                     ViT-S
                                     ViT-B
                                     ViT-L
           SWSL: ResNeXt-101 (940M)
              SWSL: ResNet-50 (940M)
            BiT-M: ResNet-152x4 (14M)
            BiT-M: ResNet-152x2 (14M)                                                               0.2
            BiT-M: ResNet-101x3 (14M)
            BiT-M: ResNet-101x1 (14M)
             BiT-M: ResNet-50x3 (14M)
             BiT-M: ResNet-50x1 (14M)
                              ViT-L (14M)
                             ViT-B (14M)
          Noisy Student: ENetL2 (300M)
           CLIP: ViT-B (400M), 1 prompt
         CLIP: ViT-B (400M), 80 prompts
                     ViT-22B_ft-560 (4B)
                     ViT-22B_ft-384 (4B)
                     ViT-22B_ft-224 (4B)
                                      Parti
                          StableDiffusion
                                  Imagen
                               subject-01
                               subject-02
                               subject-03
                               subject-04
                               subject-05
                               subject-06
                               subject-07
                                                                        alexnet
                                                                     vgg11_bn
                                                                     vgg13_bn
                                                                     vgg16_bn
                                                                     vgg19_bn
                                                               squeezenet1_0
                                                               squeezenet1_1
                                                                 densenet121
                                                                 densenet169
                                                                 densenet201
                                                                 inception_v3
                                                                      resnet18
                                                                      resnet34
                                                                      resnet50
                                                                    resnet101
                                                                    resnet152


                                                        ResNet-50 L2 eps 0.5
                                                        ResNet-50 L2 eps 1.0
                                                        ResNet-50 L2 eps 3.0
                                                        ResNet-50 L2 eps 5.0
                                                          shufflenet_v2_x0_5
                                                                 mobilenet_v2
                                                             resnext50_32x4d
                                                           resnext101_32x8d
                                                             wide_resnet50_2
                                                           wide_resnet101_2
                                                                  mnasnet0_5
                                                                  mnasnet1_0
                                                            InsDis: ResNet-50
                                                            MoCo: ResNet-50
                                                             PIRL: ResNet-50
                                                         MoCoV2: ResNet-50
                                                          InfoMin: ResNet-50

                                                        ResNet-50 L2 eps 0.0
                                                       SimCLR: ResNet-50x1
                                                       SimCLR: ResNet-50x2
                                                       SimCLR: ResNet-50x4


                                                SWSL: ResNeXt-101 (940M)
                                                   SWSL: ResNet-50 (940M)


                                               Noisy Student: ENetL2 (300M)
                                                 BiT-M: ResNet-152x4 (14M)
                                                 BiT-M: ResNet-152x2 (14M)
                                                 BiT-M: ResNet-101x3 (14M)
                                                 BiT-M: ResNet-101x1 (14M)
                                                  BiT-M: ResNet-50x3 (14M)
                                                  BiT-M: ResNet-50x1 (14M)

                                                CLIP: ViT-B (400M), 1 prompt
                                              CLIP: ViT-B (400M), 80 prompts

                                                                           Parti
                                                                       Imagen
                                                                    subject-01
                                                                    subject-02
                                                                    subject-03
                                                                    subject-04
                                                                    subject-05
                                                                    subject-06
                                                                    subject-07
                                                                          ViT-S
                                                                          ViT-B
                                                                          ViT-L


                                                                   ViT-L (14M)
                                                                  ViT-B (14M)

                                                          ViT-22B_ft-560 (4B)
                                                          ViT-22B_ft-384 (4B)
                                                          ViT-22B_ft-224 (4B)
                                                               StableDiffusion
                                              Figure 15: Error consistency for ‘sketch’ images.

                                   alexnet
                                vgg11_bn
                                vgg13_bn
                                vgg16_bn
                                vgg19_bn
                          squeezenet1_0
                          squeezenet1_1
                            densenet121
                            densenet169
                            densenet201
                            inception_v3
                                 resnet18
                                 resnet34
                                 resnet50
                               resnet101
                               resnet152                                                            1.0
                     shufflenet_v2_x0_5
                            mobilenet_v2
                        resnext50_32x4d
                      resnext101_32x8d                                                              0.9
                        wide_resnet50_2
                      wide_resnet101_2
                             mnasnet0_5                                                             0.8
                             mnasnet1_0
                       InsDis: ResNet-50
                       MoCo: ResNet-50
                        PIRL: ResNet-50                                                             0.7
                    MoCoV2: ResNet-50
                     InfoMin: ResNet-50
                  SimCLR: ResNet-50x1
                  SimCLR: ResNet-50x2                                                               0.6
                  SimCLR: ResNet-50x4
                   ResNet-50 L2 eps 0.0
                   ResNet-50 L2 eps 0.5                                                             0.5
                   ResNet-50 L2 eps 1.0
                   ResNet-50 L2 eps 3.0
                   ResNet-50 L2 eps 5.0
                                     ViT-S                                                          0.4
                                     ViT-B
                                     ViT-L
           SWSL: ResNeXt-101 (940M)
              SWSL: ResNet-50 (940M)                                                                0.3
            BiT-M: ResNet-152x4 (14M)
            BiT-M: ResNet-152x2 (14M)
            BiT-M: ResNet-101x3 (14M)                                                               0.2
            BiT-M: ResNet-101x1 (14M)
             BiT-M: ResNet-50x3 (14M)
             BiT-M: ResNet-50x1 (14M)
                              ViT-L (14M)
                             ViT-B (14M)
          Noisy Student: ENetL2 (300M)
           CLIP: ViT-B (400M), 1 prompt
         CLIP: ViT-B (400M), 80 prompts
                     ViT-22B_ft-560 (4B)
                     ViT-22B_ft-384 (4B)
                     ViT-22B_ft-224 (4B)
                                      Parti
                          StableDiffusion
                                  Imagen
                               subject-01
                               subject-02
                               subject-03
                               subject-04
                               subject-05
                                                                        alexnet
                                                                     vgg11_bn
                                                                     vgg13_bn
                                                                     vgg16_bn
                                                                     vgg19_bn
                                                               squeezenet1_0
                                                               squeezenet1_1
                                                                 densenet121
                                                                 densenet169
                                                                 densenet201
                                                                 inception_v3
                                                                      resnet18
                                                                      resnet34
                                                                      resnet50
                                                                    resnet101
                                                                    resnet152


                                                        ResNet-50 L2 eps 0.0
                                                        ResNet-50 L2 eps 0.5
                                                        ResNet-50 L2 eps 1.0
                                                        ResNet-50 L2 eps 3.0
                                                        ResNet-50 L2 eps 5.0
                                                          shufflenet_v2_x0_5
                                                                 mobilenet_v2
                                                             resnext50_32x4d
                                                           resnext101_32x8d
                                                             wide_resnet50_2
                                                           wide_resnet101_2
                                                                  mnasnet0_5
                                                                  mnasnet1_0
                                                            InsDis: ResNet-50
                                                            MoCo: ResNet-50
                                                             PIRL: ResNet-50
                                                         MoCoV2: ResNet-50
                                                          InfoMin: ResNet-50
                                                       SimCLR: ResNet-50x1
                                                       SimCLR: ResNet-50x2
                                                       SimCLR: ResNet-50x4


                                                SWSL: ResNeXt-101 (940M)
                                                   SWSL: ResNet-50 (940M)


                                               Noisy Student: ENetL2 (300M)
                                                 BiT-M: ResNet-152x4 (14M)
                                                 BiT-M: ResNet-152x2 (14M)
                                                 BiT-M: ResNet-101x3 (14M)
                                                 BiT-M: ResNet-101x1 (14M)
                                                  BiT-M: ResNet-50x3 (14M)
                                                  BiT-M: ResNet-50x1 (14M)

                                                CLIP: ViT-B (400M), 1 prompt
                                              CLIP: ViT-B (400M), 80 prompts

                                                                           Parti
                                                                       Imagen
                                                                    subject-01
                                                                    subject-02
                                                                    subject-03
                                                                    subject-04
                                                                    subject-05
                                                                          ViT-S
                                                                          ViT-B
                                                                          ViT-L


                                                                   ViT-L (14M)
                                                                  ViT-B (14M)

                                                          ViT-22B_ft-560 (4B)
                                                          ViT-22B_ft-384 (4B)
                                                          ViT-22B_ft-224 (4B)
                                                               StableDiffusion


                                              Figure 16: Error consistency for ‘stylized’ images.


                                                                      23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                   alexnet
                                vgg11_bn
                                vgg13_bn
                                vgg16_bn
                                vgg19_bn
                          squeezenet1_0
                          squeezenet1_1
                            densenet121
                            densenet169
                            densenet201
                            inception_v3
                                 resnet18
                                 resnet34
                                 resnet50
                               resnet101
                               resnet152
                     shufflenet_v2_x0_5                                                           1.0
                            mobilenet_v2
                        resnext50_32x4d
                      resnext101_32x8d
                        wide_resnet50_2
                      wide_resnet101_2
                             mnasnet0_5
                             mnasnet1_0                                                           0.8
                       InsDis: ResNet-50
                       MoCo: ResNet-50
                        PIRL: ResNet-50
                    MoCoV2: ResNet-50
                     InfoMin: ResNet-50
                  SimCLR: ResNet-50x1                                                             0.6
                  SimCLR: ResNet-50x2
                  SimCLR: ResNet-50x4
                   ResNet-50 L2 eps 0.0
                   ResNet-50 L2 eps 0.5
                   ResNet-50 L2 eps 1.0
                   ResNet-50 L2 eps 3.0
                   ResNet-50 L2 eps 5.0                                                           0.4
                                     ViT-S
                                     ViT-B
                                     ViT-L
           SWSL: ResNeXt-101 (940M)
              SWSL: ResNet-50 (940M)
            BiT-M: ResNet-152x4 (14M)
            BiT-M: ResNet-152x2 (14M)                                                             0.2
            BiT-M: ResNet-101x3 (14M)
            BiT-M: ResNet-101x1 (14M)
             BiT-M: ResNet-50x3 (14M)
             BiT-M: ResNet-50x1 (14M)
                              ViT-L (14M)
                             ViT-B (14M)                                                          0.0
          Noisy Student: ENetL2 (300M)
           CLIP: ViT-B (400M), 1 prompt
         CLIP: ViT-B (400M), 80 prompts
                     ViT-22B_ft-560 (4B)
                     ViT-22B_ft-384 (4B)
                     ViT-22B_ft-224 (4B)
                                      Parti
                          StableDiffusion
                                  Imagen
                               subject-01
                               subject-02
                               subject-03
                               subject-04
                               subject-05
                               subject-06
                               subject-07
                               subject-08
                               subject-09
                               subject-10
                                                                        alexnet
                                                                     vgg11_bn
                                                                     vgg13_bn
                                                                     vgg16_bn
                                                                     vgg19_bn
                                                               squeezenet1_0
                                                               squeezenet1_1
                                                                 densenet121
                                                                 densenet169
                                                                 densenet201
                                                                 inception_v3
                                                                      resnet18
                                                                      resnet34
                                                                      resnet50
                                                                    resnet101
                                                                    resnet152


                                                        ResNet-50 L2 eps 1.0
                                                        ResNet-50 L2 eps 3.0
                                                        ResNet-50 L2 eps 5.0
                                                          shufflenet_v2_x0_5
                                                                 mobilenet_v2
                                                             resnext50_32x4d
                                                           resnext101_32x8d
                                                             wide_resnet50_2
                                                           wide_resnet101_2
                                                                  mnasnet0_5
                                                                  mnasnet1_0
                                                            InsDis: ResNet-50
                                                            MoCo: ResNet-50
                                                             PIRL: ResNet-50
                                                         MoCoV2: ResNet-50
                                                          InfoMin: ResNet-50

                                                        ResNet-50 L2 eps 0.0
                                                        ResNet-50 L2 eps 0.5
                                                       SimCLR: ResNet-50x1
                                                       SimCLR: ResNet-50x2
                                                       SimCLR: ResNet-50x4


                                                SWSL: ResNeXt-101 (940M)
                                                   SWSL: ResNet-50 (940M)


                                               Noisy Student: ENetL2 (300M)
                                                 BiT-M: ResNet-152x4 (14M)
                                                 BiT-M: ResNet-152x2 (14M)
                                                 BiT-M: ResNet-101x3 (14M)
                                                 BiT-M: ResNet-101x1 (14M)
                                                  BiT-M: ResNet-50x3 (14M)
                                                  BiT-M: ResNet-50x1 (14M)

                                                CLIP: ViT-B (400M), 1 prompt
                                              CLIP: ViT-B (400M), 80 prompts

                                                                           Parti
                                                                       Imagen
                                                                    subject-01
                                                                    subject-02
                                                                    subject-03
                                                                    subject-04
                                                                    subject-05
                                                                    subject-06
                                                                    subject-07
                                                                    subject-08
                                                                    subject-09
                                                                    subject-10
                                                                          ViT-S
                                                                          ViT-B
                                                                          ViT-L


                                                                   ViT-L (14M)
                                                                  ViT-B (14M)

                                                          ViT-22B_ft-560 (4B)
                                                          ViT-22B_ft-384 (4B)
                                                          ViT-22B_ft-224 (4B)
                                                               StableDiffusion
                                               Figure 17: Error consistency for ‘edge’ images.

                                   alexnet
                                vgg11_bn
                                vgg13_bn
                                vgg16_bn
                                vgg19_bn
                          squeezenet1_0
                          squeezenet1_1
                            densenet121
                            densenet169
                            densenet201
                            inception_v3
                                 resnet18
                                 resnet34
                                 resnet50
                               resnet101
                               resnet152
                     shufflenet_v2_x0_5                                                           1.0
                            mobilenet_v2
                        resnext50_32x4d
                      resnext101_32x8d
                        wide_resnet50_2
                      wide_resnet101_2
                             mnasnet0_5
                             mnasnet1_0                                                           0.8
                       InsDis: ResNet-50
                       MoCo: ResNet-50
                        PIRL: ResNet-50
                    MoCoV2: ResNet-50
                     InfoMin: ResNet-50
                  SimCLR: ResNet-50x1
                  SimCLR: ResNet-50x2                                                             0.6
                  SimCLR: ResNet-50x4
                   ResNet-50 L2 eps 0.0
                   ResNet-50 L2 eps 0.5
                   ResNet-50 L2 eps 1.0
                   ResNet-50 L2 eps 3.0
                   ResNet-50 L2 eps 5.0                                                           0.4
                                     ViT-S
                                     ViT-B
                                     ViT-L
           SWSL: ResNeXt-101 (940M)
              SWSL: ResNet-50 (940M)
            BiT-M: ResNet-152x4 (14M)
            BiT-M: ResNet-152x2 (14M)                                                             0.2
            BiT-M: ResNet-101x3 (14M)
            BiT-M: ResNet-101x1 (14M)
             BiT-M: ResNet-50x3 (14M)
             BiT-M: ResNet-50x1 (14M)
                              ViT-L (14M)
                             ViT-B (14M)
          Noisy Student: ENetL2 (300M)                                                            0.0
           CLIP: ViT-B (400M), 1 prompt
         CLIP: ViT-B (400M), 80 prompts
                     ViT-22B_ft-560 (4B)
                     ViT-22B_ft-384 (4B)
                     ViT-22B_ft-224 (4B)
                                      Parti
                          StableDiffusion
                                  Imagen
                               subject-01
                               subject-02
                               subject-03
                               subject-04
                               subject-05
                               subject-06
                               subject-07
                               subject-08
                               subject-09
                               subject-10
                                                                        alexnet
                                                                     vgg11_bn
                                                                     vgg13_bn
                                                                     vgg16_bn
                                                                     vgg19_bn
                                                               squeezenet1_0
                                                               squeezenet1_1
                                                                 densenet121
                                                                 densenet169
                                                                 densenet201
                                                                 inception_v3
                                                                      resnet18
                                                                      resnet34
                                                                      resnet50
                                                                    resnet101
                                                                    resnet152


                                                        ResNet-50 L2 eps 3.0
                                                        ResNet-50 L2 eps 5.0
                                                          shufflenet_v2_x0_5
                                                                 mobilenet_v2
                                                             resnext50_32x4d
                                                           resnext101_32x8d
                                                             wide_resnet50_2
                                                           wide_resnet101_2
                                                                  mnasnet0_5
                                                                  mnasnet1_0
                                                            InsDis: ResNet-50
                                                            MoCo: ResNet-50
                                                             PIRL: ResNet-50
                                                         MoCoV2: ResNet-50
                                                          InfoMin: ResNet-50

                                                        ResNet-50 L2 eps 0.0
                                                        ResNet-50 L2 eps 0.5
                                                        ResNet-50 L2 eps 1.0
                                                       SimCLR: ResNet-50x1
                                                       SimCLR: ResNet-50x2
                                                       SimCLR: ResNet-50x4


                                                SWSL: ResNeXt-101 (940M)
                                                   SWSL: ResNet-50 (940M)


                                               Noisy Student: ENetL2 (300M)
                                                 BiT-M: ResNet-152x4 (14M)
                                                 BiT-M: ResNet-152x2 (14M)
                                                 BiT-M: ResNet-101x3 (14M)
                                                 BiT-M: ResNet-101x1 (14M)
                                                  BiT-M: ResNet-50x3 (14M)
                                                  BiT-M: ResNet-50x1 (14M)

                                                CLIP: ViT-B (400M), 1 prompt
                                              CLIP: ViT-B (400M), 80 prompts

                                                                           Parti
                                                                       Imagen
                                                                    subject-01
                                                                    subject-02
                                                                    subject-03
                                                                    subject-04
                                                                    subject-05
                                                                    subject-06
                                                                    subject-07
                                                                    subject-08
                                                                    subject-09
                                                                    subject-10
                                                                          ViT-S
                                                                          ViT-B
                                                                          ViT-L


                                                                   ViT-L (14M)
                                                                  ViT-B (14M)

                                                          ViT-22B_ft-560 (4B)
                                                          ViT-22B_ft-384 (4B)
                                                          ViT-22B_ft-224 (4B)
                                                               StableDiffusion


                                          Figure 18: Error consistency for ‘silhouette’ images.


                                                                     24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Benchmark table of model results for most human-like behaviour, aggregated over all 17
datasets from Geirhos et al. (2021). The three metrics “accuracy difference” “observed consistency”
and “error consistency” each produce a different model ranking. The mean rank of a model across
those three metrics is used to rank the models on our benchmark.

 model                            accuracy diff. ↓    obs. consistency ↑   error consistency ↑   mean rank ↓
 ViT-22B ft-384 (4B)                        0.018                 0.783                 0.258         2.333
 Imagen (860M)                              0.023                 0.761                 0.309         3.000
 ViT-22B ft-560 (4B)                        0.022                 0.739                 0.281         4.333
 CLIP: ViT-B (400M), 80 prompts             0.023                 0.758                 0.281         4.333
 StableDiffusion                            0.023                 0.743                 0.264         5.000
 SWSL: ResNeXt-101 (940M)                   0.028                 0.752                 0.237         8.000
 BiT-M: ResNet-101x1 (14M)                  0.034                 0.733                 0.252         9.333
 BiT-M: ResNet-152x2 (14M)                  0.035                 0.737                 0.243        10.000
 ViT-L                                      0.033                 0.738                 0.222        11.667
 BiT-M: ResNet-152x4 (14M)                  0.035                 0.732                 0.233        12.667
 ViT-L (14M)                                0.035                 0.744                 0.206        14.000
 ViT-22B ft-224 (4B)                        0.030                 0.781                 0.197        14.000
 BiT-M: ResNet-50x3 (14M)                   0.040                 0.726                 0.228        14.333
 BiT-M: ResNet-50x1 (14M)                   0.042                 0.718                 0.240        14.667
 CLIP: ViT-B (400M), 1 prompt               0.054                 0.688                 0.257        16.000
 SWSL: ResNet-50 (940M)                     0.041                 0.727                 0.211        16.667
 ViT-B                                      0.044                 0.719                 0.223        17.000
 BiT-M: ResNet-101x3 (14M)                  0.040                 0.720                 0.204        19.333
 ViT-B (14M)                                0.049                 0.717                 0.209        20.000
 densenet201                                0.060                 0.695                 0.212        20.333
 Noisy Student: ENetL2 (300M)               0.040                 0.764                 0.169        22.333
 ViT-S                                      0.066                 0.684                 0.216        22.333
 densenet169                                0.065                 0.688                 0.207        23.000
 inception v3                               0.066                 0.677                 0.211        23.333
 ResNet-50 L2 eps 1.0                       0.079                 0.669                 0.224        26.667
 ResNet-50 L2 eps 3.0                       0.079                 0.663                 0.239        27.667
 SimCLR: ResNet-50x4                        0.071                 0.698                 0.179        30.333
 wide resnet101 2                           0.068                 0.676                 0.187        30.333
 ResNet-50 L2 eps 0.5                       0.078                 0.668                 0.203        31.000
 densenet121                                0.077                 0.671                 0.200        31.000
 SimCLR: ResNet-50x2                        0.073                 0.686                 0.180        31.333
 resnet152                                  0.077                 0.675                 0.190        31.667
 resnet101                                  0.074                 0.671                 0.192        31.667
 resnext101 32x8d                           0.074                 0.674                 0.182        32.667
 ResNet-50 L2 eps 5.0                       0.087                 0.649                 0.240        32.667
 resnet50                                   0.087                 0.665                 0.208        34.333
 resnet34                                   0.084                 0.662                 0.205        35.000
 vgg19 bn                                   0.081                 0.660                 0.200        35.667
 resnext50 32x4d                            0.079                 0.666                 0.184        36.333
 SimCLR: ResNet-50x1                        0.080                 0.667                 0.179        38.000
 resnet18                                   0.091                 0.648                 0.201        40.333
 vgg16 bn                                   0.088                 0.651                 0.198        40.333
 wide resnet50 2                            0.084                 0.663                 0.176        41.667
 MoCoV2: ResNet-50                          0.083                 0.660                 0.177        42.000
 mobilenet v2                               0.092                 0.645                 0.196        43.000
 ResNet-50 L2 eps 0.0                       0.086                 0.654                 0.178        43.333
 mnasnet1 0                                 0.092                 0.646                 0.189        44.333
 vgg11 bn                                   0.106                 0.635                 0.193        44.667
 InfoMin: ResNet-50                         0.086                 0.659                 0.168        45.333
 vgg13 bn                                   0.101                 0.631                 0.180        47.000
 mnasnet0 5                                 0.110                 0.617                 0.173        51.000
 MoCo: ResNet-50                            0.107                 0.617                 0.149        53.000
 alexnet                                    0.118                 0.597                 0.165        53.333
 squeezenet1 1                              0.131                 0.593                 0.175        53.667
 PIRL: ResNet-50                            0.119                 0.607                 0.141        54.667
 shufflenet v2 x0 5                         0.126                 0.592                 0.160        55.333
 InsDis: ResNet-50                          0.131                 0.593                 0.138        56.667
 squeezenet1 0                              0.145                 0.574                 0.153        57.000


                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: Benchmark table of model results for highest out-of-distribution robustness, aggregated
over all 17 datasets from Geirhos et al. (2021).

                    model                            OOD accuracy ↑   rank ↓
                    ViT-22B ft-224 (4B)                       0.837    1.000
                    Noisy Student: ENetL2 (300M)              0.829    2.000
                    ViT-22B ft-384 (4B)                       0.798    3.000
                    ViT-L (14M)                               0.733    4.000
                    CLIP: ViT-B (400M), 80 prompts            0.708    5.000
                    Imagen (860M)                             0.706    6.000
                    ViT-L                                     0.706    7.000
                    SWSL: ResNeXt-101 (940M)                  0.698    8.000
                    BiT-M: ResNet-152x2 (14M)                 0.694    9.000
                    StableDiffusion                           0.689   10.000
                    BiT-M: ResNet-152x4 (14M)                 0.688   11.000
                    BiT-M: ResNet-101x3 (14M)                 0.682   12.000
                    BiT-M: ResNet-50x3 (14M)                  0.679   13.000
                    SimCLR: ResNet-50x4                       0.677   14.000
                    SWSL: ResNet-50 (940M)                    0.677   15.000
                    BiT-M: ResNet-101x1 (14M)                 0.672   16.000
                    ViT-B (14M)                               0.669   17.000
                    ViT-B                                     0.658   18.000
                    BiT-M: ResNet-50x1 (14M)                  0.654   19.000
                    SimCLR: ResNet-50x2                       0.644   20.000
                    ViT-22B ft-560 (4B)                       0.639   21.000
                    densenet201                               0.621   22.000
                    densenet169                               0.613   23.000
                    SimCLR: ResNet-50x1                       0.596   24.000
                    resnext101 32x8d                          0.594   25.000
                    resnet152                                 0.584   26.000
                    wide resnet101 2                          0.583   27.000
                    resnet101                                 0.583   28.000
                    ViT-S                                     0.579   29.000
                    densenet121                               0.576   30.000
                    MoCoV2: ResNet-50                         0.571   31.000
                    inception v3                              0.571   32.000
                    InfoMin: ResNet-50                        0.571   33.000
                    resnext50 32x4d                           0.569   34.000
                    wide resnet50 2                           0.566   35.000
                    resnet50                                  0.559   36.000
                    resnet34                                  0.553   37.000
                    ResNet-50 L2 eps 0.5                      0.551   38.000
                    CLIP: ViT-B (400M), 1 prompt              0.550   39.000
                    ResNet-50 L2 eps 1.0                      0.547   40.000
                    vgg19 bn                                  0.546   41.000
                    ResNet-50 L2 eps 0.0                      0.545   42.000
                    ResNet-50 L2 eps 3.0                      0.530   43.000
                    vgg16 bn                                  0.530   44.000
                    mnasnet1 0                                0.524   45.000
                    resnet18                                  0.521   46.000
                    mobilenet v2                              0.520   47.000
                    MoCo: ResNet-50                           0.502   48.000
                    ResNet-50 L2 eps 5.0                      0.501   49.000
                    vgg13 bn                                  0.499   50.000
                    vgg11 bn                                  0.498   51.000
                    PIRL: ResNet-50                           0.489   52.000
                    mnasnet0 5                                0.472   53.000
                    InsDis: ResNet-50                         0.468   54.000
                    shufflenet v2 x0 5                        0.440   55.000
                    alexnet                                   0.434   56.000
                    squeezenet1 1                             0.425   57.000
                    squeezenet1 0                             0.401   58.000



                                               26
