Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


O FFLINE DATA E NHANCED O N -P OLICY P OLICY G RA -
DIENT
WITH P ROVABLE G UARANTEES

 Yifei Zhou вҲ—                                   Ayush Sekhari вҲ—              Yuda Song
 University of California, Berkeley             MIT                          Carnegie Mellon University
 {yifei_zhou@berkeley.edu                       sekhari@mit.edu              yudas@cs.cmu.edu

 Wen Sun
 Cornell University
 ws455@cornell.edu



                                                A BSTRACT

             Hybrid RL is the setting where an RL agent has access to both offline data and
             online data by interacting with the real-world environment. In this work, we
             propose a new hybrid RL algorithm that combines an on-policy actor-critic method
             with offline data. On-policy methods such as policy gradient and natural policy
             gradient (NPG) have shown to be more robust to model misspecification, though
             sometimes it may not be as sample efficient as methods that rely on off-policy
             learning. On the other hand, offline methods that depend on off-policy training
             often require strong assumptions in theory and are less stable to train in practice.
             Our new approach integrates a procedure of off-policy training on the offline data
             into an on-policy NPG framework. We show that our approach, in theory, can
             obtain a best-of-both-worlds type of result вҖ” it achieves the state-of-art theoretical
             guarantees of offline RL when offline RL-specific assumptions hold, while at the
             same time maintaining the theoretical guarantees of on-policy NPG regardless of the
             offline RL assumptionsвҖҷ validity. Experimentally, in challenging rich-observation
             environments, we show that our approach outperforms a state-of-the-art hybrid
             RL baseline which only relies on off-policy policy optimization, demonstrating
             the empirical benefit of combining on-policy and off-policy learning. Our code is
             publicly available at https://github.com/YifeiZhou02/HNPG.

1       I NTRODUCTION
On-policy RL methods, such as direct policy gradient (PG) methods (Williams, 1992; Sutton et al.,
1999; Konda & Tsitsiklis, 1999; Kakade, 2001), are a class of successful RL algorithms due to
their compatibility with rich function approximation (Schulman et al., 2015), their ability to directly
optimize the cost functions of interests, and their robustness to model-misspecification (Agarwal et al.,
2020). While there are many impressive applications of on-policy PG methods in high-dimensional
dexterous manipulation (Akkaya et al., 2019), achieving human-level performance in large-scale
games (Vinyals et al., 2019), and finetuning large language model with human feedback (Ouyang
et al., 2022), the usage of on-policy PG methods is often limited to the setting where one can afford a
huge amount of training data. This is majorly due to the fact that on-policy PG methods do not reuse
old data (i.e., historical data that are not collected with the current policy to optimize or evaluate).
On the other hand, offline RL asks the question of how to reuse existing data. There are many real-
world applications where we have pre-collected offline data (Fan et al., 2022; Grauman et al., 2022),
and the goal of offline RL is to learn a high-quality policy purely from offline data. Since offline data
typically is generated from sub-optimal policies, offline RL methods rely on off-policy learning (e.g.,
Bellman-backup-based learning such as Q-learning and Fitted Q Iteration (FQI) (Munos & SzepesvГЎri,
2008)). While the vision of offline RL is promising, making offline RL work in both theory and
practice is often challenging. In theory, offline RL methods rely on strong assumptions on the function
    вҲ—
        First two authors contribute equally.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


approximation (e.g., classic off-policy Temporal Difference (TD) Learning algorithms can diverge
without strong assumptions such as Bellman completeness (Tsitsiklis & Van Roy, 1996)). In practice,
unlike on-policy PG method which directly performs gradient ascent on the objective of interests,
training Bellman-backup based value learning procedure in an off-policy fashion can be unstable
(Kumar et al., 2019) and less robust to model misspecification (Agarwal et al., 2020). In this work, we
ask the following question: Can we design an RL algorithm that can achieve the strengths of both
on-policy and offline RL methods? We study this question and provide an affirmative answer under
the setting of hybrid RL (Ross & Bagnell, 2012; Song et al., 2023), which considers the situation
where in addition to some offline data, the learner can also perform online interactions with the
underlying environment to collect fresh data. Prior hybrid RL works focus on the simple approach of
mixing both offline data and online data followed by iteratively running off-policy learning algorithms
such as FQI (Song et al., 2023) or Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) (Nakamoto et al., 2023; Ball et al., 2023)вҖ”
both of which are off-policy methods that rely on Bellman backup or TD to learn value functions from
off-policy data. We take an alternative approach here by augmenting on-policy PG methods with an
off-policy learning procedure on the given offline data. Different from prior work, our new approach
combines on-policy learning and off-policy learning, thus achieving the best of both worlds guarantee.
More specifically, on the algorithmic side, we integrate the Fitted Policy Evaluation procedure
(Antos et al., 2007) (an off-policy algorithm) into the Natural Policy Gradient (NPG) (Kakade, 2001)
algorithm (an on-policy framework). On the theoretical side, we show that when standard assumptions
related to offline RL hold, our approach indeed achieves similar theoretical guarantees that can be
obtained by state-of-art theoretical offline RL methods which rely on pessimism or conservatives
(Xie et al., 2021), while at the same time, our approach always maintains the theoretical guarantee of
the on-policy NPG algorithm, regardless of the validity of the offline RL specific assumptions. Thus,
our approach can still recover the on-policy result while the offline component fails.
On the practical side, we verify our approach on the challenging rich-observation combination lock
problem (Misra et al., 2020) where the agent has to always take the only correct action at each state
to get the final optimal reward (see Section 6 for more details). This RL environment has been
extensively used in prior works to evaluate an RL algorithmвҖҷs ability to do representation learning and
exploration simultaneously (Zhang et al., 2022b; Song et al., 2023; Agarwal et al., 2023). Besides
the standard rich-observation combination lock example, we propose a more challenging variant
where the observation is made of real-world images from the Cifar100 dataset (Krizhevsky, 2009).
In the Cifar100 augmented combination lock setting, the RL agent can only access images from
the training set during training and will be tested using images from the test set. Unlike standard
Mujoco environments where the transition is deterministic and initial state distribution is narrow, our
new setup here stresses testing the generalization ability of an RL algorithm when facing real-world
images as states. Empirically, on both benchmarks, our approach significantly outperforms baselines
such as pure on-policy method PPO and a hybrid RL approach RLPD (Ball et al., 2023) which relies
on only off-policy learning.
2    R ELATED WORKS
On-policy RL. On-policy RL defines the algorithms that perform policy improvement or evaluation
using the current policyвҖҷs actions or trajectories. The most notable on-policy methods are the family
of direct policy gradient methods, such as REINFORCE (Williams, 1992), Natural Policy Gradient
(NPG) (Kakade, 2001), and more recent ones equipped with neural network function approximation
such as Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) (Schulman et al., 2015) and Proximal Policy
Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017). In general, on-policy methods have some obvious
advantages: they directly optimize the objective of interest and they are nicely compatible with general
function approximation, which contributes to their success on larger-scale applications (Vinyals et al.,
2019; Berner et al., 2019). In addition, (Agarwal et al., 2020) demonstrates the provable robustness
to the вҖңDelusional BiasвҖқ (Lu et al., 2018) while only part of the model is well-specified.
Off-policy / offline RL. Off-policy learning uses data from behavior policy that is not necessarily
the current policy that we are estimating or optimizing. Since off-policy methods rely on the idea
of bootstrapping (either from the current or the target function), in theory, stronger assumptions are
required for successful learning. Foster et al. (2021) showed that realizability alone does not guarantee
sample efficient offline RL (in fact, the lower bound could be arbitrarily large depending on the state
space size). Stronger conditions such as Bellman completeness are required. It is also well-known
that in off-policy setting, when equipped with function approximation, classic TD algorithms indeed
do not guarantee to converge (Tsitsiklis & Van Roy, 1996), and even converged, the fixed point


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


solution of TD can be arbitrarily bad (Scherrer, 2010). In addition, (Agarwal et al., 2020) provided
counter-examples for TD/Q-learning style algorithmsвҖҷ failures on partially misspecified models.
These negative results all indicate the challenges of learning with offline or off-policy data. On the
other hand, positive results are present when stronger assumptions such as Bellman completeness
(Munos & SzepesvГЎri, 2008). While these assumptions are off-policy/offline learning specific and
can be strong, the fact that TD can succeed in practice implies such conditions can hold in practice
(or at least hold approximately).
Hybrid RL. Hybrid RL (Song et al., 2023) defines the setting where the learning agent has access
to both offline dataset and online interaction with the environment. Previous hybrid RL methods
(Song et al., 2023; Ross & Bagnell, 2012; Ball et al., 2023; Nakamoto et al., 2023) perform off-policy
learning (or model-based learning) on the dataset mixed with online and offline data. In particular,
HyQ (Song et al., 2023) provides theoretical justification for the off-policy approach, and the
guarantees presented by HyQ still require standard offline RL conditions to hold (due to the bootstrap
requirement). However, our new approach is fundamentally different in algorithm design: although
our offline component is still inevitably off-policy with the ideas of bootstrap, we perform on-policy
learning with the data collected during online interaction without bootstrap, which gives us a doubly
robust result when the offline learning specific assumptions (e.g., Bellman completeness) do not
hold. Additionally, we would like to mention that some other works (Gu et al., 2017b;a; Xiao et al.,
2023; Zhao et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2021), also explored the possibility of achieving the best of both
worlds of on-policy and off-policy learning. Despite achieving empirical success, their theoretical
guarantees still require a strong coverage condition on the reset distribution, while this work presents
a doubly-robust guarantee when either the offline or the on-policy condition holds.
3 P RELIMINARIES
We consider discounted infinite horizon MDP M = {S, A, Оі, r, Вө0 , P } where S, A are state-action
spaces, Оі вҲҲ (0, 1) is the discount factor, r(s, a) вҲҲ [0, 1] is the reward, Вө0 вҲҲ вҲҶ(S Г— A) is the initial
reset distribution over states and actions (i.e., we reset based on a state and action sampled from
Вө0 ), and P вҲҲ S Г— A 7вҶ’ вҲҶ(S) is the transition kernel. Note that assuming the reset distribution
over the joint space S Г— A, contrary to just resetting over S, is a standard assumption used in policy
optimization literature such as CPI and NPG (Kakade & Langford, 2002; Agarwal et al., 2021).
As usual, given a policy ПҖ вҲҲ S 7вҶ’ вҲҶ(A), we denote QПҖ (s, a) as the Q function of ПҖ, and V ПҖ (s) as
the value function of ПҖ. We denote dПҖ вҲҲ вҲҶ(S Г— A) as the average state-action occupancy measure of
policy ПҖ. We denote V ПҖ = Es0 вҲјВө0 V ПҖ (s0 ) as the expected total discounted reward of ПҖ. We denote
T ПҖ as the Bellman operator associated with ПҖ, i.e., given a function f вҲҲ S Г— A 7вҶ’ R, we have
                       T ПҖ f (s, a) = r(s, a) + ОіEsвҖІ вҲјP (s,a),aвҖІ вҲјПҖ(sвҖІ ) [f (sвҖІ , aвҖІ )].
In the hybrid RL setting, we assume that the learner has access to an offline data distribution ОҪ,
from which it can draw i.i.d. samples s, a вҲј ОҪ, r = r(s, a), sвҖІ вҲј P (s, a) to be used for learning (in
addition to on-policy online interactions). The assumption that the learner has direct access to ОҪ can
be easily relaxed by instead giving the learner a dataset D of samples drawn i.i.d. from ОҪ. For a given
policy ПҖ, we denote dПҖ as the average state-action occupancy measure, starting from Вө0 .
In our algorithm, given a policy ПҖ, we will draw
                                               PвҲһ state-action    pairs from the distribution dПҖ defined
             ПҖ                                         t   ПҖ
such that d (s, a) = (1 вҲ’ Оі)(Вө0 (s1 , a1 ) + t=1 Оі Pr (st = s, at = a)), which can be done by
sampling h with probability proportional to Оі h , execute ПҖ to h starting from (s1 , a1 ) вҲј Вө0 , and return
(sh , ah ). Given (s, a), ПҖ, to draw an unbiased estimate of the reward-to-go QПҖ (s, a), we can execute
ПҖ starting from (s0 , a0 ) := (s, a), every time step h, we terminate with probability Оі (otherwise
                                                                                           Ph
move to h + 1); once terminated at h, return the sum of the undiscounted rewards П„ =0 rП„ . This
is an unbiased estimate of QПҖ (s, a). Such kind of procedure is commonly used in on-policy PG
methods, such as PG (Williams, 1992), NPG (Kakade, 2001; Agarwal et al., 2020), and CPI (Kakade
& Langford, 2002). We refer readers to Algorithm 1 in Agarwal et al. (2021) for details.
4 H YBRID ACTOR -C RITIC
In this section, we present our main algorithm called Hybrid Actor-Critic (HAC), given in Algorithm 1.
HAC takes as input the number of rounds T , a value function class F, an offline data distribution ОҪ (or
equivalently an offline dataset sampled from ОҪ), and a weight parameter О», among other parameters,
and returns a policy ПҖ   b. HAC runs for T rounds, where it performs a few very simple steps at
each round t вҲҲ T . At the beginning of every round, given a policy ПҖ t computed in the previous
rounds, it first invokes the subroutine Hybrid Fitted Policy Evaluate (HPE), given in Algorithm 2,


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Hybrid Actor-Critic (HAC)
Require: Function class F, offline data ОҪ, # of PG iteration T , HPE # of iterations K1 , K2 , weight
    parameter О»
 1: Initialize f 0 вҲҲ F,                          0
                        pset ПҖ1 (a|s) вҲқ exp(f (s, a)).
 2: Set О· = (1 вҲ’ Оі) log(A)/T .
 3: for t = 1, . . . , T do
 4:    Let f t вҶҗ HPE(ПҖ t , F, K1 , K2 , ОҪ, О»).
 5:    ПҖ t+1 (a|s) вҲқ ПҖ t (a|s) exp(О·f t (s, a)),        вҲҖs, a.
 6: end for
 7: Return policy ПҖ    b вҲј Uniform({ПҖ1 , . . . , ПҖT +1 }).


Algorithm 2 Hybrid Fitted Policy Evaluation (HPE)
Require: Policy ПҖ, function class F, offline distribution ОҪ, number of iterations K1 , K2 , weight О»
 1: Initialize f0 вҲҲ F.
 2: Sample Don = {(s, a, y = Q          b ПҖ (s, a))} of mon many on-policy samples using ПҖ.
                                    вҖІ
 3: Sample Doff = {(s, a, s , r)} of moff many offline samples from ОҪ.
 4: for k = 1, . . . , K1 , . . . , K2 do
 5:    Solve the square loss regression problem to compute:
              fk вҶҗ argmin E          b D (f (s, a) вҲ’ r вҲ’ ОіfkвҲ’1 (sвҖІ , ПҖ(sвҖІ )))2 + О»E
                                                                                  b D (f (s, a) вҲ’ y)2 . (1)
                                  off                                             on
                       f вҲҲF

 6:   Sample fresh datasets Doff and Don as in lines 2 and 3 above.
 7: end for             PK2
 8: Return fВҜ = K2 вҲ’K
                   1
                      1   k=K1 +1 fk , and optionally Doff and Don .
                                                                t
to compute an approximation f t of the value function QПҖ corresponding to ПҖ t . Then, using the
function f t , HAC computes the policy ПҖ t+1 for the next round using the softmax policy update:
ПҖ t+1 (a | s) вҲқ ПҖ t (a | s) exp(О·f t (s, a)) for s вҲҲ S, where О· is the step size. This step ensures that the
new policy does not change too much compared to the old policy.
We next describe the subroutine HPE, our key tool in the HAC algorithm. HPE algorithm takes
as input a policy ПҖ, a value function class F, an offline distribution ОҪ, and a weight parameter О»,
among other parameters, and outputs a value function f that approximates QПҖ of the input policy
ПҖ. HPE performs K2 many iterations, where on the k-th iteration, it computes a function fk based
on the function fkвҲ’1 from the previous rounds. At the k-th iteration, in order to compute fk , HPE
first collects a dataset Don of mon many on-policy online samples from the input policy ПҖ, each
of which consists of a triplet (s, a, y) where (s, a) вҲј dПҖ and y is a stochastic estimate for QПҖ (s, a)
i.e. satisfies E[y] = QПҖ (s, a) (e.g., y can be obtained from a Monte-Carlo rollout). Then, HPE
collects a dataset Doff of moff many offline samples (s, a, sвҖІ , r) from ОҪ, where sвҖІ вҲј P (В· | s, a) and
r вҲј r(s, a). Finally, HPE computes the estimate fk by solving the optimization problem in (1).
The first term in (1) corresponds to minimizing TD error with respect to fkвҲ’1 under the offline data
Doff , and the second term corresponds to minimizing estimation error of QПҖ (s, a) under the online
dataset Don . Note that the second term does not rely on the bootstrapping procedure. The relative
weights of the terms is decided by the parameter О», given as an input to the algorithm and chosen via
hyperparameter tuning in our experiments. Typically, О» вҲҲ [1, T ]. Finally, after repeating this for K2
times, HPE outputs fВҜ which is computed by taking the average of fk produced in the last K2 вҲ’ K1
iterations1 , where we ignore the first K1 iterations to remove the bias due to the initial estimate f0 .
The key step in HPE is Eq. 1 which consists of an off-policy TD loss and an on-policy least square
regression loss. When the standard offline RL condition вҖ” Bellman completeness, holds (i.e., the
Bayes optimal T ПҖ fkвҲ’1 вҲҲ F), HPE can return a function fВҜ that has the following two properties: (1)
fВҜ is an accurate estimate of QПҖ (s, a) under dПҖ thanks to the on-policy least square loss, (2) fВҜ has small
Bellman residual under the ОҪ 2 вҖ” the offline distribution. On the other hand, without the Bellman
completeness condition, due to the existence of the on-policy regression loss, we can still ensure

   1
     Averaging is only needed for our theoretical guarantees. Our experiments in Section 6 do not perform
averaging and use the last iterate.
   2
     i.e. Es,aвҲјОҪ (fВҜ(s, a) вҲ’ r(s, a) вҲ’ ОіEsвҖІ вҲјP (В·|s,a),aвҖІ вҲјПҖ fВҜ(sвҖІ , aвҖІ ))2


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


fВҜ is a good estimator of QПҖ under dПҖ . This property ensures that we always retain the theoretical
guarantees of on-policy NPG. We illustrate these points in more detail in the analysis section.
Parameterized policies. Note that HAC uses softmax policy parameterization, which may be
intractable when A is large (since we need to compute a partition function in order to sample from
ПҖ t ). In order to circumvent this issue, we also consider a Hybrid Natural Policy Gradient (HNPG)
algorithm (Algorithm 3), that directly works with a parameterized policy class О  = {ПҖОё | Оё вҲҲ Оҳ},
where Оё is the parameter (e.g., ПҖОё can be a differentiable neural network based policy). The algorithm
is very similar to HAC and runs for T rounds, where at each round t вүӨ T , it first computes f t ,
an approximation for QПҖОёt , by invoking the HPE procedure. However, it relies on compatible
function approximation to update the current policy ПҖОёt . For working with parameterized policies,
HNPG relies on HPE to also supply an offline dataset Doff of moff many tuples (s, a) вҲј ОҪ, and
                                                                       t
an on-policy online dataset Don of mon many tuples (s, a) вҲј dПҖ , which it uses to fit the linear
critic (wt )вҠӨ вҲҮ ln ПҖОёt (a|s) in (2). We then update the current policy parameter via Оёt+1 = Оёt + О·wt ,
similar to the classic NPG update for parameterized policy (Kakade, 2001; Agarwal et al., 2021)
except that we fit the linear critic under both online and offline data. Another way to interpret
this update rule is to investigate the form of wt . Taking the gradient of the objective in (2) with
respect to w, setting it to zero, and solving for w, we get that the stationary point should be in the
          hP                            iвҲ’1 P
                    t        t       вҠӨ             t      ВҜt                             t
form of       s,a (П• (s, a)(П• (s, a)) )       s,a П• (s, a)f (s, a). Using the fact that П• (s, a) is defined
to be вҲҮ ln ПҖОёt (a|s), we see that s,a (П•t (s, a)(П•t (s, a))вҠӨ is exactly the fisher information matrix
                                     P
computed using both online and offline data. Thus our new approach extends the parameterized NPG
(Kakade, 2001) to the hybrid RL setting in a principled manner.

Algorithm 3 Hybrid NPG with Parameterized Policies (HNPG)
Require: Function class F, PG iteration T , PE iterations (K1 , K2 ), offline data ОҪ, Params О», О·.
 1: Initialize f 0 вҲҲ F, and Оё 1 such that ПҖОё1 = Uniform(A).
 2: for t = 1, . . . , T do
 3:    f t , Doff , Don вҶҗ HPE(ПҖ t , F, K1 , K2 , ОҪ, О»).
 4:    Let П•t (s, a) = вҲҮ log ПҖОёt (a|s) and fВҜt (s, a) = f t (s, a) вҲ’ EaвҲјПҖОёt (s) [f t (s, a)].
 5:    Solve the square loss regression problem to compute:
           wt вҲҲ argmin E  b D (wвҠӨ П•t (s, a) вҲ’ fВҜt (s, a))2 + О»E   b D (wвҠӨ П•t (s, a) вҲ’ fВҜt (s, a))2 . (2)

                            off                                     on
                   w

 6:   Update Оёt+1 вҶҗ Оёt + О·wt .
 7: end for
                  b вҲј Uniform({ПҖОё1 , . . . , ПҖОёT +1 }).
 8: Return policy ПҖ


5    T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS
In this section, we first present our main theoretical guarantees for our Hybrid Actor-Critic algorithm
(HAC), and then proceed to its variant HNPG that works for parameterized policy classes. We start
by stating the main assumptions and definitions for function approximation, the underlying MDP, the
offline data distribution ОҪ, and their relation to the prior works. We remark that all our assumptions
and definitions are standard, and are frequently used in the RL theory literature (Agarwal et al., 2019).
                                                                                                  2
Assumption 1 (Realizability). For any ПҖ, there exists a f вҲҲ F s.t. EПҖ [(f (s, a) вҲ’ QПҖ (s, a)) ] = 0.
We consider the following notion of inherent Bellman Error, that will appear in our bounds.
Definition 1 (Point-wise Inherent Bellman Error). We say that F has a point-wise inherent Bellman
error Оөbe , if for all f вҲҲ F and policy ПҖ, there exists a f вҖІ вҲҲ F such that вҲҘf вҖІ вҲ’ T ПҖ f вҲҘвҲһ вүӨ Оөbe .

Note that when Оөbe = 0, the above definition implies that for any f вҲҲ F, its Bellman backup T f
is in the class F, i.e. F is Bellman complete. While, Bellman completeness is a commonly used
assumption in both online (Jin et al., 2021; Xie et al., 2022) and offline RL (Munos & SzepesvГЎri,
2008), our results do not require Оөbe = 0. In fact, our algorithm enjoys meaningful guarantees, as
presented below, even when Bellman completeness does not hold, i.e., Оөbe could be arbitrarily large.
We next define the coverage for the comparator policy ПҖ e , which is a common tool in the analysis of
policy gradient methods (Kakade & Langford, 2002; Agarwal et al., 2021).


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Definition 2 (NPG Coverage). Given some comparator policy ПҖ e , we say that it has coverage Cnpg,ПҖe
                                              e
                                            dПҖ                              e
over ПҖ e if for any policy ПҖ, we have       dПҖ        вүӨ Cnpg,ПҖe , where dПҖ is the occupancy measure of ПҖ e .
                                                  вҲһ
                                                                        e
Note that Cnpg,ПҖe < вҲһ if the reset distribution Вө0 satisfies вҲҘdПҖ /Вө0 вҲҘвҲһ < вҲһ, which is a standard
assumption used in policy optimization literature such as CPI and NPG (Kakade & Langford, 2002;
Agarwale et al., 2021). This condition intuitively says that the reset distribution has goode
                                                                                              coverage
over dПҖ , making it possible to transfer the square error under dПҖ of any policy ПҖ to dПҖ (since we
always have that вҲҘВө0/dПҖ вҲҘвҲһ < 1/1вҲ’Оі for all ПҖ, by definition of Вө0 ). Finally, we introduce the Bellman
error transfer coefficient, which allows us to control the expected Belmman under a policy ПҖ in terms
of the squared Bellman error under the offline distribution ОҪ.
Definition 3 (Bellman error transfer coefficient). Given the offline distribution ОҪ, for any policy ПҖ e ,
we define the Bellman error transfer
                                   пЈұ coefficient as                               пЈј
                                     пЈІ            Es,aвҲјdПҖe [T ПҖ f (s, a) вҲ’ f (s, a)] пЈҪ
                       Coff,ПҖe := max 0, max max q                                    ,
                                          ПҖ  f вҲҲF
                                                   Es,aвҲјОҪ (T ПҖ f (s, a) вҲ’ f (s, a))2
                                     пЈі                                               пЈҫ

 where the maxПҖ is taken over the set of all stationary policies.
The Bellman error transfer coefficient above was introduced in Song et al. (2023), and is known to
be weaker than other related notions considered in prior works, including density ratio (Kakade &
Langford, 2002; Munos & SzepesvГЎri, 2008; Chen & Jiang, 2019; Uehara & Sun, 2021), all-policy
concentrability coefficient (Munos & SzepesvГЎri, 2008; Chen & Jiang, 2019), square Bellman error
based concentrability coefficient (Xie et al., 2021), relative condition number for linear MDP (Uehara
et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022a), etc. (see Song et al. (2023) for a detailed comparison). Our
definition of Bellman error transfer coefficient involves two policies ПҖ e and ПҖ, where ПҖ e denotes the
comparator policy that we wish to compete with (and is thus fixed), and ПҖ is used to define the Bellman
backups (i.e. the terms T ПҖ fh+1 (s, a) вҲ’ fh (s, a)) that we transfer from the offline distribution ОҪ to
the occupancy measure induced by ПҖ e . We take a max w.r.t.     e
                                                                  all possible ПҖ for the underlying MDP
as our analysis proceeds by transferring (from under ОҪ to dПҖ ) the Bellman error terms corresponding
to the policies that are generated by our algorithm, which could be arbitrary.
Theorem 1 (Cumulative suboptimality). Fix any Оҙ вҲҲ (0, 1), and let ОҪ be an offline data distribution.
Suppose the function class F satisfies Assumption 1. Additionally, suppose that the subroutime HPE
                                                                                                |/Оҙ)
is run with parameters K1 = 4вҢҲlog(1/Оі)вҢү, K2 = K1 + T , and moff = mon = 2T log(2|F        (1вҲ’Оі)2     . Then,
with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, HAC satisfies the following bounds on cumulative subpotimality
w.r.t. any comparator policy ПҖ e :
 вҖў Under approximate Bellman Complete (when Оөbe вүӨ 1/T ):
       T                                                               r                             !
       X
                  ПҖe        ПҖt          1    p               1                 n
                                                                                           2
                                                                                                 o
              V        вҲ’V        вүӨO        2
                                               log(A)T +                    min Cnpg,ПҖe , Coff,ПҖe В· T .
        t=1
                                    (1 вҲ’ Оі)              (1 вҲ’ Оі)2

 вҖў Without Bellman Completeness (when Оөbe > 1/T ):
                T
               X
                    ПҖe    ПҖt            1    p              1    p
                   V вҲ’V вүӨO                    log(A)T +           Cnpg,ПҖ T .
                                                                        e

               t=1
                                    (1 вҲ’ Оі)2            (1 вҲ’ Оі)2

where ПҖ t denotes the policy at round t.
                                                                                 PT        e      t
The above shows that as T increases, the average cumulative suboptimality ( t=1 V ПҖ вҲ’ V ПҖ )/T
                                    вҲҡ
converges to 0 at rate at least O(1/ T ). Thus, our algorithm will eventually learn to compete with any
comparator policy ПҖ e that has bounded Cnpg,ПҖe (or bounded Coff,ПҖe with Оөbe вүӨ 1/T ). Furthermore,
our algorithm exhibits a best-of-both-worlds behavior in the sense that it can operate both with or
without approximate Bellman Completeness and enjoys a meaningful guarantee in both cases.
In scenarios when approximate Bellman Completeness holds (i.e. Оөbe вүӨ 1/T ), the above theorem
shows that our algorithm can benefit from access to offline data, and can compete with any comparator
policy ПҖ e that has a small Bellman error transfer coefficient. This style of bound is typically obtained
in pure offline RL by using pessimism, which is typically computationally inefficient (Uehara &
Sun, 2021; Xie et al., 2021). In comparison, our algorithm only relies on simple primitives like
square-loss regression, which can be made computationally efficient under mild assumptions on F
(see discussion below); On the practical side, least square regression is much easier to implement


                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and is even compatible with modern neural networks. Finally, note that, under approximate Bellman
                           2
Completeness and when Coff,ПҖ  e вүӨ Cnpg,ПҖ e , while our guarantees are similar to that of HyQ algorithm

from Song et al. (2023), the performance guarantee for HyQ only holds under the conditions that
Bellman completeness (when Оөbe is small) and the problem has a small bilinear rank (Du et al., 2021).
In comparison, our algorithm enjoys an on-policy NPG style convergence guarantee even when Оөbe
or bilinear-rank is large.
When there is no control on the inherent Bellman error, the second bound above holds. Such a
bound is typical for policy gradient style algorithms, which do not require any control on Оөbe . Again
our result is doubly robust in the sense that we still obtain meaningful guarantees when the offline
condition does not hold, while previous hybrid RL results like Song et al. (2023) do not have any
guarantee when the offline assumptions (that Coff,ПҖe is small for some reasonable ПҖ e or Оөbe is small)
are not met.
Setting ПҖ e to be ПҖ вӢҶ (the optimal policy for the MDP), and using a standard online-to-batch conversion,
the above bound implies a sample complexity guarantee for Algorithm 1 for finding an Оө-suboptimal
policy w.r.t. ПҖ вӢҶ . Details are deferred to Section C.1.5.
On the computation side, there are two key steps that need careful consideration: (a) First,
the sampling step in line 5 in HAC. Note that for any given s, we have that ПҖ t (a | s) вҲқ
        PtвҲ’1
exp(О· П„ =1 f П„ (s, a)), so for an efficient implementation, we need the ability to efficiently sample
from this distribution. When |A| is small, this can be trivially done via enumeration. However,
when |A| is large, we may need to resort to parameterized policies in HNPG to avoid computing the
partition function. (b) Second, the minimization of (1) in HPE to compute fk given fkвҲ’1 . Note that
(1) is a square loss regression problem in f , which can be implemented efficiently in practice. In
fact, for various function classes F, explicit guarantees for subpotimality/regret for minimizing the
square loss in (1) are well known (Rakhlin & Sridharan, 2014). The above demonstrates the benefit
of hybrid RL over online RL and offline RL: by leveraging both offline and online data, we can avoid
explicit exploration or conservativeness, making algorithms much more computationally tractable.
Hybrid NPG with Parameterized Policies. We can provide a similar bound as in Theorem 1
for the HNPG algorithm, given in Algorithm 3, that works wth parameterized policy class О  =
{ПҖОё | Оё вҲҲ Оҳ}. In particular, we show that HNPG exhibits a best-of-best-worlds behavior in the
sense that it can operate with/without approximate Bellman Completeness, and in both cases enjoy
a meaningful cumulative suboptimality bound. For the theoretical analysis of HNPG, we make
additional assumptions that the policy class is well-parameterized, log ПҖОё (a | s) is smooth w.r.t. the
parameter Оё, and that W realizes the appropriate linear critics for all ПҖ вҲҲ О ; All of these assumptions
are standard in the literature on theoretical analysis of NPG algorithms. We defer the exact details of
the assumptions, and the cumulative suboptimality bound for HNPG, to Appendix D.
6   E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we describe our empirical comparison of HNPG with other state-of-the-art hybrid RL
methods on two challenging rich-observation exploration benchmarks with continuous action space.
Our experiments are designed to answer the following questions: (1) Is HNPG able to leverage
offline data to solve hard exploration problems which cannot be easily solved by pure online on-policy
PG methods? (2) For setting where Bellman Completeness condition does not necessarily hold, is
HNPG able to outperform other hybrid RL baselines which only rely on off-policy learning?
Implementation. The implementation of HNPG largely follows from Algorithm 3 and the
practical implementation recommendations from TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015). We use a two-layer
multi-layer perceptron for Q-functions and policies, plus an additional feature extractor for
imaged-based environment. Generalized Advantage Estimation (GAE) (Schulman et al., 2018)
is used while calculating online advantages. For NPG-based policy updates, we use conjugate
gradient algorithm followed by a line search to find the policy update direction. Following standard
combination lock algorithms (Song et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2022b), instead of a discounted setting
policy evaluation, we adapt to the finite horizon setting and train separate Q-functions and policies
for each timestep. The pseudocode and hyperparameters are provided in Appendix E.
Baselines. We compare HNPG with both pure on-policy and hybrid off-policy actor-critic meth-
ods. For pure on-policy method, we use TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015) as the baseline. For hybrid
off-policy method, we consider RLPD (Ball et al., 2023), a state-of-the-art algorithm in Mujoco bench-
marks, and tuned the hyperparameters specifically for this environment (see Appendix E). We tried


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                               Continuous Comblock                              Image-Based Continuous Comblock

                       Observation Space         Observation Space             Observation Space          Observation Space

                          +          +              +          +


                                                 вҖҰ                                                        вҖҰ

                         h=0         h=1   h=2        h=H-1          h=H          h=0         h=1   h=2        h=H-1          h=H


Figure 1: Illustration for continuous combination lock and image-based continuous combination lock.
training separate actors and critics for each time step and also training a single large actor and critic
shared for all time steps, for both TRPO and RLPD, and report the best variant. We found that using
a single actor and critic for RLPD resulted in better performance while the opposite holds for TRPO.
Note that imitation learning such as Behavior Cloning (B C) (Bain & Sammut, 1995) and pure offline
learning such as Conservative Q-Learning (C QL) (Kumar et al., 2020) have previously been shown
to fail on this benchmark (Song et al., 2023). Hybrid Q-learning methods (Hester et al., 2018; Song
et al., 2023) or provable online learning methods for block MDP (Du et al., 2019; Misra et al., 2020;
Zhang et al., 2022b; Mhammedi et al., 2023) do not apply here due to the continuous action space.
Offline distribution. Following Song et al. (2023), we use a suboptimal offline distribution gen-
erated by an Оө-greedy policy with 1 вҲ’ Оө probability of taking the good action and Оө probability of
taking a random action. Оө is taken to be 1/H so that this offline distribution has a bounded density
ratio for the optimal policy. The size of the offline dataset is set to 50000, and around 32%-36% of
the trajectories get optimal rewards, for H ranging from 5 to 50.
6.1 C ONTINUOUS C OMBLOCK
The left part of Figure 1 provides an illustration of a rich observation continuous Comblock of horizon
H (Misra et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2022b). For each latent state, there is only one good latent action
(out of 10 latent actions) that can lead the agent to the good states (green) in the next time step, while
taking any of the other 9 actions will lead the agent to a dead state (orange) from which the agent
will never be able to move back to good states; The reward is available at the good states in the last
time step. Every timestep, the agent does not have direct access to the latent state, instead, it has
access to a high-dimensional observation omitted from the latent state. More details can be found in
Appendix E.1. This environment is extremely challenging due to the exploration difficulty and also
the need to decode latent states from observations, and many popular deep RL baselines are known to
fail (Misra et al., 2020). Built on this environment, we further make the action space continuous. We
consider a 10-dimensional action space where a вҲҲ R10 . At each timestep, when the agent chooses
a 10-dimensional action a, the action is passed through a softmax layer, i.e., p вҲқ exp(a) where
the distribution p encodes the probability of choosing the 10 latent actions. A latent action is then
sampled based on p and the agent transits to the next time step. This continuous Comblock preserves
the exploration difficulty where a uniform exploration strategy only has exp(вҲ’H) probability of
getting the optimal reward. The continuous action space makes this environment even harder and
rules out many baselines that are based on Q-learning scheme (e.g., HyQ from Song et al. (2023))
The sample complexity of our algorithm vs. the baselines are shown in Figure 2; The loss curves
are deferred to Appendix E.2. To begin with, we observe that HNPG can reliably solve continuous
Comblock up to horizon 50 with mild sample complexity (50k sub-optimal offline samples and
around 30m online samples) despite the challenges of continuous action space. In comparison, TRPO
is not able to solve even horizon 5 due to the exploration difficulty in the environment. Although
RLPD has the benefit of improved sample complexity (detailed in Appendix E) by reusing past
online interactions, it can only solve up to horizon 15. To investigate why off-policy methods cannot
solve continuous Comblock as reliably as HNPG, we examine the critic loss of HNPG and RLPD
for both online and offline samples. Notably, although both methods maintain a relatively stable critic
loss on the offline samples, the online critic loss is more volatile for RLPD since it optimizes the TD
error (which requires bootstrap from target network) while HNPG optimizes the policy evaluation
error (which is a pure supervised learning problem) for online samples. We believe this unstable
online critic loss is why off-policy methods fail to learn reliably in this environment.
6.2 I MAGE BASED C ONTINUOUS C OMBLOCKS
To examine the robustness of HNPG when bellman completeness does not necessarily hold, we carry
out experiments on a real-world-image-based continuous Comblock, as depicted in the right part
of Figure 1. The only difference between an image-based continuous Comblock and a continuous


                                                                           8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                     1e7                 Continuous Comblock                               1e7     Image-Based Continuous Comblock
                                           HNPG (Ours)                                               1.0         HNPG (Ours)
                                 3


                Online Samples


                                                                                    Online Samples
                                           RLPD                                                      0.8         RLPD
                                           TRPO                                                                  TRPO
                                 2                                                                   0.6
                                                                                                     0.4
                                 1                                                                   0.2
                                 0                                                                   0.0
                                       0    5 10 15                   30       50                            0        5        10     15             30
                                                               Horizon                                                              Horizon

Figure 2: Comparison of sample complexity of different algorithms in Continuous Comblock and
Image-Based Continuous Comblock benchmarks. The number of online samples is averaged over 5
random seeds and the standard deviation is shaded.
Comblock lies in their observation spaces. Specifically, for an image-based continuous Comblock,
each latent state is represented by a class in cifar100 (Krizhevsky, 2009) and an observation is
generated by randomly sampling a training image from that class. After sampling an image, we get
the observation by using the "ViT-B/32" CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) image encoder to calculate a
pre-trained feature. In addition, in the training environment, the image observations are sampled
from the training set of cifar100 while in the test environment the image observations are drawn from
the val set of cifar100. Unlike mujoco-based benchmarks where transition is often deterministic and
initial state distribution is narrow, our setting, which uses real-world supervised learning datasets with
a clear training and testing data split, challenges the algorithms to generalize to unseen test examples.
To get a sense of the inherent bellman error in Definition 1 for this setting, we conduct supervised
learning experiments on cifar100 with the same functions as used for actors and critics (on top of the
CLIP feature). The resulting top-1 classification accuracy is 77.7% on the training set and 72.1% on
the test set, showing that the latent states are not 100% decodable from the pre-trained features using
our function class. The fact that our function classes are not rich enough to exactly decode the latent
states introduces model misspecification such that Bellman completeness may not hold.
The sample complexity results are shown in Figure 2 (right) and the loss curve results of horizon 5
are shown in Figure 3. First, TRPO fails to solve horizon 5 again due to its inefficient exploration.
In this more realistic image-based setting, we observe that RLPD struggles even in horizon 5 and
completely fails for horizon 10. In contrast, HNPG not only has a reduced sample complexity for
horizon 5 but also reliably solves up to horizon 30 with around 10m online samples. To investigate
this contrast, we examine the critic loss of HNPG and RLPD for horizon 5. While the offline critic
TD loss stays stable for both HNPG and RLPD, the online critic TD loss is exploding for RLPD.
This is not surprising since for environments where the Bellman completeness condition does not
hold, Bellman backup based methods can diverge and become unstable to train. On the other hand,
the on-policy training loss for HNPG is small since the on-policy training is based on supervised
learning style least square regression instead of TD-style bootstrapping.
Finally, the train and test learning curves are also reported in Figure 3. It is observed that both the
training curve and the test curve of HNPG have smaller variances, indicating that it is more stable to
train, while those of RLPD have a larger variance, indicating that it is less stable. More importantly,
even though two methods reach a similar train set reward in the best random seed, HNPG achieves a
larger margin over RLPD in the test environment (around 0.8 compared to 0.6), showing that HNPG
is better at generalization since RLPD uses the off-policy algorithm SAC which typically has a much
higher updates-to-data (gradient updates per (s, a, r, sвҖІ ) collection) ratio from 1:1 to 10:1, making it
possible to overfit to the training data in the replay buffer.
7    C ONCLUSION
We propose a new actor-critic style algorithm for the hybrid RL setting. Unlike previous model-free
hybrid RL methods that only rely on off-policy learning, our proposed algorithms HAC and (the
parametrized version) HNPG perform on-policy learning over the online data together with an off-
policy learning procedure using the offline data. Thus, our algorithms are able to achieve guarantees
that are the best-of-both-worlds. In particular, our algorithms achieve the state-of-art theoretical
guarantees of offline RL when offline RL-specific assumptions (e.g., Bellman completeness and
offline distribution coverage) hold, while at the same time enjoy the theoretical guarantees of on-
policy policy gradient methods regardless of the offline RL assumptionsвҖҷ validity. Our experiment
results show that HNPG can indeed outperform the pure on-policy method, and stay robust to the
lack of Bellman completeness condition in practice; In the latter scenario, other off-policy hybrid RL
algorithms fail. Future research directions include sharpening the rates in our theoretical bounds and
trying our algorithmic ideas for large-scale applications.


                                                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Akshay Krishnamurthy and Drew Bagnell for useful discussions. AS acknowledges support
from the Simons Foundation and NSF through award DMS-2031883, as well as from the DOE
through award DE- SC0022199.

R EFERENCES
Alekh Agarwal, Nan Jiang, and Sham M Kakade. Reinforcement learning: Theory and algorithms.
  2019.

Alekh Agarwal, Mikael Henaff, Sham Kakade, and Wen Sun. PC-PG: Policy cover directed explo-
  ration for provable policy gradient learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2020.

Alekh Agarwal, Sham M Kakade, Jason D Lee, and Gaurav Mahajan. On the theory of policy
  gradient methods: Optimality, approximation, and distribution shift. The Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 22(1):4431вҖ“4506, 2021.

Alekh Agarwal, Yuda Song, Wen Sun, Kaiwen Wang, Mengdi Wang, and Xuezhou Zhang. Provable
  benefits of representational transfer in reinforcement learning. In Gergely Neu and Lorenzo
  Rosasco (eds.), Proceedings of Thirty Sixth Conference on Learning Theory, volume 195 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2114вҖ“2187. PMLR, 12вҖ“15 Jul 2023.

Ilge Akkaya, Marcin Andrychowicz, Maciek Chociej, Mateusz Litwin, Bob McGrew, Arthur Petron,
   Alex Paino, Matthias Plappert, Glenn Powell, Raphael Ribas, et al. Solving rubikвҖҷs cube with a
   robot hand. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.07113, 2019.

AndrГЎs Antos, Csaba SzepesvГЎri, and RГ©mi Munos. Fitted q-iteration in continuous action-space
  mdps. In J. Platt, D. Koller, Y. Singer, and S. Roweis (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 20. Curran Associates, Inc., 2007.

Michael Bain and Claude Sammut. A framework for behavioural cloning. In Machine Intelligence
 15, 1995.

Philip J Ball, Laura Smith, Ilya Kostrikov, and Sergey Levine. Efficient online reinforcement learning
  with offline data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.02948, 2023.

Christopher Berner, Greg Brockman, Brooke Chan, Vicki Cheung, PrzemysЕӮaw DЛӣebiak, Christy
  Dennison, David Farhi, Quirin Fischer, Shariq Hashme, Chris Hesse, et al. Dota 2 with large scale
  deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.06680, 2019.

Jinglin Chen and Nan Jiang. Information-theoretic considerations in batch reinforcement learning. In
   International Conference on Machine Learning, 2019.

Simon Du, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Nan Jiang, Alekh Agarwal, Miroslav DudвҖҷik, and John Langford.
  Provably efficient RL with rich observations via latent state decoding. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, 2019.

Simon Du, Sham Kakade, Jason Lee, Shachar Lovett, Gaurav Mahajan, Wen Sun, and Ruosong
  Wang. Bilinear classes: A structural framework for provable generalization in rl. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2826вҖ“2836. PMLR, 2021.

Linxi Fan, Guanzhi Wang, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Yuncong Yang, Haoyi Zhu, Andrew Tang,
  De-An Huang, Yuke Zhu, and Anima Anandkumar. Minedojo: Building open-ended embodied
  agents with internet-scale knowledge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.08853, 2022.

Dylan J Foster, Akshay Krishnamurthy, David Simchi-Levi, and Yunzong Xu. Offline reinforcement
  learning: Fundamental barriers for value function approximation. In Conference on Learning
  Theory, 2021.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Kristen Grauman, Andrew Westbury, Eugene Byrne, Zachary Chavis, Antonino Furnari, Rohit
  Girdhar, Jackson Hamburger, Hao Jiang, Miao Liu, Xingyu Liu, et al. Ego4d: Around the world in
  3,000 hours of egocentric video. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, pp. 18995вҖ“19012, 2022.
Shixiang Gu, Timothy Lillicrap, Zoubin Ghahramani, Richard E. Turner, and Sergey Levine. Q-prop:
  Sample-efficient policy gradient with an off-policy critic. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2017a.
Shixiang Gu, Timothy P. Lillicrap, Zoubin Ghahramani, Richard E. Turner, Bernhard SchГ¶lkopf, and
  Sergey Levine. Interpolated policy gradient: Merging on-policy and off-policy gradient estimation
  for deep reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/1706.00387, 2017b.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Kristian Hartikainen, George Tucker, Sehoon Ha, Jie Tan, Vikash
  Kumar, Henry Zhu, Abhishek Gupta, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic algorithms
  and applications. arXiv:1812.05905, 2018.
Todd Hester, Matej Vecerik, Olivier Pietquin, Marc Lanctot, Tom Schaul, Bilal Piot, Dan Horgan,
  John Quan, Andrew Sendonaris, Ian Osband, John Agapiou, Joel Z. Leibo, and Audrunas Gruslys.
  Deep Q-learning from demonstrations. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2018.
Chi Jin, Qinghua Liu, and Sobhan Miryoosefi. Bellman eluder dimension: New rich classes of rl
  problems, and sample-efficient algorithms. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  34:13406вҖ“13418, 2021.
Sham Kakade and John Langford. Approximately optimal approximate reinforcement learning. In
  Proceedings of the Nineteenth International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 267вҖ“274, 2002.
Sham M Kakade. A natural policy gradient. Advances in neural information processing systems, 14,
  2001.
Vijay Konda and John Tsitsiklis. Actor-critic algorithms. Advances in neural information processing
   systems, 12, 1999.
Alex Krizhevsky. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009.
Aviral Kumar, Justin Fu, Matthew Soh, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Stabilizing off-policy
  q-learning via bootstrapping error reduction. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer,
  F. d'AlchГ©-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.
Aviral Kumar, Aurick Zhou, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Conservative Q-learning for offline
  reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Seunghyun Lee, Younggyo Seo, Kimin Lee, Pieter Abbeel, and Jinwoo Shin. Offline-to-online
  reinforcement learning via balanced replay and pessimistic q-ensemble, 2021.
Tyler Lu, Dale Schuurmans, and Craig Boutilier. Non-delusional q-learning and value-iteration.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Zakaria Mhammedi, Dylan J. Foster, and Alexander Rakhlin. Representation learning with multi-step
  inverse kinematics: An efficient and optimal approach to rich-observation rl, 2023.
Dipendra Misra, Mikael Henaff, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and John Langford. Kinematic state
  abstraction and provably efficient rich-observation reinforcement learning. In International
  conference on machine learning, 2020.
RГ©mi Munos and Csaba SzepesvГЎri. Finite-time bounds for fitted value iteration. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 2008.
Mitsuhiko Nakamoto, Yuexiang Zhai, Anikait Singh, Max Sobol Mark, Yi Ma, Chelsea Finn, Aviral
  Kumar, and Sergey Levine. Cal-ql: Calibrated offline rl pre-training for efficient online fine-tuning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.05479, 2023.


                                                  11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  27730вҖ“27744, 2022.

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In Marina Meila and Tong
  Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume
  139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 8748вҖ“8763. PMLR, 18вҖ“24 Jul 2021.

Alexander Rakhlin and Karthik Sridharan. Online non-parametric regression. In Conference on
  Learning Theory, pp. 1232вҖ“1264. PMLR, 2014.

Stephane Ross and J Andrew Bagnell. Agnostic system identification for model-based reinforcement
   learning. arXiv:1203.1007, 2012.

Bruno Scherrer. Should one compute the temporal difference fix point or minimize the bellman
  residual? the unified oblique projection view. arXiv preprint arXiv:1011.4362, 2010.

John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region
  policy optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2015.

John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.

John Schulman, Philipp Moritz, Sergey Levine, Michael Jordan, and Pieter Abbeel. High-dimensional
  continuous control using generalized advantage estimation, 2018.

Yuda Song, Yifei Zhou, Ayush Sekhari, Drew Bagnell, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Wen Sun. Hybrid
  RL: Using both offline and online data can make RL efficient. In The Eleventh International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.

Richard S Sutton, David McAllester, Satinder Singh, and Yishay Mansour. Policy gradient methods
  for reinforcement learning with function approximation. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 12, 1999.

John Tsitsiklis and Benjamin Van Roy. Analysis of temporal-diffference learning with function
  approximation. Advances in neural information processing systems, 9, 1996.

Masatoshi Uehara and Wen Sun. Pessimistic model-based offline reinforcement learning under partial
  coverage. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.06226, 2021.

Masatoshi Uehara, Xuezhou Zhang, and Wen Sun. Representation learning for online and offline RL
 in low-rank MDPs. arXiv:2110.04652, 2021.

Oriol Vinyals, Igor Babuschkin, Wojciech M Czarnecki, MichaГ«l Mathieu, Andrew Dudzik, Junyoung
  Chung, David H Choi, Richard Powell, Timo Ewalds, Petko Georgiev, et al. Grandmaster level in
  starcraft ii using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature, 575(7782):350вҖ“354, 2019.

Ronald J Williams. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement
  learning. Reinforcement learning, pp. 5вҖ“32, 1992.

Chenjun Xiao, Han Wang, Yangchen Pan, Adam White, and Martha White. The in-sample softmax
  for offline reinforcement learning, 2023.

Tengyang Xie, Ching-An Cheng, Nan Jiang, Paul Mineiro, and Alekh Agarwal. Bellman-consistent
  pessimism for offline reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2021.

Tengyang Xie, Dylan J Foster, Yu Bai, Nan Jiang, and Sham M Kakade. The role of coverage in
  online reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.04157, 2022.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xuezhou Zhang, Yiding Chen, Xiaojin Zhu, and Wen Sun. Corruption-robust offline reinforcement
  learning. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 5757вҖ“5773.
  PMLR, 2022a.

Xuezhou Zhang, Yuda Song, Masatoshi Uehara, Mengdi Wang, Alekh Agarwal, and Wen Sun.
  Efficient reinforcement learning in block MDPs: A model-free representation learning approach.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2022b.
Kai Zhao, Yi Ma, Jianye Hao, Jinyi Liu, Yan Zheng, and Zhaopeng Meng. Improving offline-to-online
  reinforcement learning with q-ensembles, 2023.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C ONTENTS OF A PPENDIX

A Preliminaries                                                                                  15

B Hybrid Fitted Policy Evaluation Analysis                                                       17

C Missing Proofs from Section 4                                                                  20
   C.1 Proof of Theorem 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    20
        C.1.1    Supporting Technical Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    20
        C.1.2    Hybrid Analysis Under Approximate Bellman Completeness . . . . . . . .          21
        C.1.3    Natural Policy Gradient Analysis (Without Bellman Completeness) . . . .         21
        C.1.4    Final Bound on Cumulative Suboptimality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       22
        C.1.5    Sample Complexity Bound . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     23

D Hybrid Policy Gradient with Parameterized Policy Classes                                       25
   D.1 Update Rule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   26
   D.2 Proof of Theorem 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    27
        D.2.1 Supporting Technical Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       27
        D.2.2 Hybrid Analysis Under Approximate Bellman Completeness . . . . . . . .             29
        D.2.3 Natural Policy Gradient Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       29
        D.2.4 Final Bound on Cumulative Suboptimality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          30
        D.2.5 Sample Complexity Bound . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        31

E Experiment Details of Comblock                                                                 34
   E.1 Details of Combination Lock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     34
   E.2 Loss Curves for Comblock Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        34
   E.3 Implementation Pseudocode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       34
   E.4 Hyperparameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     35


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Additional notation. Given a dataset D = {x}, we denote E      b D [f (x)] as its empirical average, i.e.,
               1
ED [f (x)] = |D| xвҲҲD [f (x)]. For any function f , and data distribution Вө, we define вҲҘf вҲҘ22,Вө =
b                  P

Es,aвҲјВө f (s, a)2 . Unless explicitly specified, all log are natural logarithms.


A        P RELIMINARIES

The following is the well-known Performance Difference Lemma.
Lemma 1 (Performance difference lemma; Kakade & Langford (2002)). For any two policies ПҖ, ПҖ вҖІ ,
                                   вҖІ    1          h вҖІ       i
                          VПҖ вҲ’VПҖ =          Es,aвҲјdПҖ AПҖ (s, a) ,
                                       1вҲ’Оі
                                                         вҖІ               вҖІ               вҖІ
where V ПҖ = Es,aвҲјВө0 [QПҖ (s, a)], and AПҖ (s, a) = QПҖ (s, a) вҲ’ V ПҖ (s).
Lemma 2. For any policy ПҖ, and non-negative function g(s, a), we have:
                                 1
        (a) Es,aвҲјВө0 [g(s, a)] вүӨ 1вҲ’Оі Es,aвҲјdПҖ [g(s, a)].

        (b) EsМ„,aМ„вҲјdПҖ EsвҲјP (В·|sМ„,aМ„),aвҲјПҖ(a|s) [g(s, a)] вүӨ Оі1 Es,aвҲјdПҖ [g(s, a)].

where Вө0 denotes the initial reset distribution (which is the same for all policies ПҖ).

Proof. We prove the two parts separately:

        (a) The proof follows trivially from the definition of
                                                                                   вҲһ
                                                                                                          !
                                                                                   X
                                        dПҖ (s, a) = (1 вҲ’ Оі) Вө0 (s, a) +                  Оі h dПҖh (s, a) .
                                                                                   h=1

        (b) Recall that limhвҶ’вҲһ Оі h = 0. We start by noting that:
             dПҖ (s, a) = (1 вҲ’ Оі)(Вө0 (s, a) + ОіdПҖ1 (s, a) + Оі 2 dПҖ2 (s, a) + . . . )                                                (3)
                                                                                                                                          !
                                           X                                            X
                       вүҘ Оі(1 вҲ’ Оі)                   Вө0 (sМ„, aМ„)P (s|sМ„, aМ„)ПҖ(a|s) + Оі            dПҖ1 (sМ„, aМ„)P (s|sМ„, aМ„)ПҖ(a|s) + . . .
                                            sМ„,aМ„                                        sМ„,aМ„
                                         X
                       = Оі(1 вҲ’ Оі)                (Вө0 (sМ„, aМ„) + ОіdПҖ1 (sМ„, aМ„) + . . . ) P (s|sМ„, aМ„)ПҖ(a|s)
                                         sМ„,aМ„
                             X
                       =Оі            dПҖ (sМ„, aМ„)P (s|sМ„, aМ„)ПҖ(a|s)                                                                 (4)
                             sМ„,aМ„

                      = ОіEsМ„,aМ„вҲјdПҖ [P (s|sМ„, aМ„)ПҖ(a|s)],
             where (4) follows by plugging in the relation (3) for sМ„, aМ„. The above implies that for any
             function g вүҘ 0,
                            X                        X
                                dПҖ (s, a)g(s, a) вүҘ       ОіEsМ„,aМ„вҲјdПҖ [P (s|sМ„, aМ„)ПҖ(a|s)g(s, a)],
                               s,a                              s,a
             which implies that
                                                                                        1
                                EsМ„,aМ„вҲјdПҖ EsвҲјP (В·|sМ„,aМ„),aвҲјПҖ(a|s) [g(s, a)] вүӨ             Es,aвҲјdПҖ [g(s, a)].
                                                                                        Оі


The next lemma bounds the gap between the value of the policy ПҖ e and policy ПҖ (given a value function
f ) in terms of the expected bellman error of f and the gap between f (s, ПҖ(s)) and f (s, ПҖ e (s)). 3
    3
        In order to keep the notation simple, for stochastic policies ПҖ, we define f (s, ПҖ(s)) = EaвҲјПҖ(s) [f (s, a)].


                                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma 3. For any policy ПҖ, value function f , and comparator policy ПҖ e ,
   e
V ПҖ вҲ’ V ПҖ вүӨ Es0 ,a0 вҲјВө0 [|f (s0 , ПҖ(s0 )) вҲ’ QПҖ (s0 , a0 )|]
                          1                    ПҖ                           1
                    +         E        ПҖ e [(T   f (s, a) вҲ’ f (s, a))] +      E     ПҖ e [f (s, a) вҲ’ f (s, ПҖ(s))],
                       1 вҲ’ Оі s,aвҲјd                                       1 вҲ’ Оі s,aвҲјd
where for any policy ПҖ we define V ПҖ = Es,aвҲјdПҖ [QПҖ (s, a)].

Proof. We start by noting that
                  e
                                h e            i
               V ПҖ = Es0 ,a0 вҲјВө0 QПҖ (s0 , a0 )
                                                                                      h e       i
                    = Es0 ,a0 вҲјВө0 [r(s0 , ПҖ e (s0 ))] + Es0 ,a0 вҲјВө0 ,s1 вҲјP (В·|s0 ,a0 ) V ПҖ (s1 )
                                                                          e
                    = Es0 ,a0 вҲјВө0 r(s0 , a0 ) + ОіEs1 вҲјP (В·|s0 ,a0 ) [V ПҖ (s1 )]


                                        вҲ’ T ПҖ f (s0 , a0 ) + T ПҖ f (s0 , a0 )

                                 h e                             i
                    = ОіEs1 вҲјdПҖ1 e V ПҖ (s1 ) вҲ’ f (s1 , ПҖ(s1 )) + Es0 ,a0 вҲјВө0 [T ПҖ f (s0 , a0 )],
where the last line follows from the definition     of T ПҖ f , and the fact that s0 , a0 вҲј Вө0 followed by
                                               ПҖe                                                  e
s1 вҲј P (В· | s0 , a0 ) is equivalent to s1 вҲј d0 , by definition. Using the fact that Вө0 = dПҖ0 , and the
                  e
definition of dПҖ1 , we get
                 h e                            i                h e                              i
     Es0 ,a0 вҲјВө0 QПҖ (s0 , a0 ) вҲ’ f (s0 , ПҖ(s0 )) = Es0 ,a0 вҲјdПҖ0 e QПҖ (s0 , a0 ) вҲ’ f (s0 , ПҖ(s0 ))
                                                                   h e                              i
                                                  = ОіEs1 ,a1 вҲјdПҖ1 e QПҖ (s1 , a1 ) вҲ’ f (s1 , ПҖ(s1 ))
                                                                    + Es0 ,a0 вҲјdПҖ0 e [T ПҖ f (s0 , a0 ) вҲ’ f (s0 , a0 )]
                                                                    + Es0 ,a0 вҲјdПҖ0 e [f (s0 , a0 ) вҲ’ f (s0 , ПҖ(a0 ))]

Repeating the above expansion for the first term in the above, and then recursively for all future terms,
along with the fact that limhвҶ’вҲһ Оі h = 0, we get that
                                       вҲһ
        e                              X
     V ПҖ вҲ’ Es0 вҲјВө0 [f (s0 , ПҖ(s0 ))] вүӨ     Оі h Es,aвҲјdПҖe [(T ПҖ f (s, a) вҲ’ f (s, a))]
                                                            h
                                         h=0
                                                                     вҲһ
                                                                     X
                                                                +          Оі h Es,aвҲјdПҖe [f (s, a) вҲ’ f (s, ПҖ(s))].
                                                                                      h
                                                                     h=0

The above implies that
           e               e
        V ПҖ вҲ’ V ПҖ = V ПҖ вҲ’ Es0 вҲјВө0 [f (s0 , ПҖ(s0 ))] + Es0 ,a0 вҲјВө0 [f (s0 , ПҖ(s0 )) вҲ’ QПҖ (s0 , a0 )]
                  вүӨ Es0 ,a0 вҲјВө0 [|f (s0 , ПҖ(s0 )) вҲ’ QПҖ (s0 , a0 )|]
                                          XвҲһ
                                      +       Оі h Es,aвҲјdПҖe [(T ПҖ f (s, a) вҲ’ f (s, a))]
                                                                h
                                            h=0
                                            XвҲһ
                                        +         Оі h Es,aвҲјdПҖe [f (s, a) вҲ’ f (s, ПҖ(s))].
                                                                h
                                            h=0


The following is a well-known generalization bound that holds for least squares regression. We recall
the version given in Song et al. (2023), and skip the proof for conciseness.
Lemma 4 (Least squares generalization bound, (Song et al., 2023, Lemma 3)). Let R > 0, Оҙ вҲҲ (0, 1),
and consider a sequential function estimation setting with an instance space X and target space
Y. Let H : X 7вҶ’ [вҲ’R, R] be a class of real valued functions. Let D = {(x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xT , yT )} be
a dataset of T points where xt вҲј ПҒt := ПҒt (x1:tвҲ’1 , y1:tвҲ’1 ), and yt is sampled via the conditional
probability pt (xt ) (which could be adversarially chosen). Additionally, suppose that maxt |yt | вүӨ R
                                                                                 PT                    2
and maxh maxx |h(x)| вүӨ R. Then, the least square solution b   h вҶҗ argminhвҲҲH t=1 (h(xt ) вҲ’ yt )


                                                       16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


satisfies
  XT                  h           i      T
                                         X
                        h(x) вҲ’ y)2 вүӨ inf   ExвҲјПҒt ,yвҲјpt (x) (h(x) вҲ’ y)2 + 256R2 log(2|H|/Оҙ)

       ExвҲјПҒt ,yвҲјpt (x) (b
                                           hвҲҲH
  t=1                                            t=1
with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ.

B       H YBRID F ITTED P OLICY E VALUATION A NALYSIS
In this section, we provide our main technical result for the HPE subroutine in Algorithm 2. In
particular, we show that for any input policy ПҖ, HPE succeeds in finding a value function fВҜ that
closely approximates QПҖ on the state action distribution dПҖ , and at the same time has small Bellman
error (w.r.t. backups T ПҖ ) on the offline data distribution ОҪ. The former guarantee is used for on-policy
online analysis, and the latter part is used for the Hybrid analysis.
Lemma 5. Suppose that      l HPE procedure, given                                  m for a policy ПҖ with
                                                      m in Algorithm l2, is executed
                                  6О»Оөbe +Оөstat (1вҲ’Оі)                         1
parameters K1 = 1 + logОі (                О»2         ) , K2 = K1 + 20Оөstat (1вҲ’Оі) and moff = mon =
2T log(|2F |/Оҙ)
    (1вҲ’Оі) 2     . Then, with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, the output value function fВҜ satisfies

     (a) Es,aвҲјdПҖ [(fВҜ(s, a) вҲ’ QПҖ (s, a))2 ] вүӨ (1вҲ’Оі)
                                                  12         1          12Оөstat
                                                     2 min{ О» , Оөbe } + О»(1вҲ’Оі) =: вҲҶon ,


     (b) Es,aвҲјОҪ [(fВҜ(s, a) вҲ’ T ПҖ fВҜ(s, a))2 ] вүӨ (1вҲ’Оі)
                                                  40    О»Оөbe
                                                        1вҲ’Оі + Оөstat =: вҲҶoff ,

where Оөstat = 128(1+О»)/T .

Proof of Lemma 5. We first define additional notation. For the k-th iteration in Algorithm 2, let
              b s,a,sвҖІ вҲјDОҪ ,aвҖІ вҲјПҖ(В·|sвҖІ ) [(f (s, a) вҲ’ r вҲ’ ОіfkвҲ’1 (sвҖІ , aвҖІ ))2 ] + О»E
  b k (f ) := E
  L                                                                               b s,a,yвҲјDПҖ [(f (s, a) вҲ’ y)2 ],
                           k                                                               k
                                                                                                               (5)
and,
  Lk (f ) := Es,a,sвҖІ вҲјОҪ,aвҖІ вҲјПҖ(В·|sвҖІ ) [(f (s, a) вҲ’ r вҲ’ ОіfkвҲ’1 (sвҖІ , aвҖІ ))2 ] + О»Es,a,yвҲјdПҖ [(f (s, a) вҲ’ y)2 ].
Thus, an application of Lemma 4 implies that the optimization procedure in (1) satisfies, with
probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, the guarantee
                                      L(fk ) вүӨ min L(f ) + Оөstat ,                         (6)
                                                    f вҲҲF
where
                                     1+О»         ln(2|F|/Оҙ)            1+О»
                       Оөstat вүӨ 256 В·       2
                                             В·                 вүӨ 256 В·        ,                    (7)
                                   (1 вҲ’ Оі) min{mon , moff }             2T
since the terms in the least squares optimization problem given by the objective in (5) satisfies the
bound R2 вүӨ (1 + О») sups,a |f (s, a)|2 вүӨ (1+О»)/(1вҲ’Оі 2 ).

Now, fix any k вҲҲ [K1 + K2 ], and define a function fek вҲҲ F such that
                                   вҲҘfek вҲ’ T ПҖ fkвҲ’1 вҲҘвҲһ вүӨ Оөbe ,                                                  (8)
which is guaranteed to exist from Definition 1. Plugging in fek instead of the corresponding minimizer
in the RHS of (6), we get that
Es,a,sвҖІ вҲјОҪ,aвҖІ вҲјПҖ(В·|sвҖІ ) [(fk (s, a) вҲ’ r вҲ’ ОіfkвҲ’1 (sвҖІ , aвҖІ ))2 ] + О»Es,a,yвҲјdПҖ [(fk (s, a) вҲ’ y)2 ]
        вүӨEs,a,sвҖІ вҲјОҪ,aвҖІ вҲјПҖ(В·|sвҖІ ) [(fek (s, a) вҲ’ r вҲ’ ОіfkвҲ’1 (sвҖІ , aвҖІ ))2 ] + О»Es,a,yвҲјdПҖ [(fek (s, a) вҲ’ y)2 ] + Оөstat .
Due to the linearity of expectation, and adding appropriate terms on both the sides to handle the
variance, we get that
Es,aвҲјОҪ [(fk (s, a) вҲ’ T ПҖ fkвҲ’1 (s, a))2 ] + О»Es,aвҲјdПҖ [(fk (s, a) вҲ’ QПҖ (s, a))2 ]
                 вүӨEs,aвҲјОҪ [(fek (s, a) вҲ’ T ПҖ fkвҲ’1 (s, a))2 ] + О»Es,aвҲјdПҖ [(fek (s, a) вҲ’ QПҖ (s, a))2 ] + Оөstat
                                                                                                        (9)
                    2                               ПҖ        2
                 вүӨОө + О»Es,aвҲјdПҖ [(fk (s, a) вҲ’ Q (s, a)) ] + Оөstat
                      be
                                        e


                                                       17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                   2Оөbe
                  вүӨ        + О»Es,aвҲјdПҖ [(fek (s, a) вҲ’ QПҖ (s, a))2 ] + Оөstat ,
                   1вҲ’Оі
where the second last line follows from (8) and the last line uses the fact that Оөbe вүӨ 2/(1 вҲ’ Оі) since
max(s, a)|f (s, a) вҲ’ f вҖІ (s, a)| вүӨ 1вҲ’Оі
                                    2
                                       for any f and f вҖІ вҲҲ F. The above implies that
                                                                                     2Оөbe
  Es,aвҲјОҪ [(fk (s, a) вҲ’ T ПҖ fkвҲ’1 (s, a))2 ] вүӨ О»Es,aвҲјdПҖ [(fek (s, a) вҲ’ QПҖ (s, a))2 ] +      + Оөstat , (10)
                                                                                     1вҲ’Оі
and
                                                                                     2Оөbe
    О»Es,aвҲјdПҖ [(fk (s, a) вҲ’ QПҖ (s, a))2 ] вүӨ О»Es,aвҲјdПҖ [(fek (s, a) вҲ’ QПҖ (s, a))2 ] +        + Оөstat . (11)
                                                                                     1вҲ’Оі
We next focus our attention on bounding the first term in the RHS above. Note that
Es,aвҲјdПҖ [(fek (s, a) вҲ’ QПҖ (s, a))2 ]
                     = Es,aвҲјdПҖ (fek (s, a) вҲ’ T ПҖ fkвҲ’1 (s, a))2


                              + (T ПҖ fkвҲ’1 (s, a) вҲ’ QПҖ (s, a))(2fek (s, a) вҲ’ T ПҖ fkвҲ’1 (s, a) вҲ’ QПҖ (s, a))


                      (i) 2Оөbe
                      вүӨ         + 2Es,aвҲјdПҖ [(T ПҖ fkвҲ’1 (s, a) вҲ’ QПҖ (s, a))(fek (s, a) вҲ’ T ПҖ fkвҲ’1 (s, a))]
                         1вҲ’Оі
                                                 + Es,aвҲјdПҖ (T ПҖ fkвҲ’1 (s, a) вҲ’ QПҖ (s, a))2


                     (ii) 4Оө
                             be
                                + Es,aвҲјdПҖ (T ПҖ fkвҲ’1 (s, a) вҲ’ QПҖ (s, a))2

                     вүӨ                                                                                  (12)
                          1вҲ’Оі
where (i) follows from (8), and a simple manipulation of the second term, and (ii) again uses (8) and
the fact that supf,ПҖ max{вҲҘf вҲҘвҲһ , вҲҘT ПҖ f вҲҘвҲһ } вүӨ 1/(1 вҲ’ Оі). For the second term above, we have
Es,aвҲјdПҖ (T ПҖ fkвҲ’1 (s, a) вҲ’ QПҖ (s, a))2 = Оі 2 Es,aвҲјdПҖ ,sвҖІ вҲјP (В·|s,a),aвҖІ вҲјПҖ(sвҖІ ) (fkвҲ’1 (sвҖІ , aвҖІ ) вҲ’ QПҖ (sвҖІ , aвҖІ ))2


                                            вүӨ ОіEs,aвҲјdПҖ (fkвҲ’1 (s, a) вҲ’ QПҖ (s, a))2 ,


where the second inequality is due to Lemma 2. Plugging this bound back in (12), we get that
                                                4Оөbe
         Es,aвҲјdПҖ [(fek (s, a) вҲ’ QПҖ (s, a))2 ] вүӨ      + ОіEs,aвҲјdПҖ (fkвҲ’1 (s, a) вҲ’ QПҖ (s, a))2 .

                                                                                                        (13)
                                                1вҲ’Оі
We now complete the bounds on (10) and (11), using the bound in (13).

   вҖў Bound on (11): Using the relation (13) in (11), we get
                                                                                          6Оөbe     Оөstat
      Es,aвҲјdПҖ [(fk (s, a) вҲ’ QПҖ (s, a))2 ] вүӨ ОіEs,aвҲјdПҖ (fkвҲ’1 (s, a) вҲ’ QПҖ (s, a))2 +

                                                                                                +        ,
                                                                                         1вҲ’Оі         О»
     where we simplified the RHS since Оі вүӨ 1. Recursing the above relation from k вҲ’ 1 to 1, we
     get that

                                                                                          1      6Оөbe      Оөstat
     Es,aвҲјdПҖ (fk (s, a) вҲ’ QПҖ (s, a))2 вүӨ Оі kвҲ’1 Es,aвҲјdПҖ (f1 (s, a) вҲ’ QПҖ (s, a))2 +

                                                                                                       +
                                                                                        1вҲ’Оі 1вҲ’Оі              О»
                                               kвҲ’1

                                             Оі              1     6Оөbe      Оөstat
                                        вүӨ             +                  +          ,
                                           (1 вҲ’ Оі)2      1вҲ’Оі 1вҲ’Оі              О»
     where the last line uses the fact that sups,a |f (s, a)| вүӨ 1/1вҲ’Оі . Since, the above inequality holds
                                            l                          m
     for all k вүӨ K1 + K2 , setting K1 = logОі ( 6О»Оөbe +ОөО»stat (1вҲ’Оі) ) + 1, we get that

                                                                         12       Оөbe     Оөstat
         вҲҖk вҲҲ [K1 , K2 ] : Es,aвҲјdПҖ [(fk (s, a) вҲ’ QПҖ (s, a))2 ] вүӨ                        +         . (14)
                                                                     (1 вҲ’ Оі) 1 вҲ’ Оі          О»
   вҖў Bound on (10): Using the bound (14) in (13), we get that

                                                                         16     Оөbe     ОіОөstat
       вҲҖk вҲҲ [K1 + 1, K2 ] :          Es,aвҲјdПҖ [(fek (s, a) вҲ’ QПҖ (s, a))2 ] вүӨ           +          .
                                                                      (1 вҲ’ Оі) 1 вҲ’ Оі       О»
      Using the above relation in (10), we get that for all K1 + 1 вүӨ k вүӨ K2 ,

                                         ПҖ              2       20     О»Оөbe
                   Es,aвҲјОҪ [(fk (s, a) вҲ’ T fkвҲ’1 (s, a)) ] вүӨ                  + Оөstat ,          (15)
                                                             (1 вҲ’ Оі) 1 вҲ’ Оі

                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      where again we used the fact that Оі вҲҲ (0, 1).
   вҖў An alternate bound on (11). We now provide an alternate bound on (11) through an independent
     analysis. Let fek = QПҖ , which is guaranteed to be in the class F due to Assumption 1. Thus,
     repeating the same steps till (9) but with this choice of fek , we get that
            Es,aвҲјОҪ [(fk (s, a) вҲ’ T ПҖ fkвҲ’1 (sвҖІ , aвҖІ ))2 ] + О»Es,aвҲјdПҖ [(fk (s, a) вҲ’ QПҖ (s, a))2 ]
                                                 вүӨEs,aвҲјОҪ (QПҖ (s, a) вҲ’ T ПҖ fkвҲ’1 (s, a))2 + Оөstat .
      Ignoring positive terms in the LHS, the above implies that
                                                 1                                          Оөstat
           Es,aвҲјdПҖ [(fk (s, a) вҲ’ QПҖ (s, a))2 ] вүӨ Es,aвҲјОҪ [(QПҖ (s, a) вҲ’ T ПҖ fkвҲ’1 (s, a))2 ] +
                                                 О»                                            О»
                                                     1        Оөstat
                                               вүӨ           +        .                             (16)
                                                 О»(1 вҲ’ Оі)2      О»

Combining the above results, we note that for all K1 + 1 вүӨ k вүӨ K2 ,

                                                       12           1           12Оөstat
             Es,aвҲјdПҖ [(fk (s, a) вҲ’ QПҖ (s, a))2 ] вүӨ          2
                                                              min     , Оөbe +           ,                 (17)
                                                    (1 вҲ’ Оі)         О»          О»(1 вҲ’ Оі)
and,

                                                       20      О»Оөbe
         Es,aвҲјОҪ [(fk (s, a) вҲ’ T ПҖ fkвҲ’1 (s, a))2 ] вүӨ                  + Оөstat .                            (18)
                                                    (1 вҲ’ Оі) 1 вҲ’ Оі
We are now ready to complete the proof. Equipped with the bounds in (17) and (18), we note that
             PK2
fВҜ = K2 вҲ’K
        1
           1  k=K1 +1 fk satisfies
                                                           K2
                                                   1       X
       Es,aвҲјdПҖ   [(fВҜ(s, a) вҲ’ QПҖ (s, a))2 ] вүӨ                       Es,aвҲјdПҖ [(fk (s, a) вҲ’ QПҖ (s, a))2 ]
                                                K2 вҲ’ K1
                                                          k=K1 +1

                                                  12             1            12Оөstat
                                            вүӨ            min       , Оөbe +             ,               (19)
                                               (1 вҲ’ Оі)2          О»           О»(1 вҲ’ Оі)
where the first line follows from JensenвҖҷs inequality, and the second line is due to (17). Similarly, we
have that
 Es,aвҲјОҪ [(fВҜ(s, a) вҲ’ T ПҖ fВҜ(s, a))2 ]
                                                                                                      2
                                                                      K2
                                                                                                     !
                       1
                                                  ПҖ
                                                                      X
                                                                                         ПҖ
      = Es,aвҲјОҪ                  fK1 +1 (s, a) вҲ’ T fK2 (s, a) +             fk (s, a) вҲ’ T fkвҲ’1 (s, a)
                   K2 вҲ’ K1
                                                                   k=K1 +2
                                                                        K2
                                                                                                          !
             1                                    ПҖ             2
                                                                       X
                                                                                           ПҖ            2
      вүӨ            Es,aвҲјОҪ (fK1 +1 (s, a) вҲ’ T fK2 (s, a)) +                  (fk (s, a) вҲ’ T fkвҲ’1 (s, a))
         K2 вҲ’ K1
                                                                     k=K1 +2
                                               K2
                                                                                    !
             1                    1           X
                                                                     ПҖ            2
      вүӨ            Es,aвҲјОҪ                +          (fk (s, a) вҲ’ T fkвҲ’1 (s, a))
         K2 вҲ’ K1              (1 вҲ’ Оі)2
                                            k=K1 +2

                   1                  20        О»Оөbe
      вүӨ                          +                   +   Оөstat ,                                       (20)
         (K2 вҲ’ K1 )(1 вҲ’ Оі 2 ) (1 вҲ’ Оі) 1 вҲ’ Оі
where the first inequality is an application of JensenвҖҷs inequality, second inequality simply plus in the
fact that max вҲҘf вҲҘвҲһ , вҲҘT ПҖ f вҲҘвҲһ вүӨ 1/(1 вҲ’ Оі), and the last line simply plugs in (18). Setting
                                                              1
                                       K2 = K1 +                        .
                                                     20Оөstat (1 вҲ’ Оі)
completes the proof.


                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C     M ISSING P ROOFS FROM S ECTION 4
C.1     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

C.1.1    S UPPORTING T ECHNICAL R ESULTS
We first provide a useful technical result. In the analysis, f t (s, a) вҲ’ f t (s, ПҖ t (s)) will represent an
                                               t
approximation for the advantage function AПҖ (s, a). The following bounds the expected advantage
when s, a are sampled from the occupancy of ПҖ e .
Lemma 6. Supppose f t and ПҖ t denote the value function and the policies at round t in Algorithm 1.
Then, for any О· вүӨ (1вҲ’Оі)/2 and policy ПҖ e , we have
                    X                                               2 p
                        Es,aвҲјdПҖe [f t (s, a) вҲ’ f t (s, ПҖ t (s))] вүӨ        log(A)T .
                     t
                                                                   1вҲ’Оі

Proof. For the ease of notation, let fВҜt (s, a) := f t (s, a) вҲ’ f t (s, ПҖ t (s)). Recall that the policy ПҖt+1 ,
after round t, is defined as
                                                 ПҖ t (a | s) exp(О· fВҜt (s, a))
                             ПҖ t+1 (a | s) = P        t вҖІ               ВҜt     вҖІ
                                                                                  .
                                                aвҖІ ПҖ (a | s) exp(О· f (s, a ))
Let Zt = aвҖІ ПҖ t (aвҖІ | s) exp(О· fВҜt (s, aвҖІ )) be the normalization constant, and note that for any s,
          P

          EaвҲјПҖe (s) log ПҖ t (a | s) вҲ’ log ПҖ t+1 (a | s) = EaвҲјПҖe (s) вҲ’О· fВҜt (s, a) + log(Zt ) .

                                                                                                          (21)

We first bound the term comprising of log(Zt ). Note that since О· вүӨ (1вҲ’Оі)/2 and вҲҘf вҲҘвҲһ вүӨ 1/(1 вҲ’ Оі),
we have that О· fВҜt (s, a) вүӨ 1.Thus, using the fact that exp(x) вүӨ 1 + x + x2 for any x вүӨ 1, we have
                                                                         !
                                     X
                    log(Zt ) = log      ПҖ t (aвҖІ | s) exp(О· fВҜt (s, aвҖІ ))
                                        aвҖІ
                                                                                          !
                                       X
                             вүӨ log            t   вҖІ          ВҜt     вҖІ      2 ВҜt     вҖІ 2
                                             ПҖ (a | s)(1 + О· f (s, a ) + О· f (s, a ) )
                                        aвҖІ
                                            О·2             О·2

                             вүӨ log 1 +           2
                                                     вүӨ            ,
                                        (1 вҲ’ Оі)         (1 вҲ’ Оі)2
where in the second last inequality we use the fact that aвҖІ ПҖ t (aвҖІ | s)fВҜt (s, a) = 0 by the definition
                                                          P
of fВҜt , and that вҲҘf вҲҘвҲһ вүӨ 1/(1 вҲ’ Оі). The last inequality simply uses the fact that log(1 + x) вүӨ x for
any x вүҘ 0. Plugging in the above bound in (21), and rearranging the terms, we get that
                                  1                                                      О·
            EaвҲјПҖe (s) fВҜt (s, a) вүӨ EaвҲјПҖe (s) log ПҖ t+1 (a | s) вҲ’ log ПҖ t (a | s) +

                                                                                              .
                                    О·                                                (1 вҲ’ Оі)2
Telescoping the above for t from 1 to T , and using the fact that log(ПҖ(a | s)) вүӨ 0 since ПҖ(a | s) вүӨ 1,
we get that
           T
          X                         1                                                      О·T
              EaвҲјПҖe (s) fВҜt (s, a) вүӨ EaвҲјПҖe (s) log ПҖ T +1 (a | s) вҲ’ log ПҖ 1 (a | s) +

          t=1
                                      О·                                                 (1 вҲ’ Оі)2
                                     1                             О·T
                                вүӨ вҲ’ EaвҲјПҖe (s) log ПҖ 1 (a | s) +

                                                                         .
                                     О·                          (1 вҲ’ Оі)2
Using the fact that ПҖ 1 (s) = Uniform(A), we get that
                            T
                            X                          log(A)      О·T
                                 EaвҲјПҖe (s) fВҜt (s, a) вүӨ

                                                              +          .
                             t=1
                                                          О·     (1 вҲ’ Оі)2
                   p
Setting О· = (1 вҲ’ Оі) log(A)/T ,
                              T
                              X                               2 p
                                    EaвҲјПҖe (s) fВҜt (s, a) вүӨ

                                                                  log(A)T .
                              t=1
                                                             1вҲ’Оі
                                                                                     e
The final bound follows by taking expectation on both the sides w.r.t. s вҲј dПҖ .


                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.1.2     H YBRID A NALYSIS U NDER A PPROXIMATE B ELLMAN C OMPLETENESS

Let f t be the output of Algorithm 2, on policy ПҖ t at round t of Algorithm 1. An application of
Lemma 3 for each (ПҖt , ft ) implies that
         T                  T            h                                  i
        X      e      t    X                                   t
            VПҖ вҲ’VПҖ вүӨ          Es0 ,a0 вҲјВө0 |f t (s0 , a0 )) вҲ’ QПҖ (s0 , a0 )|
        t=1                      t=1
                                                              T
                                                         1 X             h  t                         i
                                                   +             Es,aвҲјdПҖe T ПҖ f t (s, a) вҲ’ f t (s, a)
                                                       1 вҲ’ Оі t=1
                                                              T
                                                         1 X
                                                                 Es,aвҲјdПҖe f t (s, a) вҲ’ f t (s, ПҖ t (s)) ,

                                                   +
                                                       1 вҲ’ Оі t=1

We bound each of the terms on the RHS above separately below:

        вҖў Term 1: We start by noting that
                T          h                                   i XT
               X                                 t                           t
                   Es,aвҲјВө0 |f t (s, ПҖ t (s)) вҲ’ QПҖ (s, ПҖ t (s))| =   вҲҘf t вҲ’ QПҖ вҲҘ1,Вө0
                  t=1                                                       t=1
                                                                            T
                                                                            X               t
                                                                        вүӨ         вҲҘf t вҲ’ QПҖ вҲҘ2,Вө0
                                                                            t=1
                                                                            T     r
                                                                            X          1           t
                                                                        вүӨ                 f t вҲ’ QПҖ         ,
                                                                            t=1
                                                                                      1вҲ’Оі            2,dПҖt

          where the first inequality is due to JensenвҖҷs inequality, and the second inequality is from
          Lemma 2. Using Lemma 5, we get
                                                                         s
                               T
                              X          h
                                             t    t         ПҖt
                                                                  i          вҲҶon
                                  EsвҲјВө0 |f (s, ПҖ (s)) вҲ’ V (s)| вүӨ T               .
                              t=1
                                                                            1вҲ’Оі
        вҖў Term 2: Using offline coverage in Definition 3, we get that

                    T                  h                                i         T
                    X                          t                                  X         t
                          Es,aвҲјdПҖe          T ПҖ f t (s, a) вҲ’ f t (s, a) вүӨ Coff,ПҖe   ft вҲ’ T ПҖ ft
                                                                                                       2,ОҪ
                    t=1                                                               t=1
                                                                      p
                                                           вүӨ Coff,ПҖe T вҲҶoff ,
          where the last line follows from the bound in Lemma 5.
        вҖў Term 3: Lemma 6 implies that
                      T
                     X                                                             2 p
                         EsвҲјdПҖe f t (s, ПҖ e (s)) вҲ’ f t (s, ПҖ t (s)) вүӨ

                                                                                       log(A)T .
                           t=1
                                        h                                         1вҲ’Оі

Combining the above bound, we get that
                                    s
   T
  X         h e
               ПҖ        ПҖt
                              i        вҲҶon   Coff,ПҖe T p            2     p
      EsвҲјВө0 V (s) вҲ’ V (s) вүӨ T              +             вҲҶoff +         2
                                                                           log(A)T .                           (22)
  t=1
                                       1вҲ’Оі    1вҲ’Оі               (1 вҲ’ Оі)

C.1.3     NATURAL P OLICY G RADIENT A NALYSIS (W ITHOUT B ELLMAN C OMPLETENESS )

Let ПҖ t and f t be the corresponding policies and value functions at round t, and recall the definition
fВҜt (s, a) = f t (s, a) вҲ’ f t (s, ПҖ t (s)). Using Lemma 1, we get that
              e             t
  EsвҲјВө0 [V ПҖ (s) вҲ’ V ПҖ (s)]
                  1               t
              =       Es,aвҲјdПҖe [AПҖ (s, a)]
                1вҲ’Оі

                                                           21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                      1                               1
                                                          q
                 вүӨ       Es,aвҲјdПҖe [fВҜt (s, a)] +             Es,aвҲјdПҖe [(fВҜt (s, a) вҲ’ AПҖt (s, a))2 ]
                    1вҲ’Оі                            1вҲ’Оі
                      1                               1
                                                          q
                 вүӨ       Es,aвҲјdПҖe [fВҜt (s, a)] +             Cnpg,ПҖe Es,aвҲјdПҖt [(fВҜt (s, a) вҲ’ AПҖt (s, a))2 ],
                    1вҲ’Оі                            1вҲ’Оі
                                                                                                          (23)
where the second-last line above follows from JensenвҖҷs inequality, and the last line is by invoking
Definition 2. We next bound the second term in the right hand side. Using Lemma 2-(a), we get that
             ВҜt           ПҖt                                                         ПҖt             t
Es,aвҲјd ПҖ t [(f (s, a) вҲ’ A    (s, a))2 ] =E              t         t      t
                                                ПҖ t [(f (s, a) вҲ’ f (s, ПҖ (s)) вҲ’ Q
                                               s,aвҲјd                                    (s, a) + QПҖ (s, ПҖ t (s)))2 ]
                                                                               t            t
                                           вүӨEs,aвҲјdПҖt [2(f t (s, a) вҲ’ QПҖ (s, a))2 + 2(QПҖ (s, ПҖ t (s)) вҲ’ f t (s, ПҖ t (s)))2 ]
                                                                               t                                    t
                                           вүӨEs,aвҲјdПҖt [2(f t (s, a) вҲ’ QПҖ (s, a))2 + 2(EaвҖІ вҲјПҖt (s) f t (s, aвҖІ ) вҲ’ QПҖ (s, aвҖІ ))2 ]
                                                                               t
                                           вүӨ4Es,aвҲјdПҖt [(f t (s, a) вҲ’ QПҖ (s, a))2 ]
                                  вүӨ4вҲҶon ,
where the second last line follows from JensenвҖҷs inequality, and the last line uses the bound from
Lemma 5. Plugging the above in (23), we get that
                   e          t         1                             2 p
        EsвҲјВө0 [V ПҖ (s) вҲ’ V ПҖ (s)] вүӨ        Es,aвҲјdПҖe [fВҜt (s, a)] +           Cnpg,ПҖe вҲҶon .
                                      1вҲ’Оі                          (1 вҲ’ Оі)
Summing the above expression for all t вҲҲ [T ], we get
             T                             T
             X       e          t     1 X                               2T p
                   VПҖ вҲ’VПҖ вүӨ                   Es,aвҲјdПҖe [fВҜt (s, a)] +         Cnpg,ПҖe вҲҶon .
             t=1
                                    1 вҲ’ Оі t=1                         (1 вҲ’ Оі)

Plugging the bound from Lemma 6 in the above, we get that
                 T
               X      e    t        2      p               2T p
                    VПҖ вҲ’VПҖ вүӨ             2
                                             log(A)T +          Cnpg,ПҖe вҲҶon .                                (24)
                t=1
                                (1 вҲ’  Оі)                (1 вҲ’ Оі)


C.1.4    F INAL B OUND ON C UMULATIVE S UBOPTIMALITY

Combining the bounds from (22) and (24) , we get that
        T
                             (
       X
             ПҖe    ПҖt               2     p               2T p
           V вҲ’ V вүӨ min                  2
                                            log(A)T +           Cnpg,ПҖe вҲҶon ,
       t=1
                                (1 вҲ’ Оі)                 (1 вҲ’ Оі)
                                |                     {z                  }
                                                                   (a)
                                           s                                              )
                                               вҲҶon       2    p           Coff,ПҖe T p
                                       T           +            log(A)T +            вҲҶoff ,                  (25)
                                               1вҲ’Оі   (1 вҲ’ Оі)2             (1 вҲ’ Оі)
                                       |                        {z                      }
                                                                         (b)
where, from Lemma 5, recall that

                                    12           1              12Оөstat
                                вҲҶon =    2
                                           min     , Оөbe    +           ,
                                 (1 вҲ’ Оі)         О»             О»(1 вҲ’ Оі)

                                    40      О»Оөbe
                          вҲҶoff =                  + Оөstat .                                     (26)
                                 (1 вҲ’ Оі) 1 вҲ’ Оі
Plugging in the bounds on вҲҶon and вҲҶoff in (25), we get that
                                       s                                        r
          2     p               8T                       1               8T       Cnpg,ПҖe Оөstat
(a) вүӨ         2
                  log(A)T +          2
                                         Cnpg,ПҖe min       , Оөbe +          3/2
                                                                                                ,
      (1 вҲ’ Оі)                (1 вҲ’ Оі)                     О»           (1 вҲ’ Оі)           О»
and,
                     s                           вҲҡ
          4T                 1                 4T Оөstat       2     p          7T Coff,ПҖe p       7T Coff,ПҖe вҲҡ
(b) вүӨ                    min   , Оөbe       +            +         2
                                                                     log(A)T +         2
                                                                                           О»Оөbe +              Оөstat .
      (1 вҲ’ Оі)3/2             О»                 О»(1 вҲ’ Оі)   (1 вҲ’ Оі)               (1 вҲ’ Оі)           (1 вҲ’ Оі)3/2


                                                         22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Note that О» is a free parameter in the above, which is chosen by the algorithm. We provide an upper
bound on the cumulative suboptimality under two separate cases (we set a different value of О», and
get a different bound on Оөstat in the two cases):
        вҖў Case 1: Оөbe вүӨ 1/T : In this case, we set О» = 1. Thus, from the bound in (7), we get that
          Оөstat вүӨ 128/T , which implies that
                          2     p                   8T p                          2T      p
              (a) вүӨ           2
                                   log(A)T +            2
                                                             Cnpg,ПҖe Оөbe +            3/2
                                                                                            Cnpg,ПҖe Оөstat
                      (1 вҲ’ Оі)                    (1 вҲ’ Оі)                     (1 вҲ’ Оі)
                          2     p                   30 p
                   вүӨ               log(A)T    +              Cnpg,ПҖe T ,
                      (1 вҲ’ Оі)2                   (1 вҲ’ Оі)2
          where the last line follows from the fact that Оөbe вүӨ 1/T and Оөstat вүӨ 128/T . Additionally,
          we also have that                 вҲҡ
                      4T      вҲҡ          4T Оөstat         2      p               7T Coff,ПҖe вҲҡ         7T Coff,ПҖe вҲҡ
          (b) вүӨ           3/2
                                Оө be  +             +          2
                                                                    log(A)T +             2
                                                                                              Оөbe +                Оөstat
                  (1 вҲ’ Оі)                 (1 вҲ’ Оі)     (1 вҲ’ Оі)                     (1 вҲ’ Оі)            (1 вҲ’ Оі)3/2
                       вҲҡ
                    52 T               2     p                 91 q 2
              вүӨ               +            2
                                               log(A)T +                 Coff,ПҖe T
                  (1 вҲ’ Оі) 3/2     (1 вҲ’ Оі)                  (1 вҲ’ Оі)2
                     60 p                       100 q 2
              вүӨ               log(A)T     +              Coff,ПҖe T ,
                  (1 вҲ’ Оі)2                   (1 вҲ’ Оі)2
          where the second-last line uses the fact that Оөbe вүӨ 1/T , and the last line holds since
          1/(1 вҲ’ Оі) вүҘ 1 and log(A) вүҘ 1.
          Plugging the above bounds in (25), we get
                T                                                        r
              X        e      t          60 p                    100           n                   o
                   VПҖ вҲ’VПҖ вүӨ                  2
                                                 log(A)T  +            2
                                                                                             2
                                                                           min Cnpg,ПҖe , Coff,ПҖ  e   В· T.
              t=1
                                     (1 вҲ’ Оі)                  (1 вҲ’ Оі)
        вҖў Case 2: Оөbe > 1/T : In this case, we set О» = T /2 вҲ’ 1. Thus, from the bound in (7), we get
          that Оөstat = 64, which implies that
                                        2     p                72 p
                             (a) вүӨ          2
                                                 log(A)T +             Cnpg,ПҖe T .
                                    (1 вҲ’ Оі)                 (1 вҲ’ Оі)2
          Plugging the above bounds in (25), we get
                        T
                       X      e       t        2      p              72 p
                           VПҖ вҲ’VПҖ вүӨ                 2
                                                       log(A)T +             Cnpg,ПҖe T .
                       t=1
                                           (1 вҲ’  Оі)               (1 вҲ’ Оі)2

C.1.5     S AMPLE C OMPLEXITY B OUND
Let non and noff denote the total number of on-policy online sample, and offline samples, collected
by Algorithm 2. In the following, we give a bound on non and noff for finding a Оө-suboptimal policy.
Corollary 1. Consider the setting of Theorem 1. Then, in order to guarantee that the returned policy
b is Оө-suboptimal w.r.t. to the optimal policy ПҖ вӢҶ (for the underlying MDP), the number of sampled
ПҖ
offline and online samples required by HAC in Algorithm 1 is given by:
   вҖў Under approximate Bellman Complete (when Оөbe вүӨ 1/T ):
                                                                                     !
                                                           2          3
                                  (log(A) + min{Cnpg,ПҖвӢҶ , Coff,ПҖ вӢҶ })
                   non = noff = O                                       В· log(2|F|/Оҙ) .
                                            Оө6 (1 вҲ’ Оі)14

   вҖў Without Bellman Completeness (when Оөbe > 1/T ):
                                                                             !
                                                              3
                                          (log(A) + Cnpg,ПҖвӢҶ )
                           noff = non = O                       В· log(2|F|/Оҙ) .
                                              Оө6 (1 вҲ’ Оі)14

We next provide a sample complexity bound. Let T вүҘ 4 log(1/Оі) Then, the total number of online
samples collected in T rounds of interaction is given by
                                                   T 3 log(2|F|/Оҙ)
                                T В· K2 В· mon вүІ                     .                      (27)
                                                       (1 вҲ’ Оі)2

                                                     23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Similarly, the total number of offline samples from ОҪ is given by
                                                   T 3 log(2|F|/Оҙ)
                                  T В· K2 В· moff вүІ                  .                                (28)
                                                       (1 вҲ’ Оі)2
                       T
Let ПҖb = Uniform{(ПҖ t )t=1 }, and suppose ПҖ вӢҶ denote the optimal policy for the underlying MDP. In
the following, we provide a bound on total number of samples queried to ensure that ПҖ
                                                                                    b is Оө-suboptimal.
We consider the two cases:

   вҖў Under approximate Bellman Complete (when Оөbe вүӨ 1/T ):
                                T
             h вӢҶ        i    1 X h ПҖвӢҶ         t
                                                i
            E V ПҖ вҲ’ V ПҖb вүӨ        E V вҲ’VПҖ
                            T t=1
                                                                 v    n                     o
                                                                 u
                                          r                      u min C       e , C 2
                                   60         log(A)      100    t       npg,ПҖ      off,ПҖ e
                             вүӨ          2
                                                     +                                          .
                                (1 вҲ’ Оі)          T     (1 вҲ’ Оі)2                T
                              ПҖвӢҶ      ПҖ

     Thus, to ensure that E V вҲ’ V вүӨ Оө, we set
                                      b

                               200                                          2

                      T = 2           4
                                         36 log(A) + 100 min Cnpg,ПҖвӢҶ , Coff,ПҖ   вӢҶ   .
                            Оө (1 вҲ’ Оі)
     This implies a total number of online samples, as
                                                                                !
                                                        2        3
                            (log(A) + min{Cnpg,ПҖвӢҶ , Coff,ПҖ  вӢҶ })
                        O                                          В· log(2|F|/Оҙ) .
                                         Оө6 (1 вҲ’ Оі)14
     Total number of offline samples used is the same as above.
   вҖў Without Bellman Completeness (when Оөbe > 1/T ):
                                            T
                       h вӢҶ        i     1 X h ПҖвӢҶ            t
                                                              i
                     E V ПҖ вҲ’ V ПҖb вүӨ           E V вҲ’VПҖ
                                        T t=1
                                                 r                        r
                                            2       log(A)         72       Cnpg,ПҖвӢҶ
                                     вүӨ         2
                                                            +           2
                                                                                    .
                                        (1 вҲ’ Оі)        T        (1 вҲ’ Оі)       T
                              вӢҶ
     Thus, to ensure that E V ПҖ вҲ’ V ПҖb вүӨ Оө, we set

                                          1    log(A)      Cnpg,ПҖвӢҶ
                                T =O 2                   +                .
                                          Оө (1 вҲ’ Оі)4       (1 вҲ’ Оі)4
     This implies a total number of online samples, as

                                    log(2|F|/Оҙ)                       3
                               O 6               (log(A) + Cnpg,ПҖвӢҶ ) .
                                    Оө (1 вҲ’ Оі)14
     Total number of offline samples used is the same as above.


                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D    H YBRID P OLICY G RADIENT WITH PARAMETERIZED P OLICY C LASSES
The previous section uses the softmax policy updates, which may be difficult to handle in applications
where action space is continuous. In this section, we present the analysis for HNPG (Algorithm 3)
that can work with any differentiably parameterized policy class, including neural network-based
policies. Particularly, we consider a parameterized policy class О  = {ПҖОё | Оё вҲҲ Оҳ}, where Оё is the
parameter, which satisfies the following assumption.
Assumption 2 (Smoothness). For any parameter Оё, state s, and action a, the function ln ПҖОё (a|s) is
ОІ-smooth with respect to Оё, i.e.,
                            |вҲҮ ln ПҖОё (a|s) вҲ’ вҲҮ ln ПҖОёвҖІ (a|s)| вүӨ ОІвҲҘОё вҲ’ ОёвҖІ вҲҘ2 .

This smoothness assumption is commonly used in the analysis of NPG style algorithms (Kakade,
2001; Agarwal et al., 2021). Note that vanilla on-policy NPG can be understood as an actor-
critic algorithm with compatible function approximation. More formally, on-policy NPG can
be understood as first fitting critic with linear function wвҠӨ вҲҮ ln ПҖОё (a|s), i.e. computing wМӮ =
                                                          2
argminw Es,aвҲј(ОҪ+О»dПҖОё ) wвҠӨ вҲҮ ln ПҖОё (a|s) вҲ’ AПҖОё (s, a) , followed up a parameter update ОёвҖІ =
Оё + О· wМӮ. Our hybrid approach is inspired by this actor-critic interpretation of NPG. As shown
in Algorithm 3, every iteration, given f t which is learned via HPE to approximate QПҖОёt , we fit the
linear critic (wt )вҠӨ вҲҮ ln ПҖОёt (a|s) under both offline and online data from ОҪ and dПҖОёt respectively.
After computing wt , we simply update Оёt+1 = Оёt + О·wt .
We now illustrate that a similar best-of-both-worlds type of performance guarantee can also be
achieved for learning with parameterized policies. We first introduce an assumption which is basically
saying that the linear critic (wt )вҠӨ вҲҮОё ln ПҖОё (a|s) can approximate f (s, a) вҲ’ EaвҲјПҖ(В·|s) f (s, a) which
itself is used for approximating the advantage AПҖ (s, a) (recall f is used to approximate QПҖ ).
Assumption 3 (Realizability of w). We assume realizability of the implicit value function in the set
W = {w вҲҲ Rd | вҲҘwвҲҘ вүӨ W }, i.e. for every ПҖ вҲҲ О  and f вҲҲ F, there exists a w вҲҲ W such that
                     sup вҲҘwвҠӨ вҲҮОё ln ПҖОё (a|s) вҲ’ f (s, a) вҲ’ EaвҖІ вҲјПҖ(s) f (s, aвҖІ )вҲҘ = 0.
                      s,a

We can relax the above assumption to only hold approximately, but we skip this extension for the
sake of conciseness. The next assumption is on the parameterized policy.
Assumption 4 (Well-parameterized policy class). For any ПҖОё вҲҲ О , we have EaвҲјПҖОё [вҲҮОё ln ПҖ(a|s)] = 0
for any s вҲҲ S.

This assumption is quite standard and holds for most of the parameterization. For instance, as long
as ПҖОё (a|s) вҲқ fОё (s, a) for some parameterized function fОё , this condition will hold. Special cases
include Gaussian policy ПҖОё (В·|s) = N (ВөОё (s), Пғ 2 I), and flow-based policy parameterization where
a = fОё (s, Оө) and Оө вҲј N (0, I). Note that Gaussian policy and flow-based policy are commonly used
policy parameterizations in practice (examples include TRPO Schulman et al. (2015), PPO Schulman
et al. (2017), SAC Haarnoja et al. (2018), etc.).
Finally, for the sake of simplicity, our bounds in this section depend on the concentrability coefficient,
which we define below.
Definition 4 (Concentrability coefficient). Given the offline distribution ОҪ, for any policy ПҖ e , we
define the concentrability coefficient as
                                                           e
                                                         dПҖ (s, a)
                                        CМ„off,ПҖe := sup            .
                                                     s,a ОҪ(s, a)

Clearly, bounded concentrability coefficient implies bounded Bellman error transfer coefficient
(Definition 3), but the converse does not hold. Our main result in this section is the following bound
for HNPG algorithm (given in Algorithm 3) that holds for parameterized policy classes.
Theorem 2 (Cumulative suboptimality). Fix any Оҙ вҲҲ (0, 1), and let ОҪ be an offline data distribution.
Suppose Assumption 1, 2, 3 and 4 hold for the function class F, policy class О  and the critic class
W. Additionally, suppose that the subroutime HPE is run with parameters K1 = 4вҢҲlog(1/Оі)вҢү,
                                                    |,(W/T )d }/Оҙ)
K2 = K1 + T , and moff = mon = 2T log(2 max{|F  (1вҲ’Оі)2             . Then, with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
HNPG satisfies the following bounds on cumulative subpotimality w.r.t. any comparator policy ПҖ e :

                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 вҖў Under approximate Bellman Complete (when Оөbe вүӨ 1/T ):
     T
                            1 p                        1
                                                           q
          ПҖe
    X
                 ПҖОё t

        V вҲ’V          вүӨO              2
                                 ОІW log(A)T +                min Cnpg,ПҖe , CМ„off,ПҖe В· T .
    t=1
                           1вҲ’Оі                    (1 вҲ’ Оі)2

 вҖў Without Bellman Completeness (when Оөbe > 1/T ):
              T
             X
                  ПҖe    ПҖОё t        1 p        2
                                                           1    p
                 V вҲ’V        вүӨO           ОІW log(A)T +            Cnpg,ПҖ T .
                                                                        e

             t=1
                                   1вҲ’Оі                 (1 вҲ’ Оі)2

where ПҖОёt denotes the policy at round t.

Thus, HNPG exhibits a best-of-best-worlds behavior in the sense that it can operate with/without
approximate Bellman Completeness, and in both cases enjoys a meaningful cumulative sub-optimality
bound.

D.1    U PDATE RULE

We first recall the update rule. In Algorithm 3, we run Algorithm 2 to get an estimate f t corresponding
to the value function for ПҖ t . With a fitted f t , we then estimate a linear critic to approximate
the advantage on both the offline and online data. In particular, we fit wt on top of the feature
П•t (s, a) := вҲҮ log ПҖОё (a|s)|Оё=Оёt such that
                              h                                                          2 i
wt = argmin E    b (s,a)вҲјD
                          off
                                wвҠӨ П•t (s, a) вҲ’ f t (s, a) + EaвҖІ вҲјПҖОёt (s) [f t (s, aвҖІ )])
           w
                                                              h                                                          2 i
                                            + О»Eb (s,a)вҲјD
                                                           on
                                                                wвҠӨ П•t (s, a) вҲ’ f t (s, a) + EaвҖІ вҲјПҖОёt (s) [f t (s, aвҖІ )]) .
                                                                                                             (29)
                             t
Once we have compute w , our policy update procedure is defined as follows:
                                     Оёt+1 := Оёt + О·wt .
We next provide a generalization bound for the above. Let
                 h                                                       2 i
 b t (w) = E         вҠӨ t            t                         t     вҖІ
 L         bD
             off
                   w  П•  (s, a) вҲ’ f   (s, a) +  E aвҖІ вҲјПҖ (s) [f (s, a )])
                                                        Оёt
                                                h                                                          2 i
                                     + О»E bD
                                             on
                                                      вҠӨ
                                                   w П•t (s, a) вҲ’ f t (s, a) + EaвҖІ вҲјПҖОёt (s) [f t (s, aвҖІ )]) ,
and its population counterpart
                   h                                                       2 i
Lt (w) = E(s,a)вҲјОҪ wвҠӨ П•t (s, a) вҲ’ f t (s, a) + EaвҖІ вҲјПҖОёt (s) [f t (s, aвҖІ )])
                                                h                                                      2 i
                                + О»E(s,a)вҲјdПҖt wвҠӨ П•t (s, a) вҲ’ f t (s, a) + EaвҖІ вҲјПҖОёt (s) [f t (s, aвҖІ )]) ,
where П•t (s, a) := вҲҮ log ПҖОё (a|s)|Оё=Оёt . Next, without any loss of generality, assume that
|wвҠӨ П•T (s, a)| вүӨ 1/1вҲ’Оі for all t and s, a (This condition can be easily relaxed since вҲҘwвҲҘ вүӨ W ,
and for any t вүҘ 1, Assumption 2 implies that вҲҘвҲҮ log ПҖОё (a|s)|Оё=Оёt вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘвҲҮ log ПҖОё (a|s)|Оё=Оё1 вҲҘ +
PT        s    sвҲ’1
   s=2 вҲҘОё вҲ’ Оё      вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘвҲҮ log ПҖОё (a|s)|Оё=Оё1 вҲҘ + О·tW ). Thus, an application of Lemma 4 implies that
the least squares solution wt satisfies
                         256(1 + О») log(2|W|/Оҙ)                       256(1 + О») log(2(W/T )d /Оҙ)
Lt (wt ) вүӨ inf Lt (w) +           2
                                                      вүӨ inf Lt (w) +                               ,
            w             (1 вҲ’ Оі) min{mon , moff }       w              (1 вҲ’ Оі)2 min{mon , moff }
                                                                      |            {z             }
                                                                                             =:вҲҶw
                                                                                                             (30)
where the second line follows from a straightforward covering argument of the set W = {w вҲҲ Rd |
вҲҘwвҲҘ вүӨ W } at scale 1/T . Using Assumption 3 in the above bound, we get that
                                          Lt (wt ) вүӨ вҲҶw ,
which implies that
                       h                                                            2 i
                Es,aвҲјОҪ (wt )вҠӨ П•t (s, a) вҲ’ f t (s, a) + EaвҖІ вҲјПҖОёt (s) [f t (s, aвҖІ )])     вүӨ вҲҶw . (31)


                                                       26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and
                          h                                                                   2 i       вҲҶw
              Es,aвҲјdПҖОёt       (wt )вҠӨ П•t (s, a) вҲ’ f t (s, a) + EaвҖІ вҲјПҖОёt (s) [f t (s, aвҖІ )])          вүӨ      .       (32)
                                                                                                         О»
Next, in order to simply the notation in the following proof, we increase the value of Оөstat to
                               1+О»       ln(2 max{|F|, (W/T )d }/Оҙ)           1+О»
                 Оөstat = 256         2
                                       В·                              вүӨ 256         ,                              (33)
                             (1 вҲ’ Оі)           min{mon , moff }                2T
which ensures that вҲҶw вүӨ Оөstat .

D.2     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

D.2.1      S UPPORTING T ECHNICAL R ESULTS

Fix any t вүӨ T , and let ПҖОёt be the policy at round t, and f t be the corresponding value function that is
computed using Algorithm 2 at round t. We note that an application of Lemma 5 implies that

                                                      12          1           12Оөstat
     Es,aвҲјdПҖОёt [(f t (s, a) вҲ’ QПҖОёt (s, a))2 ] вүӨ             min     , Оөbe +            =: вҲҶon       (34)
                                                   (1 вҲ’ Оі)2       О»          О»(1 вҲ’ Оі)
and that,

                                                      40     О»Оөbe
      Es,aвҲјОҪ [(f t (s, a) вҲ’ T ПҖОёt f t (s, a))2 ] вүӨ                 + Оөstat =: вҲҶoff .                (35)
                                                   (1 вҲ’ Оі) 1 вҲ’ Оі
Furthermore, from (31) and (32) recall that
                      h                                                             2 i
                Es,aвҲјОҪ (wt )вҠӨ П•t (s, a) вҲ’ f t (s, a) + EaвҖІ вҲјПҖОёt (s) [f t (s, aвҖІ )])     вүӨ вҲҶw .                     (36)
and that
                          h                                                          2 i вҲҶw
              Es,aвҲјdПҖОёt (wt )вҠӨ П•t (s, a) вҲ’ f t (s, a) + EaвҖІ вҲјПҖОёt (s) [f t (s, aвҖІ )])    вүӨ   ,                      (37)
                                                                                          О»
and that вҲҶw вүӨ Оөstat . Additionally, define the function g t such that for all s, a:
                              g t (s, a) = EaвҖІ вҲјПҖОёt (s) [f t (s, aвҖІ )] + (wt )вҠӨ П•t (s, a).                         (38)
                                                                                                               t
Before we move to the bound on total suboptimality, we first prove two technical results for g that
will be useful for the rest of the analysis.

   вҖў First, note that
     вҲҘg t вҲ’ T ПҖОёt g t вҲҘ22,ОҪ
                         h                                                                2 i
            = Es,aвҲјОҪ g t (s, a) вҲ’ r(s, a) вҲ’ EsвҖІ вҲјP (В·|s,a),aвҖІ вҲјПҖОёt (sвҖІ ) [g t (sвҖІ , aвҖІ )]
            (i)
                         h                                                                                              2 i
            = Es,aвҲјОҪ EaвҖІ вҲјПҖОёt (s) f t (s, aвҖІ ) + (wt )вҠӨ П•t (s, a) вҲ’ r(s, a) вҲ’ EsвҖІ вҲјP (В·|s,a),aвҖІ вҲјПҖОёt (sвҖІ ) [f t (s, a)]
            (ii)            h                                                            2 i
            вүӨ 2Es,aвҲјОҪ (wt )вҠӨ П•t (s, a) вҲ’ f t (s, a) + EaвҖІ вҲјПҖОёt (s) [f t (s, aвҖІ )])
                                          h                                                               2 i
                              + 2Es,aвҲјОҪ f t (s, a) вҲ’ r(s, a) вҲ’ EsвҖІ вҲјP (В·|s,a),aвҖІ вҲјПҖОёt (sвҖІ ) [f t (s, a)]
             вүӨ 2вҲҶw + 2вҲҘf t вҲ’ T ПҖОёt f t вҲҘ22,ОҪ
             (iii)
             вүӨ 2вҲҶw + 2вҲҶoff ,
      where (i) uses the fact that EaвҖІ вҲјПҖОёt (sвҖІ ) [П•t (sвҖІ , aвҖІ )] = 0 for all sвҖІ вҲҲ S in the second term. The
      inequality (ii) holds from splitting the squares. Finally, (iii) follows from (35). Thus,
                                                                p
                                   вҲҘg t вҲ’ T ПҖОёt g t вҲҘ2,ОҪ вүӨ 2вҲҶoff + 2вҲҶw .                                 (39)
   вҖў Next, note that since EaвҲјПҖ(s) [П•t (s, a)] = 0 for any s, we have EaвҲјПҖОёt (В·|s) [g t (s, a)] =
     EaвҲјПҖОёt (В·|s) [f t (s, a)] . Thus,
           Es0 ,a0 вҲјВө0 g t (s0 , a0 ) вҲ’ QПҖОёt (s0 , a0 ) = Es0 ,a0 вҲјВө0 f t (s0 , a0 ) вҲ’ QПҖОёt (s0 , a0 )


                                                               вүӨ вҲҘf t вҲ’ QПҖОёt вҲҘ1,Вө0


                                                          27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                            вүӨ вҲҘf t вҲ’ QПҖОёt вҲҘ2,Вө0
                                                              r
                                                                   1
                                                            вүӨ         вҲҘf t вҲ’ QПҖОёt вҲҘ2,ПҖОёt
                                                                 1вҲ’Оі
                                                              s
                                                                  вҲҶon
                                                            вүӨ         ,                                  (40)
                                                                 1вҲ’Оі
       where the third last line is from JensenвҖҷs inequality, the second last line is from Lemma 2 and
       the last line is due to (34).
Lemma 7. Consider the update rule in Algorithm 3, and let the function
                                                                q      g t be defined such that
                                                                                 2 log(A)
g t (s, a) = EaвҖІ вҲјПҖОёt (s) [f t (s, aвҖІ )] + (wt )вҠӨ П•t (s, a). Then, setting О· =    ОІW 2 T , we get that
                 T
                 X                                                      p
                       Es,aвҲјdПҖe [g t (s, a)] вҲ’ EaвҲјПҖОёt (s) [g t (s, a)] вүӨ 2ОІW 2 log(A)T .

                 t=1


Proof of Lemma 7. For policy optimization part, we will start by leveraging the smoothness of the
log of the policy. For any s, a, ОІ-smoothness implies that
                     ПҖ t+1 (a|s)                                   ОІ t+1         2
                 log Оё            вүҘ вҲҮОё log ПҖОёt (a|s) В· Оёt+1 вҲ’ Оёt вҲ’       Оё вҲ’ Оёt 2
                      ПҖОёt (a|s)                                      2
                                                             О·2 ОІ      2
                                  = О·вҲҮОё log ПҖОёt (a|s) В· wt вҲ’      wt 2 .                     (41)
                                                              2
                                                   e
Taking expectation on both the sides w.r.t. a вҲј ПҖ (s), we have that:
KL(ПҖ e (s)вҲҘПҖОёt (s)) вҲ’ KL(ПҖ e (s)вҲҘПҖОёt+1 (s))
                = EaвҲјПҖe (s) [log(ПҖОёt+1 (a|s)) вҲ’ log(ПҖОёt (a|s))]
                                                        О·2 ОІ     2
                 вүҘ О·EaвҲјПҖe (s) [вҲҮОё log ПҖОёt (a|s) В· wt ] вҲ’      wt 2
                                                         2
                                                   t    О·2 ОІ 2
                 вүҘ О·EaвҲјПҖe (s) [вҲҮОё log ПҖОёt (a|s) В· w ] вҲ’      W
                                                         2
                                                                                                 О·2 ОІ 2
                 = О·(EaвҲјПҖe (s) [вҲҮОё log ПҖОёt (a|s) В· wt ] вҲ’ EaвҲјПҖОёt (s) [вҲҮОё log ПҖОёt (a|s) В· wt )] вҲ’       W ,
                                                                                                   2
where the second line above follows from (41), and the last line follows from the fact that
EaвҲјПҖОёt (s) [вҲҮОё log ПҖОёt (a|s)] = 0 for any s. Rearranging the terms, and taking expectation w.r.t. s вҲј
  e
dПҖ , we get that:
 EsвҲјdПҖe [EaвҲјПҖe (s) [вҲҮОё log ПҖОёt (a|s) В· wt ] вҲ’ [EaвҲјПҖОёt (s) вҲҮОё log ПҖОёt (a|s) В· wt ]]
                                   1                                                             О·ОІ 2
                               вүӨ EsвҲјdПҖe [(KL(ПҖ e (s)вҲҘПҖОёt (s)) вҲ’ KL(ПҖ e (s)вҲҘПҖОёt+1 (s))] +             W .
                                   О·                                                              2
Next, recall that definition g t (s, a) = EaвҖІ вҲјПҖОёt (s) [f t (s, aвҖІ )] + (wt )вҠӨ П•t (s, a) where П•t (s, a) =
вҲҮОё log ПҖОёt (a|s). Using this in the above, we get that
 EsвҲјdПҖe EaвҲјПҖe (s) [g t (s, a)] вҲ’ EaвҲјПҖОёt (s) [g t (s, a)]


                                   1                                                             О·ОІ 2
                               вүӨ EsвҲјdПҖe [(KL(ПҖ e (s)вҲҘПҖОёt (s)) вҲ’ KL(ПҖ e (s)вҲҘПҖОёt+1 (s))] +             W .
                                   О·                                                              2
Summing the above for t from 1 to T , we get that:
 XT
     EsвҲјdПҖe EaвҲјПҖe (s) [g t (s, a)] вҲ’ EaвҲјПҖОёt (s) [g t (s, a)]

 t=1
                                 1                                                          О·ОІ 2
                                вүӨ  EsвҲјdПҖe [(KL(ПҖ e (s)вҲҘПҖОё1 (s)) вҲ’ KL(ПҖ e (s)вҲҘПҖОёT +1 (s))] +    W T
                                 О·                                                           2
                                 1                                 О·ОІ 2
                                вүӨ EsвҲјdПҖe [(KL(ПҖ e (s)вҲҘПҖОё1 (s))] +     W T.
                                 О·                                  2


                                                       28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Using the fact that ПҖОё1 (s) = Uniform(A), we get that
                      KL(ПҖ e (s)вҲҘПҖОё1 (s)) вүӨ EaвҲјПҖe (s) [вҲ’ log(ПҖОё1 (s))] = log(A),
which implies that
                   T
                  X                                                log(A) О·ОІ 2
                       EsвҲјdПҖe g t (s, ПҖ e (s)) вҲ’ g t (s, ПҖОёt (s)) вүӨ

                                                                         +    W T.
                  t=1
                                                                      О·     2
            q
Setting О· = 2ОІW  log(A)
                    2 T concludes the proof.


D.2.2     H YBRID A NALYSIS U NDER A PPROXIMATE B ELLMAN C OMPLETENESS
For any t вүӨ [T ], invoking Lemma 3 with ПҖ = ПҖОёt and f = g t , we get that
   e
V ПҖ вҲ’ V ПҖОёt вүӨ Es0 ,a0 вҲјВө0 g t (s0 , a0 ) вҲ’ QПҖОёt (s0 , a0 )


                             1                                                1
                                 Es,aвҲјdПҖe T ПҖОёt g t (s, a) вҲ’ g t (s, a) +        Es,aвҲјdПҖe g t (s, a) вҲ’ g t (s, ПҖОёt (s)) .

                       +
                         1вҲ’Оі                                                1вҲ’Оі
Using JensenвҖҷs inequality and Definition 4, we get that
   e
V ПҖ вҲ’ V ПҖОёt вүӨ Es0 ,a0 вҲјВө0 g t (s0 , a0 ) вҲ’ QПҖОёt (s0 , a0 )


                         CМ„off,ПҖe                                         1
                                  вҲҘT ПҖОёt g t (s, a) вҲ’ g t (s, a)вҲҘ2,ОҪ +
                                                                                        t          t

                       +                                                     E     ПҖ e g (s, a) вҲ’ g (s, ПҖОё t (s)) .
                          1вҲ’Оі                                          1 вҲ’ Оі s,aвҲјd
Adding the above bounds for t from 1 to T , we get
 T                 T
X     e           X
   V ПҖ вҲ’ V ПҖОё t вүӨ     Es0 ,a0 вҲјВө0 g t (s0 , a0 ) вҲ’ QПҖОёt (s0 , a0 )

t=1                    t=1
                                   T                                                   T
                                   X CМ„off,ПҖe                                          X     1
                                                вҲҘT ПҖОёt g t (s, a) вҲ’ g t (s, a)вҲҘ2,ОҪ +             Es,aвҲјdПҖe g t (s, a) вҲ’ g t (s, ПҖОёt (s)) .

                               +
                                   t=1
                                       1вҲ’Оі                                             t=1
                                                                                           1 вҲ’ Оі

We bound each of the terms on the RHS above separately below:

   вҖў Term 1: Using (40), we get that
                                                                                   s
                          T
                          X                                                              вҲҶon
                                Es0 ,a0 вҲјВө0 g t (s0 , a0 ) вҲ’ QПҖОёt (s0 , a0 ) вүӨ T

                                                                                               .
                          t=1
                                                                                       (1 вҲ’ Оі)
   вҖў Term 2: Using (39) , we get that
                       X T                                         p
                           CМ„off,ПҖe g t вҲ’ T ПҖ g t 2,ОҪ вүӨ 2CМ„off,ПҖe T вҲҶoff + вҲҶw .
                             t=1

   вҖў Term 3: Using Lemma 7, we get that
                    XT
                                                               p
                       Es,aвҲјdПҖe g t (s, a) вҲ’ g t (s, ПҖОёt (s)) вүӨ 2ОІW 2 log(A)T .

                         t=1

Combining the above bounds, we get that
                       s
   T
  X      e                 вҲҶon       2CМ„off,ПҖe p              1 p
      V ПҖ вҲ’ V ПҖОё t вүӨ T           +            T вҲҶoff + вҲҶw +       2ОІW 2 log(A)T .                              (42)
  t=1
                         (1 вҲ’ Оі)      1 вҲ’  Оі                1 вҲ’ Оі

D.2.3     NATURAL P OLICY G RADIENT A NALYSIS
The following bound follows by repeating a similar analysis as in Appendix C.1.3. Fix any t вҲҲ [T ],
let ПҖОёt and f t be the corresponding policies and value functions at round t. Further, recall that
g t (s, a) = EaвҖІ вҲјПҖОёt (s) [f t (s, aвҖІ )] + (wt )вҠӨ П•t (s, a) and define gМ„ t (s, a) = g t (s, a) вҲ’ g t (s, ПҖОёt (s)).


                                                         29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Using Lemma 1, we get that
              e
  EsвҲјВө0 [V ПҖ (s) вҲ’ V ПҖОёt (s)]
                       1                 ПҖ t
                  =        E      ПҖ e [A Оё (s, a)]
                    1 вҲ’ Оі s,aвҲјd
                       1                             1 q
                  вүӨ        Es,aвҲјdПҖe [gМ„ t (s, a)] +      Es,aвҲјdПҖe [(gМ„ t (s, a) вҲ’ AПҖОёt (s, a))2 ]
                    1вҲ’Оі                             1вҲ’Оі
                       1                             1
                                                        q
                  вүӨ        Es,aвҲјdПҖe [gМ„ t (s, a)] +      Cnpg,ПҖe Es,aвҲјdПҖt [(gМ„ t (s, a) вҲ’ AПҖОёt (s, a))2 ],
                    1вҲ’Оі                             1вҲ’Оі
                                                                                                       (43)
where the second-last line above follows from JensenвҖҷs inequality, and the last line is by invoking
Definition 2. We next bound the second term in the right hand side. Using the fact that ПҖt = ПҖОёt , we
get that
 Es,aвҲјdПҖОёt [(gМ„ t (s, a) вҲ’ AПҖОёt (s, a))2 ]
                  =Es,aвҲјdПҖОёt [(g t (s, a) вҲ’ g t (s, ПҖОёt (s)) вҲ’ QПҖОёt (s, a) + QПҖОёt (s, ПҖОёt (s)))2 ]
                  вүӨEs,aвҲјdПҖОёt [2(g t (s, a) вҲ’ QПҖОёt (s, a))2 + 2(QПҖОёt (s, ПҖОёt (s)) вҲ’ g t (s, ПҖОёt (s)))2 ]
                  =Es,aвҲјdПҖОёt [2(g t (s, a) вҲ’ QПҖОёt (s, a))2 + 2(EaвҖІ вҲјПҖОёt (s) [g t (s, aвҖІ ) вҲ’ QПҖОёt (s, aвҖІ )])2 ]
                  вүӨ4Es,aвҲјdПҖОёt [(g t (s, a) вҲ’ QПҖОёt (s, a))2 ],
where the first inequality uses (a + b)2 вүӨ 2a2 + 2b2 for any a, b, and the second inequality follows
from JensenвҖҷs inequality. Adding and subtracting EaвҖІ вҲјПҖОёt (s) [f t (s, aвҖІ )]) inside the expectation, further
decomposing the above, and again applying JensenвҖҷs inequality, we get that
   Es,aвҲјdПҖОёt [(gМ„ t (s, a) вҲ’ AПҖОёt (s, a))2 ] вүӨ 8Es,aвҲјdПҖОёt [(g t (s, a) вҲ’ EaвҖІ вҲјПҖОёt (s) [f t (s, aвҖІ )]))2 ]
                                                                + 8Es,aвҲјdПҖОёt [(f t (s, a) вҲ’ QПҖОёt (s, a))2 ]
                                          вҲҶw
                                          вүӨ     + вҲҶon ,
                                           О»
where the last line uses the bound from (37) and Lemma 5. Plugging the above in (43), we get that
                                                                    r
         ПҖe          ПҖОёt         1               t             4      Cnpg,ПҖe вҲҶw      4 p
EsвҲјВө0 [V (s) вҲ’ V (s)] вүӨ              Es,aвҲјdПҖe [gМ„ (s, a)] +                      +           Cnpg,ПҖe вҲҶon .
                               1вҲ’Оі                          (1 вҲ’ Оі)       О»        (1 вҲ’ Оі)
Summing the above expression for all t вҲҲ [T ] implies that
                     T                                   r
  ПҖe    ПҖОёt     1 X                  t             4T      Cnpg,ПҖe вҲҶw     4T p
 V вҲ’V       вүӨ           Es,aвҲјdПҖe [gМ„ (s, a)] +                        +         Cnpg,ПҖe вҲҶon .
              1 вҲ’ Оі t=1                         (1 вҲ’ Оі)        О»        (1 вҲ’ Оі)

Using the bound for the first term from Lemma 7 in the above, we get that
                                                      r
    ПҖe      ПҖОё t     1 p          2
                                               4T        Cnpg,ПҖe вҲҶw       4T p
  V вҲ’V           вүӨ          2ОІW log(A)T +                            +          Cnpg,ПҖe вҲҶon .
                   1вҲ’Оі                       (1 вҲ’ Оі)         О»          (1 вҲ’ Оі)
                                                                                           (44)


D.2.4    F INAL B OUND ON C UMULATIVE S UBOPTIMALITY

Combining the bounds from (42) and (44), we get that
 T
                       (                                     r
X
     ПҖe     ПҖОё t           1 p        2
                                                       2T      Cnpg,ПҖe вҲҶw     4T p
    V вҲ’V         вүӨ min           4ОІW log(A)T +                            +         Cnpg,ПҖe вҲҶon ,
t=1
                         1вҲ’Оі                         (1 вҲ’ Оі)       О»        (1 вҲ’ Оі)
                         |                                    {z                              }
                                                                       (a)
                                s                                                        )
                                      вҲҶon     2CМ„off,ПҖe T p              1 p    2
                            T               +               вҲҶoff + вҲҶw +      2ОІW log(A)T ,
                                    (1 вҲ’ Оі)     1вҲ’Оі                     1вҲ’Оі
                            |                                   {z                     }
                                                                 (b)
                                                                                                          (45)


                                                     30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where recall that
                            12            1            12Оөstat
                    вҲҶon =        2
                                   min{ , Оөbe } +
                         (1 вҲ’ Оі)         О»            О»(1 вҲ’ Оі)

                            40      О»Оөbe
                 вҲҶoff =                     + Оөstat
                         (1 вҲ’ Оі) 1 вҲ’ Оі
                  вҲҶw = Оөstat ,
                                 2T log(|F/Оҙ|)
                 moff = mon =
                                     (1 вҲ’ Оі)
                               1+О»       ln(2 max{|F| вҲ§ |W|}/Оҙ)              1+О»
                 Оөstat вүӨ 256           В·                               вүӨ 256     ,
                             (1 вҲ’ Оі)2         min{mon , moff }                2T
 due to Lemma 5, and (33) and (30). Plugging in the bounds on вҲҶon and вҲҶoff in (45), we get that
                                              r                              s
         1 p        2
                                     16T         C  npg,ПҖ e Оөstat     16T                  1
(a) вүӨ         2ОІW log(A)T +                                       +           Cnpg,ПҖe min    , Оөbe ,
       1вҲ’Оі                        (1 вҲ’ Оі)3/2            О»           (1 вҲ’ Оі)2               О»
and,
                             s                                       r
                   4T                    1                   4T Оөstat   14T CМ„off,ПҖe p
         (b) вүӨ                 min         , Оөbe       +              +                О»Оөbe
               (1 вҲ’ Оі)3/2                О»                 (1 вҲ’ Оі)О»      (1 вҲ’ Оі)2
                                               14T CМ„off,ПҖe вҲҡ           1 p
                                             +         3/2
                                                              Оөstat +          2ОІW 2 log(A)T .
                                               (1 вҲ’ Оі)                1вҲ’Оі
Note that О» is a free parameter in the above, which is chosen by the algorithm. We provide an upper
bound on the cumulative suboptimality under two separate cases (we set a different value of О», and
get a different bound on Оөstat in the two cases):
   вҖў Case 1: Under approximate Bellman Complete (when Оөbe вүӨ 1/T ): In this case, we set О» = 1.
     Thus, from the bound in (7), we get that Оөstat вүӨ 256/T , which implies that
                 1 p                              16T     p                    16T p
        (a) вүӨ             2ОІW 2 log(A)T +                   Cnpg,ПҖ e Оөstat +                Cnpg,ПҖe Оөbe
               1вҲ’Оі                            (1 вҲ’ Оі)3/2                     (1 вҲ’ Оі)2
                 1 p                             300 p
            вүӨ             2ОІW 2 log(A)T +                 Cnpg,ПҖe T ,
               1вҲ’Оі                            (1 вҲ’ Оі)2
     where the last line follows from the fact that Оөbe вүӨ 1/T . Additionally, we also have that
                                    350 q 2                 1 p
                           (b) вүӨ         2
                                             CМ„off,ПҖe T +         2ОІW 2 log(A)T ,
                                 (1 вҲ’ Оі)                  1вҲ’Оі
     where the last line uses the fact that Оөbe вүӨ 1/T , and that CМ„off,ПҖe вүҘ 1.
     Plugging the above bounds in (25), we get
         T                                                            r
        X
              ПҖe       ПҖОё t      1 p         2
                                                              350            n
                                                                                             2
                                                                                                     o
            V вҲ’V            вүӨ          2ОІW log(A)T +                    min   C npg,ПҖ e , CМ„
                                                                                             off,ПҖ e   В· T.
        t=1
                               1вҲ’Оі                         (1 вҲ’ Оі)2

   вҖў Case 2: Without Bellman Completeness (when Оөbe > 1/T ) In this case, we set О» = T2 вҲ’ 1. Thus,
     from the bound in (7), we get that Оөstat = 128, which implies that
                                 1 p                        56 p
                        (a) вүӨ           ОІW 2 log(A)T +               Cnpg,ПҖe T .
                              1вҲ’Оі                        (1 вҲ’ Оі)2
     Plugging the above bounds in (25), we get
                 T
                X       e               1 p                         56 p
                    V ПҖ вҲ’ V ПҖОё t вүӨ            2ОІW 2 log(A)T +               Cnpg,ПҖe T .
                t=1
                                     1 вҲ’  Оі                     (1  вҲ’ Оі)2

D.2.5    S AMPLE C OMPLEXITY B OUND
Corollary 2 (Sample complexity). Consider the setting of Theorem 2. Then, in order to guarantee
                         b is Оө-suboptimal w.r.t. to the optimal policy ПҖ вӢҶ (for the underlying MDP),
that the returned policy ПҖ
the number of sampled offline and online samples required by HNPG in Algorithm 3 is given by:


                                                           31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   вҖў Under approximate Bellman Complete (when Оөbe вүӨ 1/T ):

                                                  2
                    (ОІW 2 log(A) + min{Cnpg,ПҖвӢҶ ,CМ„off,ПҖвӢҶ }/(1вҲ’Оі)2 )3

                                                                                       d
     non = noff = O                                                  В· log(2 max{(W/T ) , |F|}/Оҙ) .
                                   Оө6 (1 вҲ’ Оі)8

   вҖў Without Bellman Completeness (when Оөbe > 1/T ):
                                                                 3                                   !
                               ОІW 2 log(A) + Cnpg,ПҖвӢҶ/(1вҲ’Оі)2                               d
         non = noff = O                                              В· log(2 max{(W/T ) , |F|}/Оҙ) .
                                        Оө6 (1 вҲ’ Оі)8

In particular, HNPG draws the same number of offline samples, and on-policy online samples.

We next provide a sample complexity bound. Let T вүҘ 4 log(1/Оі) Then, the total number of online
samples collected in T rounds of interaction is given by

                                          T 3 (log(2 max{(W/T )d , |F|}/Оҙ))
                         T В· K2 В· mon вүІ                                     .                            (46)
                                                       (1 вҲ’ Оі)2
Similarly, the total number of offline samples from ОҪ is given by
                                          T 3 (log(2 max{(W/T )d , |F|}/Оҙ))
                        T В· K2 В· moff вүІ                                     .                            (47)
                                                       (1 вҲ’ Оі)2
                           T
Let ПҖb = Uniform{(ПҖОёt )t=1 }, and suppose ПҖ вӢҶ denote the optimal policy for the underlying MDP. In
the following, we provide a bound on total number of samples queried to ensure that ПҖ
                                                                                    b is Оө-suboptimal.
We consider the two cases:

   вҖў Case 1: Under approximate Bellman Complete (when Оөbe вүӨ 1/T ):
                                T
           h вӢҶ         i     1 X h ПҖвӢҶ             i
         E V ПҖ вҲ’ V ПҖb вүӨ           E V вҲ’ V ПҖОё t
                            T t=1
                                                                 r
                               1 p        2
                                                          350            n
                                                                                            2
                                                                                                   o
                          вүӨ         2ОІW log(A)T +                  min      C npg,ПҖ  e , CМ„
                                                                                           off,ПҖ e   В· T.
                            1вҲ’Оі                        (1 вҲ’ Оі)2
                              вӢҶ
     Thus, to ensure that E V ПҖ вҲ’ V ПҖb вүӨ Оө, we set
                             1 ОІW 2 log(A)

                                                     1                         2
                  T =O 2                      +           min   C npg,ПҖ вӢҶ , CМ„off,ПҖ вӢҶ         .
                            Оө     (1 вҲ’ Оі)2       (1 вҲ’ Оі)4
     This implies a total number of online samples, as
                                                                                                       3 !
           log(2 max{(W/T )d , |F|}/Оҙ)

                                               2               1                              2
      O                                     ОІW log(A) +              min Cnpg,ПҖвӢҶ , CМ„off,ПҖвӢҶ               .
                    Оө6 (1 вҲ’ Оі)8                            (1 вҲ’ Оі)2
     Total number of offline samples used is the same as above.
   вҖў Case 2: Without Bellman Completeness (when Оөbe > 1/T ):
                                             T
                      h вӢҶ          i    1 X h ПҖвӢҶ             i
                    E V ПҖ вҲ’ V ПҖb вүӨ             E V вҲ’ V ПҖОё t
                                        T t=1
                                               r                         r
                                           1     ОІW 2 log(A)       56        Cnpg,ПҖвӢҶ
                                     вүӨ                       +                        .
                                        1вҲ’Оі           T         (1 вҲ’ Оі)2        T
                              вӢҶ
     Thus, to ensure that E V ПҖ вҲ’ V ПҖb вүӨ Оө, we set
                                          1 ОІW 2 log(A)

                                                              Cnpg,ПҖвӢҶ
                               T =O 2                      +             .
                                         Оө      (1 вҲ’ Оі)2     (1 вҲ’ Оі)4
     This implies a total number of online samples, as
                                                                                       3 !
                   log(2 max{(W/T )d , |F|}/Оҙ)

                                                         2             1
               O                                     ОІW log(A) +              Cnpg,ПҖвӢҶ     .
                             Оө6 (1 вҲ’ Оі)8                           (1 вҲ’ Оі 2 )


                                                    32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Total number of offline samples used is same as above.


                                             33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                         Train Set Reward                      Test Set Reward                       Online Critic Loss                       Offline Critic Loss
                 1.0
                                                      0.8                                    0.6                                      0.6
                 0.8
                                                      0.6                                    0.4
                 0.6                                                                                                                  0.4
                                                      0.4
                 0.4
                                                                                             0.2                                      0.2
                 0.2                                  0.2

                 0.0                                  0.0                                    0.0                                      0.0
                       0 0.3m0.6m0.9m1.2m1.5m               0 0.3m0.6m0.9m1.2m1.5m                 0 0.3m0.6m0.9m1.2m1.5m                   0 0.3m0.6m0.9m1.2m1.5m
                  Number of Online Samples                Number of Online Samples               Number of Online Samples              Number of Online Samples
                                                                            HNPG          RLPD


Figure 3: Comparison of the moving average learning and loss curves between HNPG and RLPD
on an image-based Comblock with horizon 5. For train/test reward curves, median over 5 random
seeds are reported and 20/80th quantile are shaded. For loss curves, one random run is chosen and
reported. Online critic loss for HNPG refers to online MC regression square loss and offline critic
loss for HNPG refers to offline TD loss. Both online and offline critic losses for RLPD are TD losses.

                       Train Set Reward                                       Online Critic Loss                                            Offline Critic Loss
      1.0                                                       1.0                                                       1.0
      0.8                                                       0.8                                                       0.8
      0.6                                                       0.6                                                       0.6
      0.4                                                       0.4                                                       0.4
      0.2                                                       0.2                                                       0.2
      0.0                                                       0.0                                                       0.0
            0     60k      120k   180k      240k   300k               0     60k    120k    180k      240k   300k                0     60k       120k    180k        240k   300k
                Number of Online Samples                                  Number of Online Samples                                  Number of Online Samples
                                                                                   RLPD                  HNPG
Figure 4: Comparison of the loss curves between HNPG and RLPD on a continuous Comblock with
horizon 15.
E E XPERIMENT D ETAILS OF C OMBLOCK

E.1    D ETAILS OF C OMBINATION L OCK

In a Comblock environment, each timestep has three latent states with the first two being good states
and the last one being an absorbing state. Each latent state has 10 underlying actions. In good
states, only one underlying action will lead to one of two good states of the next timestep with equal
probability while the rest of the underlying actions will lead to the absorbing state of the next timestep.
Once the agent gets to an absorbing state, any underlying action will lead to the absorbing state of the
next timestep. Once the agent reaches one of the good states in the last timestep, it will receive an
optimal reward of 1. When the agent goes from a good state to an absorbing state, it also has a 0.5
probability of receiving an anti-shaped reward of 0.1. Rewards for any other transitions are 0. To
get the observation for each latent state, we concatenate one-hot representations of the latent state
and horizon, add random noise N (0, 0.1) to each dimension, and finally multiply it with a Hadmard
matrix.

E.2    L OSS C URVES FOR C OMBLOCK E XPERIMENTS

In Figure 4, we present the loss curve comparison for HNPG and RLPD on a continuous Comblock
with horizon 5. Although RLPD enjoys a smaller sample complexity compared to HNPG, its learning
curve is less stable. Similar to Figure 3, the online critic loss is more bumpy for RLPD since it
optimizes TD loss and its bellman bootstrapping can be unstable.

E.3    I MPLEMENTATION P SEUDOCODE

Following prior combination lock algorithms (Song et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2022b), instead of
a discounted setting policy evaluation, we adapt to the finite horizon setting and train separate Q-
functions and policies for each timestep. We also incorporated some empirical recommendations
from (Schulman et al., 2015) and the resulting practical algorithm is presented in Algorithm 4 and
Algorithm 5.


                                                                                      34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 4 Practical Finite-Horizon HNPG
Require: Function class {Fi }HвҲ’1    i=1 , PG iteration T , offline data ОҪ, Params О», KL constraint maxKL .
 1: Initialize f00 , . . . , fHвҲ’1
                              0
                                  вҲҲ F, and Оё01 , . . . , ОёHвҲ’1
                                                          1
                                                              .
 2: for t = 1, . . . , T do
 3:    f0t , . . . , fHвҲ’1
                      t
                            вҲҲ F, Doff , Don вҶҗ FHPE({Fi }HвҲ’1                     HвҲ’1
                                                                i=1 , ОҪ, {ПҖОёit }i=0 , О»).
 4:    for h = 0, . . . , H вҲ’ 1 do
 5:         Let П•th (s, a) = вҲҮ log ПҖОёht (a|s) and fВҜht (s, a) = fht (s, a) вҲ’ EaвҲјПҖОёt (s) [fht (s, a)].
                                                                                        h
 6:         Use Conjugate Gradient to solve:
              wt вҲҲ argmin E     b h (wвҠӨ П•t (s, a) вҲ’ fВҜt (s, a))2 + О»E       b Dh (wвҠӨ П•t (s, a) вҲ’ fВҜt (s, a))2 .

              h                Doff         h          h                   on        h            h
                         w
                                                                                                           (48)
                   t
 7:       Get О· = argmaxО· в„“LS (О·, maxKL ) according to (50) using line search.
 8:      Update Оёht+1 вҶҗ Оёht + О· t wht .
 9:   end for
10: end for
11: Return policy ПҖОёT , . . . , ПҖОёT
                          0           HвҲ’1


Algorithm 5 Finite-Horizon Hybrid Fitted Policy Evaluation (FHPE)
Require: Policy ПҖ0 , . . . , ПҖHвҲ’1 , function class {Fi }HвҲ’1
                                                          i=0 , offline distribution ОҪ, weight О»
 1: Initialize f0 , . . . , fHвҲ’1 вҲҲ F, fH = 0.
 2: Sample Don = {{(si , ai , yi = Q         b ПҖ (s, a))}}HвҲ’1 of mon many on-policy samples using
                                               i          i=0
    ПҖ0 , . . . , ПҖHвҲ’1 .
 3: Sample Doff = {{(si , ai , sвҖІi , ri )}}HвҲ’1
                                           i=0 of moff many offline samples from ОҪ.
 4: for h = H вҲ’ 1, . . . , 0 do
 5:    Solve the square loss regression problem to compute:
             fh вҶҗ argmin E    b h (f (s, a) вҲ’ r вҲ’ fh+1 (sвҖІ , ПҖh+1 (sвҖІ )))2 + О»Eb Dh (f (s, a) вҲ’ y)2 . (49)
                               Doff                                                 on
                       f вҲҲFh
 6: end for
 7: Return f0 , . . . , fHвҲ’1 , and optionally Doff and Don .
In Algorithm 4, we define the line search objective в„“tLS (О·, maxKL ), which take the following form:
                  в„“tLS (О·, maxKL ) = LОёht (Оёht + О·wht ) вҲ’ X {KL(Оёht , Оёht + О·wht ) вүӨ maxKL },              (50)
where L(В·) is the policy gradient objective, and X {В·} = 0 if the statement is true and вҲһ otherwise.
In practice, this objective is solved using line search. For more details we refer the reader to the
original paper (Schulman et al., 2015).

E.4    H YPERPARAMETERS

We provide the hyperparameters of HNPG for both continuous Comblock and image-based continu-
ous Comblock in Table 1. In addition, we provide the hyperparameters we tried for RLPD baseline
for both Comblock settings in Table 2.

            Table 1: Hyperparameters for HNPG in (image-based) continuous Comblock

                                                     Value Considered           Final Value
                               GAE П„                    {0.97, 0.9}                0.97
                        L-2 regularization rate       {0, 1e-3, 1e-2}                0
                       Maximum KL difference         {1e-1, 1e-2, 1e-3}            1e-2
                              Damping                     {1e-1}                   1e-1
                              Optimizer               {Adam, SGD}                 Adam
                              Batch size               {500, 1000}                 1000
                        Reweighting factor О»            {0.1, 1, 10}                 1


                                                      35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         Table 2: Hyperparameters for RLPD in (image-based) continuous Comblock

                                               Value Considered    Final Value
                       Discount Оі                   {0.99}            0.99
           Actor minimum standard deviation          {-10}             -10
           Actor maximum standard deviation           {2}               2
                   Initial temperature               {0.1}             0.1
                       Alpha Beta                    {0.5}             0.5
                 Alpha Learning Rate                {1e-4}            1e-4
                   Actor learning rate           {1e-2, 1e-3}         1e-3
                   Critic learning rate          {1e-2, 1e-3}         1e-3
                   Critic soft update П„        {0.01, 0.02, 0.1}      0.01
              Critic soft update frequency           {1, 2}             2
                        Optimizer                  {Adam}            Adam
             Number of updates per sample           {1, 10}             1
                        Batch size                {64, 128}           128
                       Buffer size                {1e5, 1e6}           1e6


                                          36
