Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Enhancing Length Extrapolation in
Sequential Models with Pointer-Augmented
Neural Memory
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                         Abstract

        We propose a solution called Pointer-Augmented Neural Memory (PANM)
        to help neural networks understand and apply symbol processing to new,
        longer sequences of data. PANM integrates an external neural memory
        that uses physical addresses and pointer manipulation techniques to mimic
        human and computer symbol processing abilities. PANM facilitates pointer
        assignment, dereference, and arithmetic by explicitly using pointers to ac-
        cess memory content. Remarkably, it can learn to perform these operations
        through end-to-end training on sequence data, powering various sequential
        models. Our experiments demonstrate PANM’s exceptional length extrap-
        olating capabilities and improved performance in tasks that require symbol
        processing, such as algorithmic reasoning and Dyck language recognition.
        Additionally, PANM helps Transformer achieve up to 100% generalization
        accuracy in compositional learning tasks and significantly better results in
        mathematical reasoning, question answering and machine translation tasks.


1   Introduction

Systematic generalization underpins intelligence, and it relies on the ability to recognize
abstract rules, extrapolating them to novel contexts that are distinct yet semantically similar
to the seen data. Current neural networks or statistical machine learning fall short of
handling novel data generated by symbolic rules even though they have achieved state-of-
the-art results in various domains. Some approaches can show decent generalization for
single or set input data (Bahdanau et al., 2018; Gao et al., 2020; Webb et al., 2020). Yet,
neural networks in general still fail in sequential symbol processing tasks, even with slight
novelty during inference (Lake and Baroni, 2018; Delétang et al., 2022). For instance, these
models can easily learn to duplicate sequences of 10 items, but they will fail to copy sequences
of 20 items if they were not part of the training data. These models overfit the training
data and perform poorly on out-of-distribution samples such as sequences of greater length
or sequences with novel compositions. The issue also affects big models like Large Language
Models, making them struggle with symbolic manipulation tasks (Qian et al., 2023). This
indicates that current methods lack a principled mechanism for systematic generalization.
From a neuroscience perspective, it has been suggested that the brain can execute symbol
processing through variable binding and neural pointers, wherein the sensory data are con-
ceptualized into symbols that can be assigned arbitrary values (Kriete et al., 2013). Like
the brain, computer programs excel at symbolic computations. Programmers use address
pointers to dynamically access data or programs, and have flexible control over the variable.
Their programs can work appropriately with unseen inputs.
Building on these insights, we propose a pointer-based mechanism to enhance generaliza-
tion to unseen length in sequence prediction, which is a crucial problem that unifies all
computable problems (Solomonoff, 2010). Our mechanism is based on two principles: (I)
explicitly modeling pointers as physical addresses, and (II) strictly isolating pointer ma-
nipulation from input data. As such, we need to design a memory that supports physical
pointers, and create a model that manipulates the pointers to perform abstract rules and


                                               1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                              (c) Pointer-based
                                               Memory Access          (d) Decoding


                                               Mode-1
                   (b) Address Bank            Access


            0001



                    0010


                                      0100
                            0011
                                                                      Controller
                                             Pointer Unit


                                               Mode-2
                                               Access


                   (a) Data Memory



Figure 1: PANM architecture. (a) The data memory contains the encoded input sequence
(b) The address bank contains physical addresses associated with data memory slots. The
base and end addresses (pB , pE ) define the address range of the input sequence. (c) The
Pointer Unit takes pB , pE , recurrently generates the current pointer pat and gets its value ∗ pat
via Mode-1 (red)/2 (green) Access. (d) The Controller takes pointer information, decoding
input (zt = yt− ), and produce the t-th output token yˆt .


access to the memory. Our memory, dubbed Pointer-Augmented Neural Memory (PANM),
is like RAM in Von Neumann architecture (Von Neumann, 1993), which is slot-based, and
each memory slot consists of two components: data and address. Unlike initial endeavors
that implicitly model pointers as attention softmax (Vinyals et al., 2015; Kurach et al.,
2015), our addresses are generated to explicitly simulate physical memory addresses, i.e.,
incremental binary numbers, which is critical for generalization to longer sequences.
To manipulate a pointer, we create an address bank that contains physical addresses cor-
responding to the input sequence, and use a neural network called Pointer Unit that is
responsible for transforming pointers from an initial address in the address bank. Through
attention to the address bank, a new pointer is generated as a mixture of the physical ad-
dresses, which can point to different memory slots to follow the logic of the task. We aim to
let the Pointer Unit learn the symbolic rules of the task in an end-to-end manner. Finally,
given a (manipulated) pointer, the model can access the data through 2 modes of pointer-
based access: pointer dereference (Mode-1) and relational access (Mode-2). Our memory
can be plugged into common encoder-decoder backbones such as LSTM or Transformer.
Our contribution is a novel memory architecture that incorporates explicit pointer and sym-
bol processing, working seamlessly with sequential models to generalize better. We examine
our model in symbol-processing domains such as algorithms and context-free grammar where
PANM effectively works with LSTM and StackRNN. We apply PANM to improve the gen-
eralization of Transformer models on compositional learning, using SCAN and mathematics
datasets. Also, we observe PANM’s superior performance in more realistic question answer-
ing and machine translation tasks. Our focus is not on striving for state-of-the-art results
requiring specialized designs tailored to specific tasks. Our objective is to highlight the
generalization improvement achieved by integrating our memory module into fundamen-
tal sequential models, with minimal architectural changes, and showcase the importance of
using fundamental generalizing principles to address limitations of current deep learning.


2     Methods

2.1   Problem Formulation
                                                                                       l(Xi )
In sequence-to-sequence (s2s) problems, each data point is an input sequence Xi = xit t=1 ,
                                        l(Yi )
associated with a target sequence Yi = yti t=1 where l is a function returning the length of
                                                                                     l(Ŷi )
the sequence. A model Φ takes the input Xi and generates an output sequence Ŷi = ŷti t=1
                                                                                   i
where the predicted sequence terminates as the model outputs a special token ŷt=l(   Ŷ )
                                                                                           =
                                                                                              i


                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


< eos >. Each predicted token is sampled from a categorical distribution, parameterized
by Φ and conditioned on the input sequence and optionally with previous output tokens:
                                               t−1                        t−1
ŷti ∼ pΦ (yt |Xi , yt−
                     i           i
                        ) where yt− can be yki k=1 (true outputs) or ŷki k=1 (predicted outputs)
or even zero, depending on the setting (training
                                                P      or inference).  We train Φ by minimizing
the following cross-entropy loss: L = Ei − t log pΦ (yti |Xi , yt− i
                                                                     ) . We are interested in the
ability to handle inputs of arbitrary length, so we focus on settings in which the length of
testing input sequences is larger than that of training ones: max l(Xi ) < min l(Xj ) with
Xi ∈ Dtrain and Xj ∈ Dtest . In the following sections, when there is no confusion, we will
drop the sample index i or j for ease of reading. We note that autoregression is a special
case of the s2s formulation where the input and output are from the same domain, and the
target sequence is one step ahead of the input sequence.

2.2   Pointer Modeling

Computers are powerful thanks to their ability to manipulate pointers. These pointers
store the address of data in memory. Following C programming language notation, let p
denote a pointer associated with a data d in memory M, then p is also the address of the
memory slot containing d, i.e., p = &d. We can access the data via p as ∗ p = d, which
is also known as pointer dereference. We can manipulate the pointer to execute various
tasks. For example, if the task is to copy the list X to a new list Y , repeating this simple
pointer-based procedure performs correctly regardless of the list length and the values in
X: ∗ &Y = ∗ &X ; &Y = &Y + 1 ; &X = &X + 1 .
In this paper, we propose a way to model pointers by constructing a bank of addresses,
analogous to the addresses in computer architecture. The address bank starts with a base
address pB and increases to form an arithmetic sequence with the common difference of 1.
For example, if the bank has 3 addresses and pB = 3, the addresses are A = {3, 4, 5}. We
represent the address as b-bit binary vectors, so we have A = {0010, 0011, 0100} when b = 4.
The address space is 2b b-bit binary vectors. Given a memory M containing l(M) slots, we
bind each slot to an address in the address bank A such that A[t] = &M[t] and ∗ A[t] = M[t]
(1 ≤ t ≤ l(M)). We use pE as the end address to refer to the final address corresponding to
the last item in M.
The memory M stores the input sequence, and its size depends on the input length: l(M) =
l(X). To enable generalization, the address space should cover a wide range of addresses that
is greater than the sequence length range (i.e., 2b > max l(X)). More importantly, during
training, all possible addresses should be exposed to the model. Otherwise, any unexposed
address will confuse the model when it appears during inference. As such, during training,
we uniformly sample the base address pB from the address space to construct the address
bank A for each sequence memory M. This ensures any address in the address space will
eventually appear between the base and end addresses. See Appendix B for an illustrative
example of the base address sampling mechanism and its complexity.
Given the address bank, we can perform pointer-based procedures to achieve generalization.
To do so, we need pointer variables pt denoting pointers used by the model at timestep
t. As for the copy task, the model outputs correctly by accessing and manipulating the
pointer variables through 3 important pointer operations: pt = A[t] (assignment); ŷti = ∗ pt
(dereference); pt = pt + 1 (arithmetic), which will be described in the next section.

2.3   Pointer-Augmented Neural Memory (PANM)

PANM acts as an external memory module for any neural network to support it handling
sequence data. In such a memory-augmented neural network, a neural Controller (Ctrl)
interacts with the memory (M) to read/write data and make predictions on the output
target. Unlike traditional neural memory, PANM is equipped with an address bank (A) and
a Pointer Unit (PU) to support pointer operations. To simplify memory writing operations,
PANM transforms the whole input sequence X to the memory M in the encoding phase
such that L = l(M) = l(X) using M = Encoderθ (X) where X ∈ Rdx ×L , M ∈ Rdm ×L and
the Encoder, parameterized by θ, can be any neural encoder such as LSTM or Transformer.


                                               3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               b×L
The address bank A ∈ {0, 1}     is then created and bound to M as mentioned in the previous
section. During decoding, the encoded information in M is not changed and the controller
focuses only on reading from M to produce the right output sequence. An overview of PANM
decoding process is given in Fig. 1.

2.3.1   Pointer Unit
At each timestep t of the decoding process, PANM makes use of pointer variables pat , which
are initialized as a valid address in the address space and then updated by the Pointer Unit
PU. In particular, the PU, implemented as an GRU (Chung et al., 2014), takes an address
from A as its initial inputs, e.g., pa0 = pB , and recurrently produces a key hat that performs
address attention to create succeeding pointer variables pat :

                                                                                     !
                                                                   hat gϕa (A[n])
         hat = GRUϕ    pat−1 , hat−1       ; wta [n] = softmax                           ; pat = Awta

                                                                                                        (1)
                                                                 khat k gϕa (A[n])

where ha0 is initialized as 0 and 1 ≤ n ≤ l(X), ϕ denotes the parameter of the PU and g a (·) is
a feed-forward neural network to transform the address to the same space as hat . According
to § 1’s principle I, pat is “softly” assigned a physical address value in the address bank.
Our pointer, pat , offers several advantages over “implicit pointers” made up of the attention
weights (wta ), which are commonly utilized in previous works (Vinyals et al., 2015; Luong
et al., 2015). First, pat is a combination of physical addresses represented by binary numbers,
and therefore its dimension is generally independent of the sequence length. In contrast,
the dimension of wta varies with the input length. Therefore, arithmetic transformations
on pat are easier than on wta . Second, longer testing length poses challenges for traditional
attentions to accurately produce wta pointing to unseen location. Using “physical key” A to
compute wta mitigates this issue by employing random physical address ranges (see § 2.2).
Following § 1’s principle II, the PU recurrently transforms the original pa0 to a series of
              l(Ŷ )
pointers {pat }t=1 suitable for the current task without using input data. This prevents
unseen testing inputs disturb PU’s transformations. In the copy example, an ideal arithmetic
transformation ensure pa0 = pB and pat+1 = pat +1, which performs perfectly for any sequence
whose length ≤ 2b . We aim to learn PU to automatically discover pointer manipulation rules
from the task. As the rules are learned, generalization is achieved even when the testing
sequence is longer or contains novel items.

2.3.2   Pointer-based Addressing Modes
Mode 1 In this mode, the content from memory M is retrieved directly by dereferencing
pointers. To dereference pointer pat , we utilize the A − M binding and the address attention
weight wta , retrieving the pointer value associated with pat as ∗ pat = Mwta . Through this
dereference operator, we can access to arbitrary data in the memory M without relying on
the content of the memory. This property enables robustness in handling new sequence
when the memory content is novel and the process stays the same (e.g., copy a never-seen-
before sequence). Accessing M indirectly via A allows more memory slots to be added to M
during inference without affecting the processing rule as long as the PU can transform the
pointer variable correctly. During training, PU experiences pointer variables covering the
whole address space because the base address is sampled randomly. Hence, it is possible for
PU to correctly transform pointers that point to extended addresses of a growing memory as
long as the pointer manipulation rule does not change. The address attention can be used
                                                                                          Ha
for multiple pointer variables. In this case, there would be multiple pointer units {PUh }h=1
                         n    oH a        n      oH a
responsible for several pat,h       and ∗ pat,h        where H a is the number of attention
                                h=1                h=1
heads. These pointer values will be used by the Controller for other memory reading.
Mode 2 This mode uses a more complicated memory access mechanism to capture relations
between pointers in complicated reasoning tasks. The accessed content is not the one asso-
ciated with the current pointer, but those whose contents are related to the current pointer’s


                                                        4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                PANM (Ours)


Figure 2: Exemplar results on 2 algorithms. (a, b) Test accuracy (mean ± std) over 5
runs on Copy and ID Sort on each length test, respectively. Random predictor would reach
around 10% accuracy. (c,d) Visualization of data and pointer’s slots for Copy and ID Sort,
respectively.

value. As an example, selection sort algorithm may require comparing items in a list with
the Mode-1 pointer’s item to select the greater one. We simulate that using attention with
the query as the current pointer value:



                             ∗ a   Ha
                                                        qt M[n]
             qt = gϕc         pt,h h=1       ; wtc [n] = softmax    ; ∗ pct = Mwtc          (2)
                                                     kqt k kM[n]k
                                                           n      oH a
Here, the pointer attention takes the concatenated values ∗ pat,h         as input, transforms
                                                                                      h=1
them to a query qt using a feed-forward neural network g c (·), and returns the related pointer
value ∗ pct through attention mechanisms on M. Intuitively, the Pointer Unit manipulates the
Mode-1 pointer pat such that it retrieves the desired content pointed by the Mode-2 pointer
                                                                  n     oH c
pct . We can also have multi-head attention, which results in ∗ pct,h         where H c is the
                                                                         h=1
number of attention heads.

2.3.3   The Controller
The Controller Ctrl is responsible for decoding the memory to produce outputs. Unlike
other methods, we have pointer-based memory access to provide the controller with symbol-
processing information. In particular, at the t-th step of the decoding, Ctrl takes the pointer
values (mode 1 and 2) as input together with an optional decoding input (zt = yt− ), and
uses a GRU to recurrently produce the hidden state hct as follows,

                                       h                                     i
                                              ∗ a   Ha            Hc
                         hct = GRUλ            pt,h h=1 , ∗ pct,h h=1 , zt       , hct−1

                                                                                               (3)
where the hidden state hc0 is initialized as i M[i] and λ is the parameters of Ctrl. The GRU
                                                        P
handles content-based input, empowered with pointer information to construct rich hidden
state representations. Furthermore, the pointer-based data give the GRU access to correct
items in the sequence even when the memory content becomes different from the training
due to encountering novel sequence length.
The Controller Ctrl uses the pointer values (mode 1), the related pointer values (mode
2) and the hidden state hct to make the final prediction. It simply concatenates them
and  forward to the g o (·)–a MLP,                                      i
                                         to generate the output token ŷt ∼ pΦ (yt |Xi , zt ) =
      n      oH a n         oH c
       ∗ a
gλo     pt,h      , ∗ pct,h      , hct . The pointer values allow g o to fully utilize pointer
             h=1               h=1
information in producing the final output. Φ consists of the parameters of the Encoderθ ,
Pointer Unit PUϕ and Controller Ctrlλ . Ctrl can be put on top of another decoder to
process the decoding input zt . In some experiments, we use Transformer as the decoder (see
Appendix C and D.3). A summary of PANM’s operation is given in Algo. 1 in Appendix.

                                                              5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            Task           Copy    Reverse    Mix     D. Recall    P. Sort   ID Sort
          Other Max        60.2     63.6      64.0      47.6        60.6       42.1
         PANM (Ours)       74.8     73.6      81.2      52.8        67.8      59.2

Table 1: Algorithmic reasoning: mean sequence-level accuracy (%) over testing lengths
Other Max is selected as the best numbers at each length mode from other baselines.


3     Experimental Results
In our experiments, we use two pointer variables in Mode-1 access and one for Mode-2 to
balance between performance and computing cost (H a = 2, H c = 1, see more in Appendix
C). The two Mode-1 pointer variables are initialized as the base and end addresses. All
MLPs in PANM have 1 hidden layer of 128 dimensions. We use 256-dimensional GRUs for
PU and Ctrl. The memory’s address space has b = 10 bits, corresponding to a maximum of
1024 unique addresses, which is greater than any sequence length in the experiments.
In §3.1-3.3, our chosen tasks are representative of various types of symbolic reasoning and
well-known benchmarks to measure the symbol-processing capability of ML models. To
showcase that these tasks are non-trivial, we report how Chat-GPT failed on our tasks in
Appendix D.6. We validate the contribution of our methods in other practical tasks in §3.4.
We also explain the choice of competing baselines in Appendix D.

3.1   Algorithmic Reasoning

In our first experiment, we study the class of symbol processing problems where an output
sequence is generated by a predefined algorithm applied to any input sequence (e.g., copy
and sort). The tokens in the sequences are symbols from 0 to 9. The input tokens can
be coupled with meta information related to the task such as the priority score in Priority
Sort task. During training, the input sequences have length up to L tokens and can grow
to L + 1, 2(L + 1), 4(L + 1) or 8(L + 1) during testing. Our setting is more challenging
than previous generalization tests on algorithmic reasoning because of four reasons: (1) the
task is 10-class classification, harder than binary prediction in Graves et al. (2014), (2) the
testing data can be eight time longer than the training and the training length is limited to
L ≈ 10, which is harder than Grefenstette et al. (2015), (3) there is no curriculum learning
as in Kurach et al. (2015), and (4) the training label is the one-hot value of the token, which
can be confusing in case one token appears multiple times in the input sequence and tougher
than using label as the index/location of the token as in Vinyals et al. (2015).
Here, we design several tasks. Content-free tasks involve permuting tokens in input
sequence using certain position-based rules: First-In-First-Out (Copy), Last-In-First-Out
(Reverse) and Mix. While the first two rules demand linear pointer manipulations (traverse
the sequence from the head or tail, to output the target token), the last one uses a non-
linear, length-dependent manipulation rule: if t is odd, yt = xd L e ; if t is even, yt = x1 .
                                                                 2
Content-based tasks need the input’s token value together with symbol processing to
arrange the output sequence. We introduce 3 tasks: Dynamic Recall, Priority Sort and ID
Sort. Readers can find the details of these tasks in Appendix D.1.
Baselines are categorized into 4 groups: (1) Traditional RNNs such as LSTM (Hochreiter
and Schmidhuber, 1997), (2) Sequential attention models: Content Attention (Bahdanau
et al., 2014), Location Attention (Luong et al., 2015), Hybrid Attention (our baseline con-
catenates the attention vectors from content and location attention), (3) MANNs such as
NTM (Graves et al., 2014), DNC (Graves et al., 2016), Neural Stack (Grefenstette et al.,
2015) and Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017), and (4) pointer-aware models: NRAM (Ku-
rach et al., 2015), PtrNet (Vinyals et al., 2015), ESBN (Webb et al., 2020) and our method
PANM. In this synthetic experiment, we adopt LSTM as the encoder for PANM. All base-
lines are trained with fixed number of steps (100K for ID Sort and 50K for the rest), which
is enough for the training loss to converge. For each task, each baseline is trained 5 times
with different random seeds and we use the best checkpoint on L + 1 mode validation to
evaluate the baselines.


                                              6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                            SCAN (L cut-off)                             Math
         Task
                    22   24   25     26    27    28     30     32    33    36    40    a.s   p.v
   U. TRM+RPE       20   12   71    100   100    100    100    100   100   100   100   97    75
      TRM+RPE       20   12   31     61   100    100    100    94    100   100   100   91    0
        U. TRM      2    5    14     21    26       0    6     35     0     0     0    94    20
         TRM        0    4    19     29    30       8   24     36     0     0     0    89    12
      PANM (Ours)   22   47   100   100   100    100    100    100   100   100   100   97    86


Table 2: SCAN (Left): Exact match accuracy (%, median of 5 runs) on splits of various
lengths. Mathematics (Right): mean accuracy over 5 runs. The baselines’ numbers are from
Csordás et al. (2021) and we run PANM using the authors’ codebase.


Results We report the average accuracy across different testing length for each task in Table
1. Overall, PANM significantly outperforms the best competitors ranging from 10-20% per
task. Compared with individual baselines, the improvement is much higher (Appendix D.1).
We illustrate how the pointer manipulation works for Copy and ID Sort in Fig. 2c and d.
In Copy, only Mode-1 access is needed. As decoding step t increases, Pointer Unit generates
pat following the increment of the addresses as expected. In ID Sort, both Mode-1 and 2
are needed. The Pointer Unit generates pat incrementally to trace the input tokens from
left to right (Mode 1). Then, the Mode-2 pointer pct is computed via attention to discover
token with the same id, which will be the output at step t. Without Mode-2 access, PANM
certainly fails this task. Experiments with varied number of heads are in Appendix D.5.

3.2     Dyck Language Recognition

Truly understanding the hidden law of context-free grammars such as Dyck (Dn ) is chal-
lenging for neural networks, even those with memory and attention (Yu et al., 2019). The
language consists of strings with balanced pairs of brackets of different types (|1 , |2 ,...,|n ),
generated by the following rules: S → |i S|i with probability p/n or SS with probability q
or   with probability 1 − p − q. Here, p, q are parameter of the language and   is equivalent
to EOS token. We follow the sequence prediction task and datasets in Suzgun et al. (2019)
where the input is an unfinished Dyck string, and the output is the set of possible brackets
for the next token, e.g., for D2 , ([] → ( or ) or [. We follow the authors to enable set
prediction by representing output yt as a multi-hot vector.
We adapt PANM to this autoregression task by masking M to ensure the decoder only see
tokens up to the current decoding step. Since the token set is simple, we do not need to use
any encoder, i.e., raw input tokens are stored in M. The SOTA baseline in this task is SRNN
(Suzgun et al., 2019), an autoregressive model using stack as memory. We use this model as
the decoder to make the setup of PANM close to SRNN. The only difference is that PANM
has Pointer-Based Memory Access (Fig. 1b). To make the task more challenging, we limit
the maximum training length L to 10 (D2 ) and 20 (D3 ) tokens, and the testing lengths are
L + 2, 2L, 4L, 8L. We choose L as minimum numbers such that the model can perform
decently on training data. The standard training and testing sizes are 5000. We train the
models for 5 epochs and evaluate them on the training data at the end of each epoch to
save model checkpoints. We use the best checkpoints for generalization test.
Fig. 4 (left) in Appendix D.2 reports the models’ accuracy for D2 and D3 . Under our extreme
setting, SRNN generalization fades out quickly as test lengths increase, especially for D3
whereas PANM performance degradation happens at a much slower rate, outperforming
SRNN by around 20% on average in both tasks at any test lengths.

3.3     Compositional Learning

SCAN In this task , one needs to map an input sentence into an output sequence of
commands (Lake and Baroni, 2018). The sequences are compositional, consisting of reusable
parts. For example, in one case, “jump twice” should be mapped to “JUMP JUMP” and in
another, “walk twice” becomes “WALK WALK”. We focus on the “length split” datasets where
the training sequences are shorter than the test ones with 11 length modes L = 22, 24, .., 40


                                                7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(Newman et al., 2020). We adopt the benchmark, training procedure and baselines prepared
by Csordás et al. (2021), which achieves strong results under standard s2s learning. Here,
our aim is not to break SOTA, which can be achieve by hybrid-symbolic architectures (Chen
et al., 2020; Shaw et al., 2021). Instead, we focus on improving Transformer generalization in
this task, hence the baselines are chosen as several variants of Transformers (TRM) targeted
to sequence extrapolation, including those using Relative Positional Encoding (RPE (Dai
et al., 2019)) and Universal Transformer (U. TRM (Dehghani et al., 2018)), which is an
advanced Transformer variant that recurrently processes each token, and can dynamically
adjust the number of processing steps. Following Csordás et al. (2021), each baseline is
trained 5 times for 50K steps and the resulting model after training is used for evaluation
(no validation). Here, we use Transformer as the Encoder, which is the same as the TRM,
and stack the Controller to another Transform decoder (see details in Appendix D.3). Hence,
the only difference is the decoding where PANM leverages pointer manipulation.
Table 2 shows that PANM outperforms other baselines in the hardest settings when the
training length is up-to 22, 24, and 25. For 22 and 24 cases, general models like PANM
cannot show perfect generalization because some testing compositions is entirely discarded
from the train set. In easier settings, PANM shares the perfect median accuracy with the
sophisticated U. TRM + RPE although it does not use RPE. Remarkably, despite sharing
the same encoder, TRM performs much worse than PANM and even fails to learn in easy
modes (33, 36, 40), indicating the importance of pointer handling in this testbed. One
problem for other baselines is the EOS decision (when to generate ending token), which
requires length tracking (Newman et al., 2020). As they do not have content-free sequence
iteration mechanisms, it is extremely hard to trace the length without overfitting to the
training data. On the other hand, PANM can hypothetically generate pointer incrementally
and capture the difference between the last and the first pointers, i.e. the input length, and
infer the output sequence length based on that information.
Mathematical Problems We also test our model on mathematics (Saxton et al.,
2018) where the input/output are questions and answers about math and each to-
ken is a character. For example, What is − 5 − 110911? → −110916 (add or sub) and
What is the hundreds digit of 31253? → 2 (place value). The task requires not only
math reasoning, but also natural language understanding. We follow the training
from Csordás et al. (2021) to conduct experiments on 2 subsets: add or sub (a.s) and
place value (p.v), and compare our method with Transformer-based baselines. Here, we
focus on the extrapolating test set involving larger numbers, more numbers, more composi-
tions, and thus longer input sequences than the training. In this experiment, we use TRM
+ RPE as the Encoder. The Controller is added to a normal TRM decoder. As shown
in Table 2, on place value, PANM does not suffer from performance crash as TRM +
RPE (0% test accuracy, as admitted in the paper (Csordás et al., 2021) even though it
uses the same encoder). PANM achieves similar results as U. TRM+ RPE on add or sub
while outperforming it by 11% on place value. We also examine PANM with the original
Transformer and report additional results in Appendix D.3.

3.4   Other NLP Tasks

Question Answering Our objective is to explore the PANM’s generalization beyond ob-
viously compositional data by applying it in a more practical setting of question answering.
For this purpose, we utilize two datasets, namely bAbI (Weston et al., 2015) and SQUAD
1.1 (Rajpurkar et al., 2016) where the input sequence is a context paragraph and a question,
and the output is the answer. To add complexity to the task, we ensure the length of test
sequence is greater than that of the training by sorting the context paragraph by length
and splitting the sorted data into 0.8/0.2 and 0.5/0.5 ratio. Details of the data/task are
in Appendix D.4. In bAbI, we configure the PANM similarly to the one described in §
3.3 using Transformer backbone, and test the models after 100-epoch training. The models
predict the answer tokens given the context and question tokens. As shown in Appendix
Fig. 4 (right), PANM helps Transformer generalize better, consistently improving around
6% and 5% using 0.8/0.2 and 0.5/0.5 splits, respectively. Notably, PANM’s testing loss is
not diverged quickly as Transformer’s, indicating PANM’s capability of reducing overfitting.
In SQUAD, we use BERT as the backbone to predict the start and the end of the answer


                                              8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


as in Kenton and Toutanova (2019). PANM-assisted model outperforms the baselines by
1% and 2% exact match accuracy, respectively (Appendix Table 13). The improvement is
significant as BERT is already pretrained with big data and robust against novel test data.
Machine Translation Here, we want to verify the PANM in machine translation and show
that PANM can work with different number layers of Transformer. The results are presented
in Appendix Fig 8 where we report the model perplexity on Multi30K (en-de) dataset. The
30K-sample dataset is sorted by input length and split into training and testing s.t. testing
sequences are longer, similar to QA task. The results demonstrate PANM can consistently
improve the generalization performance of Transformer across different split ratios and the
number of encoder/decoder layers.

4   Related works
There are many attempts to augment neural networks with external memory (MANN)
to improve their symbol-processing ability. Pioneers such as NTM (Graves et al., 2014)
and DNC (Graves et al., 2016) propose computer-like memory read/write operations with
content-based attention mechanisms, and thus in principle, can execute any symbolic rules.
However, learning the hidden law end-to-end from sequence data is extremely difficult.
Therefore, MANNs including Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017), may fail miserably in
out-of-distribution testbeds, especially length extrapolation (Delétang et al., 2022). Recent
LLMs are good at reasoning and generalization, but bad at symbolic processing (Qian et al.,
2023; Tang et al., 2023). We use LLMs only to show our task difficulty (Appendix D.6), not
as a baseline, because they are not on the same scale as our method.
Many recent works advocate the use of specialized memory architectures such as stacks
(Grefenstette et al., 2015; Hao et al., 2018; Suzgun et al., 2019), key-value memory (Webb
et al., 2020; Le et al., 2020a) and improved attentions (Kurach et al., 2015; Russin et al.,
2019; Dubois et al., 2020). These methods employ different inductive biases in designing
the memory and attention, yet not following the two principles advocated by our paper.
Although they may work remarkably on certain synthetic tasks, they are not examined on
various benchmarks or compatible with different sequential backbones. Other orthogonal
approaches focus on model initialization (Zhang et al., 2019), data augmentation (Andreas,
2020) or training details (Csordás et al., 2021). Besides differentiable models, there are
major progress in compositional rule learning that leverage neuro-symbolic architectures
(Nye et al., 2020; Shaw et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2020) or reinforcement learning (Liu et al.,
2020). We have not compared our model with these task-specific methods, as our focus is
on improving the systematic generalization of fundamental differentiable models.
Our approach is mainly related to key-value memory because the address bank can be
viewed as the key and the data memory as the value. However, the key in other works
is either learned through backpropagation (Le et al., 2020a) or computed based on the
input data (Webb et al., 2020). In contrast, our “keys” are generated as fixed numbers
(physical memory addresses– § 1’s principle I), which is totally separated from the data and
extendable to longer sequences. We argue that using addresses as keys is critical to symbol
processing because it explicitly allows pointer assignment, dereference and arithmetic. A
related generalization-enable scheme is to design positional encoding of tokens in a sequence
(Vaswani et al., 2017; Dai et al., 2019; Li and McClelland, 2022). Unlike these approaches,
our physical addresses are detached from the data to support transforming pointers through
time steps and isolating pointer manipulation from the input.

5   Discussion
We introduce a neural memory model called PANM that manipulates pointers to learn sym-
bol processing rules for better length extrapolation. PANM isolates symbols from data and
uses an address bank to allow data-isolated pointer manipulation through address attention.
PANM consistently outperforms strong baselines in tasks such as algorithm mining, compo-
sitional learning, mathematics reasoning, context-free grammar recognition, and practical
NLP tasks, even when the test sequence is much longer than the training sequence.


                                              9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ethics Statement In this work, we used the publicly available datasets for experiments.
We did not collect human or animal data during this study. Our work aims to improve
the generalization of sequential models. This aim is genuine, and we do not think there
are immediate harmful consequences. However, we are aware of potential problems if our
method is used to augment large language models to generate texts that are hallucinated or
contain negative contents. This issue is typical for plug-and-play modules like PANM, and
we will do our best to prevent it from our end.

Reproducibility Statement In the Appendix, we included our detailed model descrip-
tions, algorithms, implementations, hyperparameters to replicate the results of our experi-
ments. Source code will be released when the paper is published.

References
Jacob Andreas. Good-enough compositional data augmentation. In Proceedings of the 58th
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 7556–7566, 2020.
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Neural machine translation by
  jointly learning to align and translate. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.0473, 2014.
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Shikhar Murty, Michael Noukhovitch, Thien Huu Nguyen, Harm
  de Vries, and Aaron Courville. Systematic generalization: What is required and can
  it be learned? In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Xinyun Chen, Chen Liang, Adams Wei Yu, Dawn Song, and Denny Zhou. Compositional
  generalization via neural-symbolic stack machines. Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, 33:1690–1701, 2020.
Junyoung Chung, Caglar Gulcehre, KyungHyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Empirical
  evaluation of gated recurrent neural networks on sequence modeling. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.3555, 2014.
Róbert Csordás, Kazuki Irie, and Jürgen Schmidhuber.       The devil is in the de-
  tail: Simple tricks improve systematic generalization of transformers. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2108.12284, 2021.
Zihang Dai, Zhilin Yang, Yiming Yang, Jaime G Carbonell, Quoc Le, and Ruslan Salakhut-
  dinov. Transformer-xl: Attentive language models beyond a fixed-length context. In
  Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
  pages 2978–2988, 2019.
Mostafa Dehghani, Stephan Gouws, Oriol Vinyals, Jakob Uszkoreit, and Lukasz Kaiser.
 Universal transformers. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Grégoire Delétang, Anian Ruoss, Jordi Grau-Moya, Tim Genewein, Li Kevin Wenliang,
  Elliot Catt, Marcus Hutter, Shane Legg, and Pedro A Ortega. Neural networks and the
  chomsky hierarchy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.02098, 2022.
Yann Dubois, Gautier Dagan, Dieuwke Hupkes, and Elia Bruni. Location attention for
  extrapolation to longer sequences. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 403–413, 2020.
Aaron Eisermann, Jae Hee Lee, Cornelius Weber, and Stefan Wermter. Generalization in
  multimodal language learning from simulation. In 2021 International Joint Conference
  on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pages 1–8. IEEE, 2021.
Tong Gao, Qi Huang, and Raymond Mooney. Systematic generalization on gscan with
  language conditioned embedding. In Proceedings of the 1st Conference of the Asia-Pacific
  Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 10th International Joint
  Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 491–503, 2020.
Alex Graves, Greg Wayne, and Ivo Danihelka. Neural turing machines. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1410.5401, 2014.


                                            10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alex Graves, Greg Wayne, Malcolm Reynolds, Tim Harley, Ivo Danihelka, Agnieszka
  Grabska-Barwińska, Sergio Gómez Colmenarejo, Edward Grefenstette, Tiago Ramalho,
  John Agapiou, et al. Hybrid computing using a neural network with dynamic external
  memory. Nature, 538(7626):471–476, 2016.
Edward Grefenstette, Karl Moritz Hermann, Mustafa Suleyman, and Phil Blunsom. Learn-
  ing to transduce with unbounded memory. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 28, 2015.
Yiding Hao, William Merrill, Dana Angluin, Robert Frank, Noah Amsel, Andrew Benz, and
  Simon Mendelsohn. Context-free transductions with neural stacks. EMNLP 2018, page
  306, 2018.
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural computation,
  9(8):1735–1780, 1997.
Jennifer Hu, Jon Gauthier, Peng Qian, Ethan Wilcox, and Roger P Levy. A system-
  atic assessment of syntactic generalization in neural language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2005.03692, 2020.
Jacob Devlin Ming-Wei Chang Kenton and Lee Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of
  deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of NAACL-
  HLT, pages 4171–4186, 2019.
Trenton E. Kriete, David C. Noelle, Jonathan D. Cohen, and Randall C. OâReilly. Indirec-
  tion and symbol-like processing in the prefrontal cortex and basal ganglia. Proceedings of
  the National Academy of Sciences, 110:16390 – 16395, 2013.
Karol Kurach, Marcin Andrychowicz, and Ilya Sutskever. Neural random-access machines.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06392, 2015.
Brenden Lake and Marco Baroni. Generalization without systematicity: On the composi-
  tional skills of sequence-to-sequence recurrent networks. In International conference on
  machine learning, pages 2873–2882. PMLR, 2018.
Brenden M Lake. Compositional generalization through meta sequence-to-sequence learning.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Hung Le, Truyen Tran, and Svetha Venkatesh. Neural stored-program memory. In Interna-
 tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2020a. URL https://openreview.net/
 forum?id=rkxxA24FDr.
Hung Le, Truyen Tran, and Svetha Venkatesh. Self-attentive associative memory. In
 Hal DaumÃ© III and Aarti Singh, editors, Proceedings of the 37th International Con-
 ference on Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
 pages 5682–5691, Virtual, 13–18 Jul 2020b. PMLR.
Yuxuan Li and James McClelland. Systematic generalization and emergent structures in
  transformers trained on structured tasks. In NeurIPS ’22 Workshop on All Things At-
  tention: Bridging Different Perspectives on Attention, 2022. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=BTNaKmYdQmE.
Qian Liu, Shengnan An, Jian-Guang Lou, Bei Chen, Zeqi Lin, Yan Gao, Bin Zhou, Nan-
  ning Zheng, and Dongmei Zhang. Compositional generalization by learning analytical
  expressions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:11416–11427, 2020.
Minh-Thang Luong, Hieu Pham, and Christopher D Manning. Effective approaches to
 attention-based neural machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.04025, 2015.
Benjamin Newman, John Hewitt, Percy Liang, and Christopher D. Manning. The eos
  decision and length extrapolation. In BlackBoxNLP@EMNLP, 2020. URL https://nlp.
  stanford.edu/pubs/newman2020extrapolation.pdf.


                                            11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Maxwell Nye, Armando Solar-Lezama, Josh Tenenbaum, and Brenden M Lake. Learn-
 ing compositional rules via neural program synthesis. Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 33:10832–10842, 2020.
Jing Qian, Hong Wang, Zekun Li, Shiyang Li, and Xifeng Yan. Limitations of language
  models in arithmetic and symbolic induction. In Anna Rogers, Jordan L. Boyd-Graber,
  and Naoaki Okazaki, editors, Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), ACL 2023, Toronto, Canada,
  July 9-14, 2023, pages 9285–9298. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2023. doi:
  10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.516. URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.
  516.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and Percy Liang. Squad: 100,000+
  questions for machine comprehension of text. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 2383–2392, 2016.
Jake Russin, Jason Jo, Randall C O’Reilly, and Yoshua Bengio. Compositional general-
  ization in a deep seq2seq model by separating syntax and semantics. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1904.09708, 2019.
David Saxton, Edward Grefenstette, Felix Hill, and Pushmeet Kohli. Analysing mathe-
  matical reasoning abilities of neural models. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2018.
Peter Shaw, Ming-Wei Chang, Panupong Pasupat, and Kristina Toutanova. Compositional
  generalization and natural language variation: Can a semantic parsing approach handle
  both? In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
  (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 922–938, 2021.
Ray J Solomonoff. Algorithmic probability, heuristic programming and agi. In 3d Conference
  on Artificial General Intelligence (AGI-2010), pages 57–63. Atlantis Press, 2010.
Mirac Suzgun, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yonatan Belinkov, and Stuart M Shieber. Memory-
 augmented recurrent neural networks can learn generalized dyck languages. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:1911.03329, 2019.
Xiaojuan Tang, Zilong Zheng, Jiaqi Li, Fanxu Meng, Song-Chun Zhu, Yitao Liang, and
  Muhan Zhang. Large language models are in-context semantic reasoners rather than
  symbolic reasoners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14825, 2023.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural infor-
  mation processing systems, 30, 2017.
Oriol Vinyals, Meire Fortunato, and Navdeep Jaitly. Pointer networks. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 28, 2015.
John Von Neumann. First draft of a report on the edvac. IEEE Annals of the History of
  Computing, 15(4):27–75, 1993.
Taylor Whittington Webb, Ishan Sinha, and Jonathan Cohen. Emergent symbols through
  binding in external memory. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2020.
Jason Weston, Antoine Bordes, Sumit Chopra, Alexander M Rush, Bart Van Merriënboer,
  Armand Joulin, and Tomas Mikolov. Towards ai-complete question answering: A set of
  prerequisite toy tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.05698, 2015.
Bo Wu, Haoyu Qin, Alireza Zareian, Carl Vondrick, and Shih-Fu Chang. Analogical reason-
  ing for visually grounded language acquisition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.11668, 2020.
Greg Yang. Lie access neural turing machine. arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.08671, 2016.


                                            12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xiang Yu, Ngoc Thang Vu, and Jonas Kuhn. Learning the dyck language with attention-
  based seq2seq models. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACL Workshop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing
  and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP, pages 138–146, 2019.
Biao Zhang, Ivan Titov, and Rico Sennrich. Improving deep transformer with depth-scaled
  initialization and merged attention. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on
  Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 898–909, 2019.


                                           13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Appendix
A   More Discussion on Related Works

The proposed address attention in our paper is comparable to two known mechanisms: (1)
location-based attention (Luong et al., 2015; Dubois et al., 2020) and (2) memory shifting
(Graves et al., 2014; Yang, 2016). The former uses neural networks to produce attention
weights to the memory/sequence, which cannot help when the memory grows during infer-
ence since the networks never learn to generate weights for the additional slots. Inspired
by Turing Machine, the latter aims to shift the current attention weight associated with a
memory slot to the next or previous slot. Shifting-like operations can handle any sequence
length. However, it cannot simulate complicated manipulation rules. Unlike our PU design
which obeys § 1’s principle II, the attention weight and the network trained to shift it de-
pend on the memory content M. That is detrimental to generalization since new content can
disturb both the attention weight and the shifting network as the memory grows.
Another line of works tackles systematic generalization through meta-learning training
(Lake, 2019), while our method employs standard supervised training. These approaches
are complementary, with our method concentrating on enhancing model architecture rather
than training procedures, making it applicable in diverse settings beyond SCAN tasks. Ad-
ditionally, the study by Hu et al. (2020) addresses syntactic generalization (Hu et al., 2020),
a different problem compared to our paper, which emphasizes length extrapolation across
various benchmarks. Notably, our paper considers similar baselines, such as LSTM and
Transformer, as those examined in the referenced papers. There are other lines of research
targeting reasoning and generalization using image input(Wu et al., 2020; Eisermann et al.,
2021). They are outside the scope of our paper, which specifically addresses generalization
for longer sequences of text or discrete inputs
Our address bank and physical pointers can be viewed as some form of positional encoding.
However, we do not use simple projections or embeddings to force the attention to be
position-only. Instead, we aim to learn a series of transformations that simulate the position-
based symbolic rules. At each time step, a new pointer ("position") is dynamically generated
that reflects the manipulation rule required by the task (e.g. move to the next location),
which is unlike the positional encoding approaches such as RPE (Dai et al., 2019) which aims
to provide the model with information on the relative position or distance of the timesteps.
We summarise the difference between our method and Transformer in Table 3.

B   More Discussion on Base Address Sampling Mechanism

We provide a simple example to illustrate how base address sampling help in generalization.
Assume the training sequence length is 10, and the desired manipulation is p0 = p + 1 (copy
task). Assume the possible address range is 0, 1, ..., 19, which is bigger than any sequence
length. If pB = 0 , the training address bank contains addresses: 0, 1, ...8, 9. Without base
address sampling, the model always sees the training address bank of 0, 1, ...8, 9 and thus
can only learn manipulating function for 0 ≤ p ≤ 9, thereby failing when testing address
bank includes addresses larger than 9.
Thanks to base address sampling, at some point of training, pB = 10 , the training address
bank is 10, 11, ...13, 19. The manipulating function sees p > 9 and can learn to transform
p0 = p + 1 for p > 9, e.g., transform p = 10 → p0 = 11. The learning happens because the
pointer’s value (∗ p) is used to predict the output sequence. The task loss will reward ∗ p
that follows the rule, and update the Pointer Unit such that it transforms the p following
the rule to minimize the loss. During testing, the input length can be 12, we set pB = 0 and
the address bank is 0, 1, ...., 10, 11. The learned manipulation can still be applied to new
locations 10th, and 11th.
We can prove that the complexity of exposing all addresses to the model is practically small
compared to the normal training. Assume the training input sequence length is L, and the
number of possible addresses is Lmax . Here, Lmax indicates the possible testing length that
the model can handle. When Lmax → ∞ , the expected number of samples required for
exposing all addresses is O (n log n) where n = Lmax /L (we can formulate this problem as


                                              14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Difference                       Transformer                              PANM (Our)
       Key             Keys are computed based on input             The keys in our approach are
    Generation          data. Hence, when meeting novel              generated as fixed numbers,
                         data during testing, Transformer            specifically physical memory
                       will observe novel keys, and cannot        addresses. These keys are entirely
                                    work properly.                      separate from the data.
    Extendable         The dimension of attention weights               The fixed nature of our
     to Longer          varies with input length, making               physical addresses allows
    Sequences             arithmetic transformations on                our pointers to be easily
                        these attention weights infeasible           manipulated and extendable
                         as the sequence length increases.                to longer sequences.
     Symbol                The use of attention weights            Using physical addresses as keys
    Processing            as implicit pointers may lack         in our approach is crucial for symbol
    Advantages               the explicitness needed for           processing as it explicitly allows
                            effective symbol processing.           pointer assignment, dereference,
                                                                      and arithmetic operations.
 Physical Address     Positional encoding can be generated            Our physical addresses are
  vs Positional        independently from data. However,         detached from the data, supporting
    Encoding          they are not separated from the input         the transformation of pointers
                      data as our physical addresses. There        through timesteps and isolating
                            is no explicit mechanism in               pointer manipulation from
                       Transformer to attend only to these                     the input.
                       positional encodings or to transform
                       pointers to point to these positional
                       encodings from one step to another.

                                Table 3: PANM vs Transformer


Coupon collector’s problem). For example, in even an extreme address range of Lmax = 106
(in practice we rarely need that big range) to train input sequences of length 10, we only need
to sample 105 log 105 sequences, which is often smaller than the size of the training datasets.
Empirically, in our experiments, we always train our method with the same number of batch
size and training steps as other baselines to ensure a fair comparison, and we realize that it
is always possible to expose all the addresses to our model during training.


C   More Discussion on Model and Architecture
                                                                    n       oH a
We can see that it is critical to have H a ≥ 2 and pB , pE ∈          pa0,h        to achieve general-
                                                                             h=1
                                                                              a
                                                                    n      oH
ization using pointer arithmetic. In other words, if pB , pE ∈    / pa0,h        , we can always find
                                                                         n h=1oH a
a task to make PANM fail to generalize. For example, if pE ∈          / pa0,h         , PANM cannot
                                                                                  h=1
generalize in Reverse task. To see that, without loss of generality, we assume PANM only
learn to produce the last token at address pE using information from some initial addresses
      n     oH a
p0 ∈ pa0,h        such that p0 6= pE . During training, the learned pointer arithmetic to per-
              h=1
form Reverse at the first step of the decoding to produce value y1 can only be a function of
p0 : y1 = ∗ pE =∗ f (p0 ), that is, pE = f (p0 ). During testing, pE can receive arbitrary value, so
for whatever learned f , we can always find a test sequence such that pE 6= f (p0 ) ∀f because
pE 6= p0 . A similar argument can be used for pB and Copy task.
In the main manuscript, we only experiment with 1 Mode-2 pointer (H c = 1). If H c = 0,
obviously PANM will fail in tasks such as ID Sort. Using more H c and H a can still be
beneficial in exchange for slower computation (see Appendix D.5). In all experiments, we
use 256-dimensional GRUs for the PU and Ctrl. The encoder and decoder (to stack the
Controller on) can vary across tasks. The general plug-and-play framework is illustrated in
Fig. 3. We also summarize operations of our model in Algo. 1.


                                                 15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                 OUTPUT SEQUENCE


                 PANM                                                       PANM
                                                 PANM CONTROLLER
                MEMORY                                                      Module


                                                                           Backbone
                ENCODER                               DECODER
                                                                            Model


            INPUT SEQUENCE


Figure 3: PANM as a plug-and-play architecture. The encoder and decoder can be any
model (LSTM, Transformer or BERT). PANM Controller can be used as the last layer of
the Decoder to access the memory during decoding. To reduce the number of parameters
of the augmented architecture, the decoder’s number of layers can be decreased.


D   Experimental Details


All the datasets and public codebases use Apache or MIT License. We trained all the models
using a single GPU Tesla V100-SXM2. The running time of PANM depends on the Encoder
and tasks. Overall, with 2 Mode-1 pointers and 1 Mode-2 pointer, PANM’s speed will be
70-80% compared to the backbone model. For example, in Copy task, PANM’s speed is 15
iterations/s while LSTM’s is 20 iterations/s. If PANM uses Transformer Encoder, its speed
is 77 iterations/s while Transformer’s is 90 iterations/s.
Baseline Choice Although our baselines are classic, they are still very strong baselines
in our studied tasks. For example, in our algorithmic reasoning, LSTM with attention or
Pointer Networks are still dominant baselines, outperforming the more recent Transformer.
In Dyck recognition, stack-based models are still SOTA because their inductive bias is
suitable for the task. Experiments in Sec. 3 adopt (Universal) Transformer+RPE, which
is a recent and strong Transformer variant focusing on generalization. There are also other
sophisticated methods focusing generalization (Webb et al., 2020).
In our experiments, PANM is ensured to have similar model size as the baselines and often
built on top of similar backbones for fair comparison. We believe it is still important to
improve fundamental baselines such as Transformers or LSTM because they are the building
blocks of many practical applications including recent Large Language Models (LLMs). In
this paper, we prove the improvement of these fundamental blocks, and in future works, we
will extend our ideas to more advanced backbones such as LLMs.


                                            16
    Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Algorithm 1 PANM training. To simplify, we assume the batch size and number of pointer
     heads of one.
     Input: A dataset of sequence pairs D = {Xi , Yi }N i=1 , initial Φ containing the parameters
                                                          data

              of the Encoderθ , Pointer Unit PUϕ and Controller Ctrlλ , b representing the number
              of bits of the address space, Ldec being the maximum number of decoding steps,
              and function l measuing the length of a sequence.
     Ouput: Φ∗ , trained parameters.
   1 for {Xi , Yi } ∼ D do
        /* Construct the memory                                                                */
   2    M = Encoderθ (Xi )
        /* Sample base address.            During testing, pB can be set to 0                  */
                                 b
   3    pB ∼ Uniform {0, 1}
        /* Generate the address                                                                */
   4    for j = 0, 1, ..., l(M) − 1 do
   5        A[j] = (pB + j) mod 2b
   6    end
        /* Decode with pointers                                                                */
   7    for t = 0, 1, ..., Ldec do
   8        Use PUϕ and A to compute pat using Eq. 1
   9        Use M and pat to compute pointer values ∗ pat (Mode 1) and ∗ pct (Mode 2) (see §2.3.2)
 10         Use Ctrλ and pointer values to compute pΦ (yt |Xi , zt ) (see §2.3.3)
 11         ŷti = argmaxyt pΦ (yt |Xi , zt )
 12         if ŷti is eos then
 13               break
 14         end
15        end
          /* Compute cross-entropy loss                                                          */
                                              i
                   P
16        L = − t log pΦ (yt = Yi [t]|Xi , yt− )
17        Use L to update Φ through backpropagation
18    end


    D.1   Algorithmic Reasoning
    We first give the details of the content-based tasks below.
    In Dynamic Recall, an arbitrary input token is chosen as the query and is added to the
    end of the input sequence. Depending on the length of the input, a.k.a, odd or even, the first
    target token will be on the left or right of the query, following its succeeding tokens in the
    input. This task requires both content matching (find query token in the input sequence)
    and position-based access (shift left or right).
    In Priority Sort, each input token is associated with a priority score sampled from the
    standard normal distribution. The target output will be tokens from the input sequence
    sorted ascending by their the score. This task can be solved in many ways and likely needs
    complicated symbol processing such as looping through items in the sequence and comparing
    the score of tokens.
    Finally, in ID Sort, each input token is augmented with an id feature vector sampled
    from standard multivariate normal distribution such that every 2 tokens share one id. For
    example, with input x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 , x1 and x4 may share one id while x2 and x3 shares
    another id. The pairing is chosen randomly. The output token at position i-th will be
    the input token that share id with the i-th input token. The correct output for the earlier
    example is x4 , x3 , x2 , x1 . This task is specifically designed to test the ability to learn Mode
    2 pointer-based memory access.
    In this task, we implement the baselines such as LSTM, attention models and Transformer
    using Pytorch library. The hidden state dimension for these models are set to 512, which
    results in around 1-3 millions parameters. We tuned the number of layers of the en-
    coder/decoder for these baselines in Copy task, and realized that 1-layer gave the best


                                                    17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


performance. For NTM and DNC, we use public repositories1 with default controller’s
hidden state of 256 dimensions and 128-slot external memory, which results in around 1.2
millions parameters. We use the ESBN’s author codebase 2 with default parameter setting,
resulting in ≈1.2 million parameters. For PtrNet, since we do not use token index as the
training label, we produce the predicted token by performing weighted sum the input tokens
using the PtrNet’s attention weights. PtrNet’s hyperparameters are the same as attention
models. We could not find the authors’ code for Neural Stack and NRAM so we implemented
them and tuned hyperparameters for the Copy task at length L such that the model sizes
are about 1.1 million parameters. In this task PANM uses LSTM with hidden state of 256
as the Encoder and does not stack the Controller on any decoder models, resulting in ≈1.1
million parameters.
In this experiment, all the models are trained without teacher forcing as in Graves et al.
(2014), i.e, the input to the decoder is zero (zt = 0). The detailed average accuracy (mean
± std.) of each method together with the actual length of each testing mode are reported
in Tables 5-10.
Overall, PANM observes significant improvement ranging from 10-20% on each task. We
note that when compared with individual baselines, the improvement is much higher. Con-
sider Copy as an example (Fig. 2a), PANM outperforms the worst baseline Transformer by
around 60% at 2(L+1) and 30% at 4(L+1), respectively. As stated earlier that our tasks are
challenging, thus, originally strong baselines such as NTM, DNC, and Neural Stack do not
generalize well at extreme lengths, especially in ID Sort. ID Sort is trickier than content-free
tasks, making some baselines fail at length L even though it is in the training data. The best
other model in this case is Content Attention, which clearly underperforms our PANM from
few % to 50% (Fig. 2b). Without curriculum learning and under the 10-class prediction
setting, methods that use implicit pointers, such as PtrNet, NRAM, and ESBN, demon-
strate mediocre performance on average when compared to PANM. Furthermore, PANM
also outperforms in length-dependent tasks (Mix, D. Recall), indicating that it can track
the sequence length in extrapolation. We hypothesize that PANM’s content–free pointer
generation mechanism to simulate list iteration makes it possible.
In Copy, only Mode-1 access is needed. As decoding step t increases, Pointer Unit generates
pat following the increment of the addresses as expected. That said, for several steps, the
address attention is not sharp, showing other addresses pointed by the pointer, which is
not surprising since we use soft attention and it is hard for a neural network to learn the
exact rule: pat+1 = pat + 1. This problem gets worse as test length increases as the error
accumulates, especially when the same token can appear many times, which confuses the
model. This explains why PANM’s performance drops clearly in the hardest case 8(L + 1).
Yet, it is still significantly better than others whose results are near random prediction.

D.2    Dyck Language Recognition
In this task, we adopt the SRNN code from Suzgun et al. (2019)3 using the default param-
eters. As explained in the main text, this task is auto-regression, hence, zt = ŷt−1 . PANM
adopts SRNN (an auto-regressive model) as the encoder and does not stack the Controller
on any decoder models. The result is visualized in Fig. 4 (left).

D.3    Conpositional Learning
In this task, we adopt the code from Csordás et al. (2021)4 using the default parameters.
When using Transformer Encoder, we need to have Transformer-like decoder to align the
token representation of the encoding and decoding phases. As such, in SCAN, we utilize
the 3-layer Transformer decoder, replace its last layer by the Controller. Formally, zt in
Eq. 3 becomes Decoder(yt− ) where the Decoder is a 2-layer Transformer. In Mathematics
reasoning task, we use similar integration except that the Encoder is Transformer with
   1
     https://github.com/thaihungle/SAM
   2
     https://github.com/taylorwwebb/emergent_symbols
   3
     https://github.com/suzgunmirac/marnns
   4
     https://github.com/RobertCsordas/transformer_generalization


                                              18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: Dyck (Left): mean ± std. accuracy over 5 runs with different testing lengths.
bAbI QA (Right): mean ± std. testing accuracy and cross-entropy loss across 100 training
epochs over 5 runs.
                   40                       60                                                     100
                                                                                                                             Mean
                   30                                                80                             80                       M e d ia n
  Ac c u r a c y


                                            40                                                                               r u n -1
                                                                     60                             60
                   20                                                                                                        r u n -2
                                                                     40                             40                       r u n -3
                                            20
                   10                                                                                                        r u n -4
                                                                     20                             20
                                                                                                                             r u n -5
                    0
                                     L=22    0
                                                              L=24    0                     L=25     0
                                                                                                                      L=26
                        0   20K      40K         0   20K      40K         0        20K      40K          0   20K      40K
                              Step                     Step                          Step                      Step


                                       Figure 5: SCAN: PANM’s exemplar learning curves.


relative positional encoding (TRM + RPE). By reducing the number of decoding layer,
we ensure PANM’s hyperparameter number equivalent to that of the Transformer baseline
(12M). All models are trained with teacher forcing as in Csordás et al. (2021).
SCAN The training size is 16990 and the test size is 3920. SCAN is a well-known and stan-
dard benchmark for testing compositional learning and generalization in sequential models.
One property of this dataset is that a new length often contains new rules that must be
captured by the model to ensure generalization, and thus, if the model fails to learn a hid-
den rule, its performance may drop significantly from one length split to another. Fig. 5
illustrates PANM’s testing accuracy curves when L = 22, 24, 25, 26. Other learning curves
for L > 26 looks similar to L = 26 where PANM easily solves the task perfectly.
Mathematical Problems Table 11 reports the accuracy with mean and standard devi-
ation. Here, we augment TRM and TRM+RPE with PANM. Both shows improvement,
especially for TRM+RPE, indicating that PANM is compatible with other methods de-
signed to improve generalization in Transformer.

D.4                     Other NLP Tasks
The bAbI dataset consists of 20 synthetic tasks that evaluate various reasoning skills. To
prepare the data for each task, we combine train/valid/test into a single set and sort it by
length and split it into training and testing sets, as described in the main text. We train the
models jointly on all 20 tasks and measure the accuracy of their answers, which are consid-
ered correct only if they match the ground truth answer perfectly. The training/evaluation
follows exactly the standard protocol presented in (Le et al., 2020b). The Transformer used
here has 8 heads, 3 layers of encoding, 3 layers of decoding, and hidden dimensions of 512.
PANM uses the same Transformer backbone except that the decoder has 2 layers to make
the model size equivalent. We run each model 5 times to report the mean and standard
deviation as in Fig. 4 (right). Table 12 reports the detailed numbers.
The SQUAD dataset contains more than 100K realistic context/question-answer pairs.
Again, we combine train/test into a single set and sort it by length and split into new
train/test sets. Following Kenton and Toutanova (2019), we use BERT model (https:
//huggingface.co/bert-base-uncased) to predict the start and end location of the an-
swer, and finetune the model with the same setting (e.g., 3 epochs with a learning rate of


                                                                              19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         P AN M (1 b a s e H a )             P AN M (2 H a )          P AN M (n o p o in t e r )
                                         P AN M (1 e n d H a )               P AN M (3 H a )
                                              Co p y                                                      Re ve r s e
                                                                                  90


                                                                                  80
                       80
                                                                                  70
 Ac c u r a c y (% )


                                                                                  60
                       60

                                                                                  50


                       40                                                         40


                                                                                  30

                       20                                                         20


                                                                                  10

                             0   10K      20K          30K   40K       50K             0       10K     20K          30K        40K   50K
                                                Step                                                         Step


Figure 6: Testing accuracy (mean ± std.) at 2(L+1) length over training steps. Different
configurations of Mode-1 pointers are trained and evaluated 5 times.

                                              PANM (H c=0)              PANM (H c=1)                 PANM (H c=2)
                                       Copy                             Priorty Sort                                ID Sort
                       100
                                                             80

                                                                                                 50
                                                             70
                        80

                                                             60
 Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                 40
                        60                                   50


                                                             40                                  30

                        40
                                                             30
                                                                                                 20
                                                             20
                        20

                                                             10                                  10

                             0    20K           40K                0     20K           40K            0                 50K          100K
                                       Step                                    Step                                     Step


Figure 7: Testing accuracy (mean ± std.) at 2(L+1) length over training steps. Different
configurations of Mode-2 pointers are trained and evaluated 5 times.


5e-5) except that our batch size is 16 to fit with our GPU. PANM appends the Controller
to BERT to predict the start and end. Both BERT and PANM have around 114 million
parameters. Table 13 reports the detailed numbers.

D.5                     Additional Experiments

Pointer Hyperparameters In this section, we confirm the logic presented in Appendix
C by performing experiments that involve varying the number and type of pointers.
Mode-1 Pointers We test the PANM version in § 3.1 with H a = 0, 1, 2, 3 on Copy, Reverse.
We do not use Mode-2 pointer here to avoid confusion (H c = 0). Fig. 6 plots the testing
accuracy over training time. As H a = 0, there is no pointer information for the Controller,


                                                                         20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


PANM should be equivalent to an GRU and fail to generalize. As H a = 1, the only pointer
is initialized either with the base or end address. As shown in Fig., PANM cannot generalize
in both Copy and Reverse tasks with single Mode-1 pointer, which is proved in Appendix C.
In the caseH a = 3, we initialize them with the base, end and middle addresses. We observe
that increasing H a to 3 slightly reduces the performance in these tasks. We speculate that
too many Mode-1 pointers make the learning harder; in particular, learning to manipulate
the third pointer may interfere with that of the first or second pointer, which are more
important in these tasks. Generally, most tasks only require list iterations from the head to
the tail or vice versa. Hence, we keep H a = 2 in all experiments to save the computation
cost.
Mode-2 Pointers We fix H a = 2, and vary H c = 0, 1, 2 on Copy, Priority Sort, ID Sort.
As shown in Fig. 7, without Mode-2 pointers (H c = 0), generalization in Priority Sort and
ID Sort is reduced significantly by 50% and 30%, respectively because these tasks focus more
on the content of the input sequence and often demand comparing the content of different
tokens. Interestingly, a content-free task like Copy also suffers from performance drop if
there is no Mode-2 pointer. Specifically, we find out that for 2/5 runs, the model converges
to a suboptimal solution, leading to high variance and slightly lower mean accuracy. Per-
haps, Mode-2 pointer allows the decoder to access the input instantly (like content-based
attention), avoid forgetting, and thus, improve the prediction as the sequence is longer.
Having more Mode-2 pointers generally improves the generalization in Copy and Priority
Sort, yet the gain is small for H c = 2, or even negative in ID Sort. Therefore, we trade-off
performance with computing efficiency by setting H c = 1 in our experiments.

D.6      Failures of Chat-GPT in Our Tasks
Large Language Models (LLMs), especially Chat-GPT, have shown remarkable results in
reasoning and generalization. Directly comparing Chat-GPT with other models used in our
experiments would be unfair because Chat-GPT was not directly trained with our datasets
and it has much more parameters than our model. Therefore, in this section, we merely
use Chat-GPT as a tool to verify that our chosen tasks, despite being simple, are non-
trivial. The evaluated tasks are algorithmic reasoning and SCAN. We do not examine Dyck
recognition because the output encoding is complicated to represent in text. Other datasets
are more common and likely to be used for training Chat-GPT, thus, are not suitable for
generalization test. For example, in Mathematics task, if we ask Chat-GPT the question
from the data What is the hundreds digit of 31253?, it provide the correct answer (2).
However, slightly modifying the question to ensure it does not appear in the training and
testing set will successfully fool Chat-GPT:

         Example 1:
              – Prompt: What is the hundreds digit of 312537?
              – Chat-GPT answer: The hundreds digit of the number 312537 is 2.
         Example 2:
              – Prompt: What is the hundreds digit of 319253?
              – Chat-GPT answer: The hundreds digit of the number 319253 is 9.

We use Open AI’s Chat-GPT 3.5 version September and evaluate the model on our data
using few-shot example prompts, following the format:
Examples:
input x11 , x12 , ... output y11 , y21 , ...
input x21 , x22 , ... output y12 , y22 , ...
...
Question:
input x1 , x2 , ... output

Algorithmic Reasoning To ensure that Chat-GPT does not memorize the output answer
from its vast training data, we use non-digit symbols: ˜!@#$%ˆ&*( as 10 tokens of the


                                               21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                   Failure example
      Task        Chat-GPT                                                                PANM
                                     Input         Chat-GPT Output        True Output
     Copy            100%                                N/A                                  84%
    Reverse          69%         $%&&$%ˆ@%#        %#ˆ@ˆ%$&&%$         #%@ˆ%$&&%$             84%
     Mix             42%         $%&&$%ˆ@%#        %#ˆ&&$%$@%&         $%$&$%$@$#             98%
 Dynamic Recall       14%       $(&&$#ˆ@%# %                $               @                 45%

Table 4: Failure of Chat-GPT on algorithmic reasoning test cases of length 2L. Token-level
accuracy is reported. We do not test Chat-GPT on Priority and ID sort because they have
complicated token representations. PANM results cannot be directly compared, and shown
for reference only.

      Copy Task          9(L)     10(L+1)    20((L+1)*2)    40((L+1)*4)     80((L+1)*8)
        LSTM            100±0       47±0         11±0           10±0            10±0
  Location Attention    100±0       93±2         51±5           28±4            20±1
  Content Attention     100±0       92±1         53±0           33±0            22±0
   Hybrid Attention     100±0       91±1         50±1           23±3            13±0
     Transformer        100±0       20±1         16±0           13±0            11±0
         NTM            100±0       74±4         13±2           11±0            11±0
         DNC            100±0       54±2         11±1           11±0            11±0
    Neural Stack        100±0       90±4         47±2           29±0            17±0
        PtrNet          100±0       90±2         52±1           32±1            20±0
       NRAM             100±0       81±3         15±2           11±0            11±1
        ESBN            100±0       92±0         34±0           11±0            11±0
        PANM            100±0      100±0        84±1           52±1            36±1

                   Table 5: Copy: accuracy (mean ± std. over 5 runs)


datasets. For each task, we sample 20 training examples of length L = 5 to build the in-
context examples, and test on 1 longer sequence of length 2L = 10. We conduct 20 trials and
report the average test accuracy. Table 4 summaries the evaluation results. Overall, except
for Copy task where Chat-GPT shows excellent generalization, other tasks are very hard
for Chat-GPT, indicating that the length extrapolation problem still poses a big challenge
to today AI techniques.

SCAN In this task, we sample 20 examples in the L-cutoff=40 split set (easiest) as in-
context learning examples and evaluate on 10 unseen sequences. Chat-GPT totally failed in
this task. When testing on the similar length or longer length as the examples, Chat-GPT
cannot produce any exact match results (exact match accuracy=0). Below are some failure
examples:

      IN: walk and turn opposite right OUT:
          – Chat-GPT output: I TURN RIGHT I TURN RIGHT I WALK
          – True output: I WALK I TURN RIGHT I TURN RIGHT
      IN: run around left twice and run around right OUT:
          – Chat-GPT output: I RUN I TURN LEFT I RUN I TURN LEFT I RUN
            I TURN RIGHT I RUN
          – True output: I TURN LEFT I RUN I TURN LEFT I RUN I TURN LEFT
            I RUN I TURN LEFT I RUN I TURN LEFT I RUN I TURN LEFT I RUN
            I TURN LEFT I RUN I TURN LEFT I RUN I TURN RIGHT I RUN
            I TURN RIGHT I RUN I TURN RIGHT I RUN I TURN RIGHT I RUN


                                             22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Reverse Task        9(L)    10(L+1)   20((L+1)*2)    40((L+1)*4)    80((L+1)*8)
        LSTM           100±0      96±0        53±0           33±0           22±0
  Location Attention   100±0      26±3        18±1           14±0           12±0
  Content Attention    100±0     81±25       38±11           23±4           16±2
   Hybrid Attention    100±0      98±1        50±7           24±2           15±1
     Transformer       100±0      18±0        15±3           13±1           11±0
         NTM           100±0      95±7       65±27          26±13           13±1
         DNC           100±0      93±3       60±18           23±6           12±1
    Neural Stack       100±0      96±1        64±4           35±3           19±1
        PtrNet         100±0      77±5        32±4           22±1           12±0
       NRAM            100±0      96±1        60±3           33±2           15±2
        ESBN            99±0      95±0        14±2           11±0           10±0
        PANM           100±0     100±0       84±3           51±1           33±1

                 Table 6: Reverse: accuracy (mean ± std. over 5 runs)


      Mix Task          9(L)    10(L+1)   20((L+1)*2)    40((L+1)*4)    80((L+1)*8)
        LSTM           100±0      96±0        53±0           33±0           22±0
  Location Attention   100±0     92±10        56±1           45±0           30±6
  Content Attention    100±0      61±8        57±1           14±0           12±0
   Hybrid Attention    100±0      98±1        56±3           34±0           23±6
     Transformer       100±0      18±0        15±3           13±1           11±0
         NTM           100±0      95±7       65±27          26±13           13±1
         DNC           100±0      91±4        58±9           19±3           11±1
    Neural Stack       100±0      87±3        50±5           14±2           11±0
        PtrNet         100±0      59±3        51±3           13±1           11±0
       NRAM             99±0      82±7        48±6           17±4           10±1
        ESBN            99±0      95±0        14±2           11±0           10±0
        PANM           100±0     100±0       98±1           54±0           54±1

                  Table 7: Mix: accuracy (mean ± std. over 5 runs)


     Drecall Task       9(L)   10(L+1)    20((L+1)*2)    40((L+1)*4)    80((L+1)*8)
        LSTM            85±7    74±16         21±2           12±1           11±0
  Location Attention    88±1     82±1         30±3           19±2           13±0
  Content Attention     88±2     84±0         27±3           17±1           13±1
   Hybrid Attention    69±25    66±24         28±4           19±2           13±1
     Transformer        33±1     32±0         22±0           14±1           12±1
         NTM            86±3     72±8         22±1           15±0           12±0
         DNC            89±0     83±1         22±1           14±2           11±0
    Neural Stack        85±4     76±2         23±1           15±1           13±1
        PtrNet         65±14     48±7         25±6           14±1           12±1
       NRAM             61±6     59±4         21±4           13±2           11±1
        ESBN           90±1      86±1         22±3           11±1           10±0
        PANM           92±0     89±0         45±1           22±0           16±0

                 Table 8: Drecall: accuracy (mean ± std. over 5 runs)


                                          23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      PSort Task          10(L)    11(L+1)    21((L+1)*2)      41((L+1)*4)      81((L+1)*8)
         LSTM             87±2      83±2          28±3             16±1             12±1
   Location Attention     69±3      66±3          45±1             27±2             20±2
   Content Attention      97±0      96±0          57±6             30±7             22±5
    Hybrid Attention      85±3      81±1          33±1             25±2             23±3
      Transformer         71±9      48±8          21±3             16±4             14±4
          NTM             96±2      95±3         34±18             12±1             10±0
          DNC             95±0      92±2          29±7             11±1             10±0
     Neural Stack         92±2      79±2          32±3             13±2             11±1
         PtrNet           77±2      71±2          43±2             24±1             19±1
        NRAM              82±3      80±2          51±2             25±1             13±1
         ESBN             26±4      24±4          13±2             11±1             10±0
         PANM             97±0      97±1         86±2             32±7             27±4

                    Table 9: PSort: accuracy (mean ± std. over 5 runs)


    ID Sort Task          10(L)    11(L+1)     21((L+1)*2)     41((L+1)*4)      81((L+1)*8)
        LSTM             48±10       40±5          20±1            13±1             11±1
  Location Attention      34±1       32±1          20±0            14±0             12±0
  Content Attention       98±1       56±1          28±2            16±0             12±0
   Hybrid Attention       32±1       31±1          19±1            14±0             12±0
     Transformer          34±2       29±0          19±0            15±0             12±0
         NTM             40±23      32±17          16±4            12±2             11±0
         DNC              35±1       36±1          23±2            17±2             13±0
    Neural Stack          33±3       32±1          19±1            13±1             12±0
        PtrNet            27±1       24±1          15±0            12±1             11±0
       NRAM               31±2       29±1          14±0            12±0             11±0
        ESBN             47±18      42±12          18±0            12±0             10±0
        PANM             100±0      100±0         56±2            25±0             15±0

                  Table 10: ID Sort: accuracy (mean ± std. over 5 runs)


                        Task                        add or sub      place value
                   U. TRM+ RPE♣                    0.97  ± 0.01      0.75 ± 0.10
                    TRM + RPE♣                      0.91 ± 0.03           -
                    TRM + RPE♦                      0.91 ± 0.04         0±0
                       TRM♣                         0.89 ± 0.01      0.12 ± 0.07
                       TRM♦                         0.86 ± 0.01       0.05+0.05
                      U. TRM♣                       0.94 ± 0.01      0.20 ± 0.02
                PANM TRM base (Ours)                0.91 ± 0.01      0.15 ± 0.02
             PANM TRM + RPE base (Ours)            0.97  ± 0.02     0.86    ±
                                                                            0.05

Table 11: Mathematics: mean ± std accuracy over 5 runs. ♣ are numbers from Csordás
et al. (2021). ♦ is our rerun to confirm the results, which, in some cases, could not match the
reported numbers. - means training crash reported in the original papers. We run PANM
using the authors’ codebase.


                                                       Split
                           Model
                                              0.8-0.2          0.5-0.5
                       Transformer         0.79 ± 0.01      0.76 ± 0.01
                      U. TRM+ RPE          0.80 ± 0.02      0.75 ± 0.01
                      PANM (Ours)         0.85 ±    0.02 0.81   ±    0.03

             Table 12: bAbI QA: Testing accuracy (mean ± std.) over 5 runs.


                                              24
   Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                 Split
                                                                             Model                       0.8-0.2        0.5-0.5
                                                                                                       F1      EM      F1     EM
                                                                     BERT                             0.77 0.64 0.73 0.59
                                                                  PANM (Ours)                         0.78 0.65 0.76 0.61

   Table 13: SQUAD 1.1: Testing accuracy after 3 epoch fine-tuning. F1 score and exact
   match (EM) follows the standard evaluation in (Kenton and Toutanova, 2019).


                               Tr a n s fo r m e r
                    70         P AN M                                                                                               P AN M                 TRAN S F ORM E R
                    60
                                                                                                                         1000
                                                                                                      P e r p le xit y


                    50
P e rp l e xi t y


                    40                                                                                                    300
                    30
                                                                                                                          100
                    20
                                                                                                                           50
                    10                                                                                                     30
                     0
                                                                                                                                0            20                40      60
                         0 .8 (1 )      0 .8 (2 )    0 .8 (3 )   0 .5 (1 )    0 .5 (2 )   0 .5 (3 )                                               E p oc h s
                                         Tra i n /Te s t R a t i o ( # La ye rs )


   Figure 8: Additional results on machine translation task: Perplexity on Multi30K dataset
   (the lower the better). We sort the sequences in the data by length and create 2 settings
   using train/test split of 0.8 and 0.5, respectively. The baselines are Transformer and PANM.
   Left: The best test perplexity over 2 settings for different number of Transformer’s layers
   (1 to 3 layers). Right: an example of testing perplexity curves over training epochs for the
   case of 0.5 train/test split (2 layers) where we run 3 times and report the mean±std. The
   y-axis is visualized using log scale.


                                                                                                                         25
