Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


TAIL: TASK - SPECIFIC A DAPTERS FOR I MITATION
L EARNING WITH L ARGE P RETRAINED M ODELS
 Zuxin Liu1 , Jesse Zhang2 , Kavosh Asadi3 , Yao Liu3 , Ding Zhao1 , Shoham Sabach3 , Rasool Fakoor3
 1
  Carnegie Mellon University, 2 University of Southern California, 3 Amazon Web Services



                                             A BSTRACT

         The full potential of large pretrained models remains largely untapped in control
         domains like robotics. This is mainly due to data scarcity and computational chal-
         lenges associated with training or fine-tuning large models for such applications.
         Prior work mainly emphasizes either effective pretraining of large models for
         decision-making or single-task adaptation. But real-world problems will require
         data-efficient, continual adaptation for new control tasks. Recognizing these con-
         straints, we introduce TAIL (Task-specific Adapters for Imitation Learning), a
         framework for efficient adaptation to a stream of new control tasks. Inspired by
         recent advancements in parameter-efficient fine-tuning in language domains, we
         explore efficient fine-tuning techniques—e.g., Bottleneck Adapters, P-Tuning, and
         Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA)—in TAIL to adapt large pretrained models for
         new tasks with limited demonstration data. Our extensive experiments comparing
         prevalent parameter-efficient fine-tuning techniques and adaptation baselines sug-
         gest that TAIL with LoRA can achieve the best post-adaptation performance with
         only 1% of the trainable parameters of full fine-tuning while avoiding catastrophic
         forgetting and preserving adaptation plasticity in continual learning settings.


1    I NTRODUCTION
A desired property of an autonomous agent is the ability to adapt efficiently to novel tasks. In
vision and language domains, large pretrained models have demonstrated adaptation to new tasks
with just a few examples through prior knowledge obtained from internet-scale datasets (Brown
et al., 2020; Radford et al., 2021; Touvron et al., 2023). Similar methods have also been applied
in decision-making and control applications (Brohan et al., 2022; Driess et al., 2023; Brohan et al.,
2023). However, new control tasks are more difficult to adapt to than the aforementioned vision and
language domains due to (1) the lack of internet-scale control data and (2) how optimal actions can
vary significantly from task-to-task, even under shared observation spaces. As such, these large-scale
decision-making models still rely on a close alignment between training and testing tasks.
In contrast, agents deployed in challenging environments need to adapt to major task variations—take,
for example, a general household robot. Equipped with a factory-pretrained policy, the robot will
be employed in unique ways by every household. Thus, the robot will need to continually adapt in
order to best serve each one, e.g., by fine-tuning its capabilities on a few demonstrations (Chebotar
et al., 2021; Lu et al., 2021; Kalashnkov et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021a; Yao et al., 2024). Because
most prior decision-making papers adapt to new tasks by fine-tuning the entire model (Gupta et al.,
2022; Bousmalis et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023a;b; Collaboration et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023c),
mastering each new skill requires great computational cost and often leads to catastrophic forgetting
of old ones. An alternative approach would be to store a separate policy per new task, which leads to
unreasonable storage requirements. Some prior work investigates efficient adaptation of large models
to a single task suite (Liang et al., 2022; Schmied et al., 2023; Sharma et al., 2023), but this realistic
continual learning setting brings out additional problems to consider, warranting further investigation.
What would be the best way for agents to efficiently adapt to a stream of novel tasks without having
to trade off computation, storage, and performance on older tasks?
To answer this question, we propose Task-specific Adapters for Imitation Learning, shown in Fig. 1, a
framework for efficient adaptation to new control tasks. Through TAIL we (1) effectively incorporate
lightweight adapter modules into pretrained decision-making models and (2) comprehensively com-


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


pare efficient adaptation techniques implemented in TAIL in a continual imitation learning setting.
Notably, we examine parameter-efficient adaptation techniques (PEFT) used for large language
models; we explore the potential of adapters (Houlsby et al., 2019), prefix tuning (Li & Liang, 2021),
and low-rank adaptation (LoRA) (Hu et al., 2021) in fostering efficient and continual adaptation in
large pretrained decision-making models. These works stand out as they introduce a small number of
new parameters which help: avoid catastrophic forgetting, maintain training plasticity for continual
learning, avoid overfitting with limited adaptation data, and reduce computational and memory
burden. Investigating these works in control tasks for a realistic continual learning setup specifically
is important because, unlike in language domains, test task losses are often not proportional to test
task performance (Ross et al., 2011; Ke et al., 2020)—efficient adaptation insights from language
models may not transfer to decision-making ones. Thus, independent investigation of these adaptation
techniques for decision-making is crucial for deploying continually adapting agents in the real world.
We compare PEFT techniques implemented in TAIL against commonly used adaptation methods in
the imitation learning literature. In our experiments, we discover that TAIL with LoRA leads to the
best post-adaptation performance as it preserves the original pretrained representations while being
resilient against overfitting in the limited-data regime. These capabilities are especially important for
agents operating in new, challenging environments, such as the aforementioned household robots. Our
analysis also reveals important insights into the strengths and limitations of each adaptation strategy.
Instead of performing full fine-tuning of the entire model, TAIL only introduces a small number of
additional parameters without making changes to the original model. These additional parameters
make up a mere 1.17% of the size of the original model. Importantly, this results in approximately
23% less GPU memory consumption to achieve 22% higher forward adaptation success rate than
full fine-tuning while avoiding catastrophic forgetting. Notably, these results are contrary to many
results from the vision and language model literature which show that full fine-tuning works better
(He et al., 2022; Mao et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022; Schmied et al., 2023).
In summary, this work bridges a crucial gap in research into efficient and continual adaptation
for pretrained decision models by introducing a framework for continual imitation learning, TAIL,
and thoroughly analyzing the effects of different efficient adaptation methods. Comprehensive
experiments demonstrate that TAIL outperforms standard continual learning and prior single-task
adaptation baselines.

2    R ELATED W ORK
Pretrained Models for Control. Researchers have long studied the use of pretrained models for better
downstream transfer to related tasks (Bozinovski & Fulgosi, 1976; Schmidhuber, 1992; Dietterich
et al., 1997). Recent works have examined using the representations learned by pretrained visual
models for control (Shridhar et al., 2022; Nair et al., 2022; Ma et al., 2022; 2023; Majumdar et al.,
2023a). These methods leverage representations acquired from large task-agnostic datasets, such
as Ego4D (Grauman et al., 2022), or through self-supervised objectives. However, there’s evidence
that simply utilizing these pretrained features may not be as useful for downstream task performance
(Hansen et al., 2022). Meanwhile, another recent line of work directly trains large pretrained models
for control (Brohan et al., 2022; Reed et al., 2022; Driess et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2023; Brohan
et al., 2023; Bousmalis et al., 2023). These methods either do not attempt adaptation to new tasks,
or perform expensive full-fine-tuning for adaptation. In contrast, our method, TAIL, is a framework
for efficient adaptation of decision-making models, like the aforementioned large pretrained control
models, and investigates ways to adapt such models efficiently to multiple new tasks.
Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT). PEFT has gained traction as a way to adapt pretrained
models without significantly increasing parameters. Rebuffi et al. (2018) demonstrated that residual
adapters for smaller, CNN-based vision models are effective in non-control supervised learning set-
tings. More recently, transformer-focused techniques such as transformer adapter modules (Houlsby
et al., 2019), LoRA (Hu et al., 2021), and prompt tuning (Li & Liang, 2021) incorporate lightweight
modules or prompts optimized for downstream tasks, all while preserving the original model weights.
PEFT offers several advantages over full fine-tuning: it’s faster, less susceptible to overfitting, retains
prior capabilities, and facilitates efficient task-switching. While PEFT has been successful in both
language and vision domains (Chen et al., 2022; Schmied et al., 2023), its continuous adaptation
for large decision-making models is not yet thoroughly examined. Liang et al. (2022); Sharma
et al. (2023), Xu et al. (2022), and Xu et al. (2023) propose the use of adapters, prompt-tuning,
and hyper-network in robotics settings, but they do not examine other PEFT methods and focus on


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                             actions                      actions
                                                𝒂𝟏                 𝒂𝟐                  𝒂𝟑
                                                                                                            task head                    task head

                    Input Fusion                                                                          Pretrained                    Pretrained
                      Module                                 Temporal Decoder                              Weights                       Weights

                                                                                                             inputs                       inputs

          Task                       Token                                                                                          Frozen Pretrained
        Embedding                  Sequence          ...                ...                 ...        Full Fine-Tuning
                                                                                                                                        Features
                                                                                                                        actions
          Instruction                          Spatial            Spatial             Spatial                                                       Trainable

            Encoder                           Encoder                                                                  task head                    Frozen
                                                                 Encoder             Encoder
                                                                                                                   Pretrained           Adapter
                                                                                                                    Weights             Weights
        Open the drawer and
         put the bowl in it.                         ...                ...                 ...
                                                                                                                        inputs
        Task description           Observations 𝒔𝟏                 𝒔𝟐                  𝒔𝟑
                                                                                                           Task-specific Adapters (TAIL)
                                                       (a)                                                              (b)
Figure 1: (a): The multi-modal, transformer policy architecture we utilize for pretraining. We encode language
task descriptions with a pretrained CLIP instruction encoder and image observations with a pretrained CLIP
spatial encoder. We additionally encode state observations (not pictured) which, along with the observation
embeddings, are embedded into a sequence of tokens used by the temporal decoder transformer to predict
single-step action distributions. We include an input fusion module to explicitly combine the task embedding
with the observation token sequence for better instruction-following ability. (b): The three types of fine-tuning
paradigms we test, with TAIL at the bottom right. For further architecture details, see Appendix Sec. A.

adaptation to a single task suite. We instead examine the performance of various state-of-the-art
PEFT techniques implemented with TAIL in the continual learning scenario.
Continual Learning. Continual learning in control (Thrun & Mitchell, 1995; McCloskey & Cohen,
1989; Fu et al., 2022) is a long-studied problem with applications to many real-world situations. In
general, agents should be able to transfer knowledge (e.g., by continually fine-tuning) or experience
(e.g., training data) from previously learned tasks to new tasks (Lopez-Paz & Ranzato, 2017; Traoré
et al., 2019; Fakoor et al., 2020; Caccia et al., 2023). However, with large pretrained models trained on
large datasets, fine-tuning the entire model is computationally costly yet risks catastrophic forgetting,
and transferring training data from other tasks is too memory inefficient in the face of a large stream of
new tasks. Therefore, we present a study into efficient fine-tuning techniques which, when integrated
with TAIL, can help inform future research of continual learning.

3     P RELIMINARIES
In this section, we introduce our problem setting (Sec. 3.1), review large, pretrained models for
decision-making (Sec. 3.2), and discuss traditional adaptation methods in this area (Sec. 3.3).
3.1 C ONTINUAL I MITATION L EARNING
The agent encounters a sequence of K tasks, denoted as {T1 , . . . , TK }. Each task Tk = (µ0k , gk )
is characterized by an initial state distribution µ0k and a goal predicate gk . Goals for tasks can be
specified using language instructions, providing clear context (Jang et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2023a).
For every task Tk , the agent receives N demonstration trajectories Dk = {τk1 , . . . , τkN }. In this paper,
we use the standard behavioral cloning loss to optimize the agent’s policy π over these demonstrations,
however we note that TAIL can be used with other training objectives as well:

                                                      K
                                                                              "l                                            #
                                                      X                        X k

                                                                                            π(a|s≤t , Tk ; θ), atk

                                      θ̂ = min                    E                  L                                          .                               (1)
                                                θ             st ,at ∼Dk
                                                      k=1                      t=0
Here, L is a supervised action prediction (e.g., mean squared error or negative log likelihood) loss, lk
is the length of demonstrations for task Tk , and θ refers to the learnable parameters of the network.
Notably, after learning task Tk , the agent cannot access additional data from preceding tasks. This
presents a continual learning challenge, emphasizing the importance of transferring knowledge across
tasks without the risk of catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989).
3.2   P RETRAINED D ECISION -M AKING M ODELS
Here, we briefly describe common features of large pretrained decision-making model architectures
used for embodied agents. We incorporate key components shared amongst these models into the
architecture of the model that we pretrain to evaluate efficient adaptation, pictured in Fig. 1(a).


                                                                                 3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Transformer Backbone. Most recent work training large-scale decision-making models (Brohan
et al., 2022; Shafiullah et al., 2022; Brohan et al., 2023) utilize a transformer backbone (Vaswani
et al., 2017) that attends to tokenized observations from prior timesteps. We adopt a standard GPT-
2 (Radford et al., 2019a) transformer decoder (Fig. 1(a), temporal decoder) with separate encoders
for each input modality and continuous action distribution outputs.
Pretrained Input Encoders. Encoders pretrained on large, diverse datasets can produce rich, well-
structured embeddings which make it easier to learn the downstream tasks (Jang et al., 2021; Brohan
et al., 2022). Therefore, we utilize pretrained CLIP image and textual encoders (Radford et al., 2021).
Input Modality Fusion. The idea of explicitly “fusing” different input modalities has seen great suc-
cess not only in domains like vision and language (Perez et al., 2017), but also in agent learning (Jang
et al., 2021; Brohan et al., 2022). Similarly, we utilize FiLM layers (Perez et al., 2017) (Fig. 1(a),
input fusion module) to fuse language task specifications with observations.

3.3   A DAPTING PRETRAINED MODELS FOR NEW TASKS
One standard adaptation method in prior research is full fine-tuning (FFT) of all model parameters
(Fig 1(b), top left). Though straightforward, it is resource-intensive and prone to overfitting with
limited data (Bousmalis et al., 2023). There is also a risk of distorting pretrained features, resulting
in the loss of prior tasks—a phenomenon known as catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey & Cohen,
1989). Evidence also suggests that extensive fine-tuning might undermine a model’s rapid adaptability
to new tasks, an effect referred to as the loss of model plasticity and capacity (Kumar et al., 2022;
Lyle et al., 2022; Kumar et al., 2023). Such issues become more prominent in continual learning
contexts (Lopez-Paz & Ranzato, 2017). Moreover, duplicating a sizable model for each subsequent
task is neither efficient nor practical due to storage limitations.
Another standard adaptation method is the use of frozen pretrained features (FPF, Fig 1(b) top right).
FPF ensures the retention of knowledge acquired from previous tasks by tuning a task-specific head.
However, as noted in Sharma et al. (2023), it is not expressive enough for out-of-distribution or
especially complex tasks. Given these challenges, there’s a clear need for a more advanced fine-tuning
paradigm that addresses catastrophic forgetting while maintaining model plasticity for adapting to
new tasks, all in a data and computationally resource-efficient manner.

4     TASK - SPECIFIC ADAPTERS FOR IMITATION LEARNING
In this section, we outline how we perform efficient adaptation on pretrained models through our
Task-specific Adapters for Imitation Learning framework, depicted in Fig 1(b). Different from
the FPF approach which simply substitutes the policy head for every new task, TAIL introduces a
small set of new weights, serving as a lightweight plugin to address specific tasks. This concept
draws inspiration from parameter-efficient adaptation techniques prevalent in the language model
area. These methods offer several advantages as they: (1) add a few parameters (typically between
0.1% ∼ 2%) to preserve the original features, thereby enhancing model plasticity for continual
learning and avoiding catastrophic forgetting (Kumar et al., 2023), (2) are resilient to overfitting when
adaptation data is scarce, (3) are more computationally and storage-efficient than FFT.
Next, we delve into three prominent weight integration techniques for Transformer-based pretrained
models in Sec. 4.1, followed by a case study illustrating the application of this framework in continual
imitation learning scenarios in Sec. 4.2.

4.1   A DAPTER W EIGHTS I NTEGRATION
The concept of an adapter can be best conceptualized as a modular plugin to the base model, cus-
tomized for specific downstream tasks, that does not affect the model’s pretrained representations.
We mainly explore three prevalent styles of integration for TAIL: Parallel (Hu et al., 2021), Sequen-
tial (Houlsby et al., 2019; Sharma et al., 2023), and Prefix Token (Li & Liang, 2021; Lester et al.,
2021; Liu et al., 2023b), all of which are showcased with a Transformer block in Fig. 2. Parallel
and sequential integration techniques are generally applicable to any model with feedforward layers,
while the prefix token style method is especially tailored for Transformers.
Given a pretrained model, let’s consider one layer weight matrix in it, denoted as W ∈ Rd×k . Its
input and output hidden states are hin ∈ Rd and hout ∈ Rk , respectively. We have hout = W ⊤ hin .
Next, we detail how to apply parallel and sequential insertions to the pretrained weight matrix.


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                      +                                                     Frozen
                  Add & Layer Norm
                                                𝑾         LoRA                                              Parallel

                      Bottleneck                                                                            Sequential
                                                                                                            Prefix Token
                                                                        Attention
                 Feed Forward Layer


                                                      𝑸                     𝑲                  𝑽
                  Add & Layer Norm                           ...                    ...              ...

                                                      +                      +                 +           𝑾𝒖𝒑
                      Bottleneck
                                                                                                            𝑟
                                                 𝑾𝒒       LoRA         𝑾𝒌        LoRA     𝑾𝒗       LoRA
                 Multi-head Attention                                                                      𝑾𝒅𝒐𝒘𝒏

                                                                       Hidden States


        Transformer                                                              ...
                                                            Tokens


Figure 2: Demonstration of three weight integration styles of TAIL for a Transformer block: sequential
(bottleneck adapter), parallel (LoRA), and prefix token (prefix/prompt-tuning).

Parallel Integration (LoRA). This integration method, often associated with Low-Rank Adaptation
(LoRA) (Hu et al., 2021), introduces trainable low-rank matrices Wdown ∈ Rd×r and Wup ∈ Rr×k .
Here, r ≪ min(d, k) represents the rank and is usually much smaller than the dimensions of the
original matrix. These matrices are typically integrated in parallel with the original weight matrix W
through addition, as shown as LoRA in Fig. 2:
                                        hout = W ⊤ hin + αWup
                                                           ⊤   ⊤
                                                              Wdown hin ,                                                  (2)
with α being a hyperparameter to modulate task-specific adjustments. The above equation can also be
formulated as: hout = (W + αWdown Wup )⊤ hin = (W + α∆W )⊤ hin , where ∆W denotes the
weight modifications for new tasks, and thus the columns of Wdown and Wup can be interpreted as a
new basis that contains task-specific knowledge. As observed by Aghajanyan et al. (2020), despite
projecting to a condensed subspace with small “intrinsic dimensions,” pretrained models can still
learn effectively. By introducing the two low-rank matrices, the original weight matrices W can be
adeptly tailored with a minimal increase in parameters. Though LoRA was originally crafted for
large language models—specifically for the query and value projections matrices WQ and WV in
multi-head attention (Hu et al., 2021)—it is easily applied to other linear layers as well, such as the
Transformer’s feedforward layers (Chen et al., 2022).
Sequential Integration (Bottleneck Adapter). Renowned in the language model domain, the
Bottleneck Adapter introduces bottleneck layers within the model (Houlsby et al., 2019; Sharma et al.,
2023) by appending a trainable bottleneck layer after the feedforward network in each Transformer
layer. Similar to LoRA, this bottleneck consists of down and up projections, Wdown and Wup ,
which first shrink then restore the dimensions of token hidden states. Formally, for the feedforward
network’s input hin and a bottleneck size r, the output hout is:
                                           ⊤        ⊤
                                                        (W ⊤ hin ) ,

                                 hout = Wup  ϕ Wdown                                              (3)
where ϕ denotes a nonlinear activation function. The Bottleneck Adapter (Fig. 2) acts as a filter,
isolating relevant information for specific tasks. Yet, filtering often requires a larger bottleneck size
compared to that of LoRA, leading to more parameters. Additionally, the sequential insertion can
increase latency compared to the parallel nature of LoRA (Hu et al., 2021).
Prefix Token Integration (Prefix & Prompt-Tuning). In this style, a set of learnable prefix tokens
are appended or prepended to the input sequence (Li & Liang, 2021; Lester et al., 2021; Liu et al.,
2023b). Let’s consider an input sequence s ∈ Rn×d , where n is the sequence length and d is the
embedding dimension. The prefix tokens can be represented as p ∈ Rm×d , where m denotes the
number of prefix tokens. These vectors act like virtual tokens which the original tokens can attend
to. They are initialized and learned during the task-specific adaptation phase. The modified input
sequence, after appending the prefix tokens, can be expressed as S = [p; s] ∈ R(m+n)×d . The model
then processes this extended sequence. These prefix tokens can be viewed as task descriptors that are
designed to guide the model towards the desired task-specific behavior (see in Fig. 2).
With adapters, we can treat the optimization from Eq. 1 as one over adapter weights instead, where
the model is parametrized by θ̂ = {θ, ω} and ω is the set of adapter weights we are optimizing for.

                                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 Kitchen        Spatial         Goal          Object       Living Room    Study Room


Figure 3: Our task suites for continual imitation learning (excluding LIBERO-10). The robot, placed in a
tabletop environment, is equipped with a 6-DOF arm and a parallel gripper. It receives RGB images from two
views, joint states, and language instructions, and is tasked with producing continuous actions to control its arm.

4.2    TAIL FOR CONTINUAL IMITATION LEARNING
We consider the continual imitation learning problem as a typical application of the proposed TAIL
adaptation paradigm. The goal of continual imitation learning is to ensure that the model performs
effectively on the current task and without significant degradation of performance in past tasks.
Given pretrained model weights, denoted as θ, and a new task Tk with demonstrations Dk =
{τk1 , . . . , τkN }, we initialize the task-specific adapter weight ωk with far less parameters than the base
model: |ωk | ≪ |θ|. The adapter weights are inserted into the model through the integration methods
introduced in Sec. 4.1. By optimizing the behavior cloning loss in Eq. 1 w.r.t ωk while keeping the
pretrained weights frozen, the policy adapts to Tk without interfering with previous tasks.
To execute a task, the corresponding lightweight adapters are loaded as a plugin of the pretrained
network weights. For example, when revisiting a prior task Tj , where j ≤ k, the model is configured
to solely activate the j-th adapter ωj . This entire procedure can be streamlined as follows:

    1. For an incoming task Tk , acquire the training set Dk , initialize a task-specific adapter ωk .
    2. Combine adapter ωk with the base model θ using either parallel, sequential, or prefix token.
    3. Train the adapter on Dk to optimize Eq. 1 for ωk , keeping pretrained parameters θ frozen.

In essence, TAIL ensures task-specific knowledge is contained within the adapters, thereby enabling
efficient adaptation without catastrophic forgetting. It’s also worth noting that the TAIL framework is
flexible. The choice of integration method or the specific architecture of the adapter can be tailored
based on the complexity of the task or the available computational resources.

5     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we evaluate TAIL on a wide range of tasks and benchmark its performance against
other fine-tuning approaches. We mainly aim to answer the following questions: (1) Which efficient
adaptation methods in TAIL work best? (2) Can TAIL prevent catastrophic forgetting of previously
learned tasks, while allowing more efficient forward adaptation to new tasks over standard adaptation
methods? (3) What are the computational efficiencies gained by using TAIL? Addressing them
requires a set of diverse tasks in realistic environments, as we describe in the following section.

5.1    DATASETS AND B ENCHMARK S UITES
We utilize the LIBERO robotic manipulation continual learning benchmark (Liu et al., 2023a), which
features a diverse range of tasks that mirror human daily activities, such as turning on a stove, moving
books, and opening drawers. Each task is specified via natural language instructions, for instance,
"Open the top drawer of the cabinet, and put the bowl in it."
We craft a pretraining task suite, named Kitchen, involving 40 diverse tasks sourced from the
LIBERO-90 dataset’s kitchen scenes. We then evaluate adaptation to 5 separate task suites. LIBERO
contains 3 task suites tailored for continual learning, focusing on evaluating different aspects of
knowledge adaptation: the Spatial task contains the same objects in each scene but with different
spatial layouts; each task in the Goal suite has distinct goals (such as open the drawer, or turn on the
stove), while keeping the objects and layout fixed; the Object suite contains pick-and-place tasks for
different objects in the scene but with the same layout. To create a more comprehensive experimental
setting, we also create 2 additional task suites (from LIBERO-90): Living Room, and Study Room.
We adopt 8 tasks from each of the 5 adaptation task suites, respectively. Finally, we separately
evaluate each task sequentially in LIBERO-10, a benchmark with 10 challenging long-horizon tasks.
See Fig. 3 for task suite examples and Appendix Sec. D for more details.


                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             TAIL - LoRA       TAIL - RoboAdapter         TAIL - Bottleneck Adapter         TAIL - Prefix Tuning
           1.0
                Pretraining: Kitchen S1: Spatial Tasks     S2: Goal Tasks      S3: Object Tasks     S4: Living Room        S5: Study Room
           0.8
           0.8
 Success Rate
           0.6
           0.6
           0.4
           0.4
           0.2
           0.2
           0.0
           0.00.0
               0                  100 0.2              200     0.4         300          0.6     400              0.8 500                    1.0
                                                                                                                                            600
                                                                Continual Training Epoch
Figure 4: Success rates for different types of adapters under our TAIL framework. None of these methods
suffer from catastrophic forgetting, so backward evaluation results are not presented here. LoRA performs best
across all tasks, underscoring the benefits of the parallel integration approach.

5.2             E XPERIMENT SETUP
Evaluation metrics. The primary metric we report is average per-task suite success rate, measured
by checking if current state aligns with pre-defined goal states. For continual learning, we also
assess Forward Transfer (FWT) and Backward Transfer (BWT) across the curriculum of suites.
Following the metric proposed in LIBERO (Liu et al., 2023a), FWT is computed by the maximum
success rate one algorithm can achieve when adapting to a new task. We denote FWT at task k as Fk .
Meanwhile, BWT measures the success rate increase on previous tasks. Namely, when adapting to
the k-th task, we record the best FWT model on this task and then evaluate this model on all previous
k − 1 tasks, obtaining success rate Si , 1 ≤ i ≤ k − 1. Then we compute the success rate difference
between the new model and the best FWT of the previous k − 1 tasks and then average among them
                                    1
                                        Pk−1
to obtain the BWT metric: Bk = k−1         i=1 (Si − Fi ). For both metrics, higher is better.

Model architecture. We adopt the CLIP-base model (Radford et al., 2021) as both the spatial encoder
and the language instruction encoder, each with 12 transformer layers. A 6-layer GPT2 structure
(Radford et al., 2019b) serves as our temporal encoder, with the FiLM module (Perez et al., 2017)
handling input fusion. These components are well-regarded in the literature (Chen et al., 2021b;
Brohan et al., 2022; Jiang et al., 2023). Further architectural details can be found in Appendix A.
Continual Learning Baselines. We adopt four baselines: Full Fine-Tuning (FFT), Frozen Pretrained
Features (FPF) which mirrors the linear probing method (Kumar et al., 2022) but also tunes both the
policy head and fusion module per task, Experience Replay (ER) (Chaudhry et al., 2019) which uses
a 50-50 data split between new and previous task data while adapting to a new task (Rolnick et al.,
2019), Elastic Weight Consolidation (EWC) (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017) which regularizes updates
of crucial parameters from earlier tasks based on their Fisher information, and PackNet (Mallya &
Lazebnik, 2018) which prunes parameters to then be re-learned for every new task. These all use the
same model and task conditioning, i.e., language, as TAIL. Further baseline details in Appendix B.1.
TAIL Adapters. We use LoRA (Hu et al., 2021), Bottleneck Adapter (Houlsby et al., 2019), and
Prefix Tuning (Li & Liang, 2021) to represent parallel, sequential, and prefix integration styles.
RoboAdapter (Sharma et al., 2023), a specific implementation for decision-making, stands as another
sequential integration style. Unlike the Bottleneck Adapter that applies weights at every transformer
layer, it introduces weights only at specific transformer layers and exclusively after the feedforward
layer. Configuration specifics and more details for these adapters are available in Appendix B.2.
Training, Adaptation, and Evaluation. Each task provides 50 successful human demonstrations.
These are divided into 40 training trajectories and 10 for validation. We report success rates
over 10 scenes with initial states that are unseen in training. This limited demonstration setup
offers an opportunity to determine which technique is less prone to overfitting in data-restricted
conditions. Given our focus on evaluating the adaptation of large pretrained models, we further
increase adaptation difficulty by training on and evaluating adaptation performance on all tasks
within a task suite simultaneously.1 We pretrain on Kitchen until performance convergence (100
epochs). Subsequent adaptations follow two setups: (1) sequential adaptation across the Spatial,
Goal, Object, Living Room, and Study Room task suites for 100 epochs each, and (2) adaptation
to each long-horizon task within the LIBERO-10 benchmark over 50 epochs. Each experiment is
conducted with 3 different random seeds. Except for the Experience Replay (ER) method, data from
earlier tasks remains unavailable in later stages. Our diverse adaptation setup provides a thorough
        1
            We use one adapter per task suite. LIBERO (Liu et al., 2023a) originally evaluated on a per-task basis.


                                                                           7
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                     TAIL - LoRA           FFT          FPF                Experience Replay                     EWC                 PackNet               Out-of-Stage
                         Pretraining Stage: Kitchen                                Adapting Stage 1: Spatial Tasks                                            Adapting Stage 2: Goal Tasks
                                                                       0.8                                                                     0.8
           0.6
Success Rate                                                           0.6                                                                     0.6
           0.4                                                         0.4                                                                     0.4
           0.2                                                         0.2                                                                     0.2
           0.0                                                         0.0                                                                     0.0
                  0     100    200       300       400   500     600         100         200        300          400      500            600         200     250     300   350     400    450   500     550   600
                       Adapting Stage 3: Object Tasks                  0.8
                                                                                   Adapting Stage 4: Living Room                                             Adapting Stage 5: Study Room
           0.8                                                                                                                                 0.6
                                                                       0.6
Success Rate


           0.6
                                                                       0.4                                                                     0.4
           0.4
                                                                       0.2                                                                     0.2
           0.2
                                                                       0.0
           0.0                                                                                                                                 0.0
                 300    350    400       450       500   550     600         400   425     450    475      500    525   550      575     600         500           520      540          560      580         600
                                       Epoch                                                              Epoch                                                                   Epoch

   Figure 5: Success rates on the pretraining stage on 40 tasks in the LIBERO Kitchen scene and 5 adaptation
   stages, each with 8 tasks over 100 epochs, which are continuously evaluated in subsequent stages (shaded area).

   and in-depth examination of knowledge transfer across a spectrum of domains, including spatial,
   procedural, visual, and compositional.
   In the pretraining phase for TAIL, we add trainable adapters to the CLIP spatial and instruction
   encoders while freezing the encoder weights. All other model weights are fully learnable. During
   adaptation, the CLIP encoders and the GPT2 decoder are frozen, while adapters for them, the fusion
   module, and the policy head are tuned. Adapter weights are initialized from previous adapters with
   minor random noise. A fusion module and policy head copy are maintained during the adaptation for
   both TAIL and FPF. The detailed hyperparameters are presented in Appendix B.
   5.3 R ESULTS AND ANALYSIS
   Comparison of TAIL Integration Styles. Fig. 4 showcases the continual adaptation success
   rates for different TAIL methods. The efficacy of LoRA suggests that a well-pretrained model
   has a surprisingly low intrinsic dimension for imitation learning tasks (Aghajanyan et al., 2020).
   This implies the existence of a low-rank reparameterization that is just as adept for fine-tuning
   as the full parameter space. Further, the prefix tuning method outperforms the bottleneck-based
   approach (Houlsby et al., 2019), indicating that the sequential integration style may not be the optimal
   choice for continual learning, potentially due to its inherent "filtering" mechanism. Surprisingly,
   RoboAdapter (Sharma et al., 2023) generally performs the worst, potentially due to only introducing
   weights after the feedforward layer as opposed to after (Houlsby et al., 2019) or within (Li & Liang,
   2021; Hu et al., 2021) the attention layer. Due to LoRA’s pronounced effectiveness, it is predominantly
   employed as our TAIL integration method in subsequent experiments.
   TAIL vs. Conventional Fine-tuning. Across all evaluations, TAIL vastly outperforms all baselines
   in both forward and backward transfer, demonstrating that conventional fine-tuning methods are weak
   in data-scarce continual learning. In Fig. 5 we plot continual learning success rates over 6 task suites,
   where TAIL outperforms the best baselines by over 3x in some comparisons and generally achieves
   the best success rates. We display additional results on LIBERO-10, long-horizon tasks, in Table 1.
   Here, TAIL again performs best, with perfect backward transfer and forward transfer capabilities
   significantly better than the baselines: FFT not only exhibits marked catastrophic forgetting of earlier
   tasks—evidenced by poor BWT—but also compromises the model’s adaptability to new tasks. This
   decline in forward transfer is characterized by a steady descent in success rates as training progresses,
   displayed in Appendix Table 7. Such deterioration in flexibility has been recognized in other studies
   as well (Lyle et al., 2022; Kumar et al., 2023). PackNet is able to adapt well on some task suites as it
   learns new parameters within different parts of the model, but overall is still outperformed by TAIL.

   Table 1: Adaptation results on 10 long horizon tasks, higher is better. The BWT for TAIL methods are all 0 (no
   forgetting). FPF results were omitted due to its near-zero performance. See per-task results in Appendix Table 7.

                                                    Conventional Fine-Tuning Methods                                                                       TAIL-based Methods (Ours)
                          Full Fine-Tuning                 Experience Replay                                EWC                         LoRA                 Prefix         Bottleneck          RoboAdapter
                         FWT ↑       BWT ↑                FWT ↑        BWT ↑                     FWT ↑              BWT ↑               FWT ↑                FWT ↑           FWT ↑                FWT ↑
     Average           0.48 ± 0.10      -0.55 ± 0.21     0.45 ± 0.09    -0.49 ± 0.23           0.30 ± 0.16        -0.43 ± 0.20         0.70 ± 0.10         0.51 ± 0.15      0.46 ± 0.11          0.42 ± 0.13

   Adaptation Plasticity. Exhaustive fine-tuning on specialized domains has been found to distort
   pretrained features (Kumar et al., 2022), undermining model adaptability. Our circle-back experiments


                                                                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: Comparison of trainable parameters and memory usage for TAIL and FFT. We use (·%) and ↓ (·%) to
denote the percentage of trainable parameter and the decrease of GPU memory w.r.t FFT.

                                Conventional                      TAIL-based Methods (Ours)
Method
                              Full Fine-Tuning       LoRA       RoboAdapter Bottleneck Adapter      Prefix Tuning
CLIP (Spatial & Task Encoder)     149.62M            0.49M         1.29M          1.31M                0.58M
GPT2 (Temporal Encoder)            21.78M            0.69M         0.40M          0.40M                0.24M
Fusion module and policy head      0.84M             0.84M         0.84M          0.84M                0.84M
Total Parameters                  172.24M        2.02M (1.17%) 2.53M (1.47%) 2.55M (1.48%)         1.66M (0.93%)
GPU Memory (Batch 14)               20.1G        15.5G (↓ 23%) 14.0G (↓ 30%) 14.9G (↓ 26%)         15.8G (↓ 21%)



in Table 2, where a full fine-tuned model is re-trained on prior task suites, demonstrate a steep
performance drop upon re-visiting previously learned tasks. Additional experiments in Appendix C.3
further highlight this issue.
The training and validation losses, detailed in Appendix        Table 2: The success rate of initial training and
C.1 and Fig. 7, highlight FFT’s propensity to overfit.          revisiting previous tasks with FFT. FFT suffers
This translates to a notable decline in success rates, rein-    from catastrophic forgetting and performs worse
forcing the challenges FFT faces in balancing retention         on re-visits despite re-training on the same data.
of prior tasks with the assimilation of new ones.
                                                                                   LIBERO Task Suite
While ER and the regularization-based method EWC Type
exhibit some potential in mitigating catastrophic forget-             Spatial         Goal        Object
ting, they were detrimental to forward transfer perfor-    Initial     0.79           0.42         0.42
                                                           Re-visit 0.53 ( ↓ 0.26) 0.20 (↓0.22) 0.27 (↓0.15)
mance. Their downsides are also reflected in storage
and computing costs: ER requires more storage for previous data than TAIL LoRA adapter weights
(e.g., Kitchen dataset at 28GB vs 7.8MB for TAIL’s LoRA adapter). Furthermore, EWC presents
significant challenges for larger models because of the increased GPU memory consumption from
maintaining a copy of the entire weights of the old model in memory. We also found it to exhibit
unstable training due to the regularization loss. More discussions are presented in Appendix B.1.
When does TAIL work best? The efficacy of TAIL hinges significantly on the base model’s features.
We compare TAIL under different pretraining strategies and models in Appendix Sec. C.2 and C.3. In
short, TAIL works best with our pretraining architecture and frozen CLIP visual/language encoders,
and performance drops when we fine-tune the pretrained encoders, likely as FFT contaminates the
rich CLIP features when fine-tuned in a niche domain with sparse data.
Analysis Summary. We argue in favor of a large pretrained base model augmented with numerous
lightweight plugins tailored for different downstream tasks. This framework, TAIL, holds considerable
promise for advancing embodied intelligence in real-world applications; the storage footprint of our
entire model is about 660MB, and duplicating this model for each task in a stream of oncoming tasks
is impractical. Meanwhile, the space occupied by one such model can accommodate as many as 84
task-specific adapters, which, as our experiments show, can outperform full fine-tuning regardless.
Moreover, the features of the pretrained weights remain intact, ensuring their applicability across a
broad array of domains. In summary, TAIL offers a promising avenue for the efficient adaptation of
large decision-making models. Despite the fact that our method requires significantly less computation
and memory (and storage), our experiments show that it consistently outperforms all prior approaches
in the continual learning setting. We would also like to highlight that the TAIL framework is not
restricted to imitation learning, but also other learning methods such as reinforcement learning.

6    C ONCLUSION
In this study, we examined the challenges of efficiently adapting large pretrained models for decision-
making and robotics applications. We proposed TAIL, an efficient adaptation framework for pretrained
decision-making models. Through a comprehensive exploration of parameter-efficient fine-tuning
(PEFT) techniques in TAIL, especially Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA), we demonstrated their po-
tential in enhancing adaptation efficiency, mitigating catastrophic forgetting, and ensuring robust
performance across diverse tasks. Our empirical evaluations on the LIBERO benchmark further
underscored the advantages of these techniques in continual learning scenarios. As the demand for
adaptive, intelligent agents grows across various domains, the insights from this research offer a
promising direction for the future of efficient model adaptation in decision-making contexts.


                                                        9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Rishabh Agarwal, Max Schwarzer, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aaron C Courville, and Marc Bellemare.
  Reincarnating reinforcement learning: Reusing prior computation to accelerate progress. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:28955–28971, 2022.

Armen Aghajanyan, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Sonal Gupta. Intrinsic dimensionality explains the
  effectiveness of language model fine-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.13255, 2020.

Christopher M Bishop. Mixture density networks. 1994.

Konstantinos Bousmalis, Giulia Vezzani, Dushyant Rao, Coline Devin, Alex X Lee, Maria Bauza,
  Todor Davchev, Yuxiang Zhou, Agrim Gupta, Akhil Raju, et al. Robocat: A self-improving
  foundation agent for robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.11706, 2023.

Stevo Bozinovski and Ante Fulgosi. The influence of pattern similarity and transfer learning upon
  training of a base perceptron b2. In Proceedings of Symposium Informatica, volume 3, pp. 121–126,
  1976.

Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Joseph Dabis, Chelsea Finn,
  Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Jasmine Hsu, et al. Rt-1: Robotics
  transformer for real-world control at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06817, 2022.

Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Xi Chen, Krzysztof Choromanski,
  Tianli Ding, Danny Driess, Avinava Dubey, Chelsea Finn, Pete Florence, Chuyuan Fu, Montse Gon-
  zalez Arenas, et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control.
  In arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818, 2023.

Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel
  Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, et al. Language
  models are few-shot learners, 2020.

Massimo Caccia, Jonas Mueller, Taesup Kim, Laurent Charlin, and Rasool Fakoor. Task-agnostic
 continual reinforcement learning: Gaining insights and overcoming challenges. In Conference on
 Lifelong Learning Agents, 2023.

Arslan Chaudhry, Marcus Rohrbach, Mohamed Elhoseiny, Thalaiyasingam Ajanthan, Puneet K
  Dokania, Philip HS Torr, and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. On tiny episodic memories in continual
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.10486, 2019.

Yevgen Chebotar, Karol Hausman, Yao Lu, Ted Xiao, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Jake Varley, Alex
  Irpan, Benjamin Eysenbach, Ryan Julian, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. Actionable models:
  Unsupervised offline reinforcement learning of robotic skills. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.07749,
  2021.

Baiming Chen, Zuxin Liu, Jiacheng Zhu, Mengdi Xu, Wenhao Ding, Liang Li, and Ding Zhao.
  Context-aware safe reinforcement learning for non-stationary environments. In 2021 IEEE Inter-
  national Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 10689–10695. IEEE, 2021a.

Lili Chen, Kevin Lu, Aravind Rajeswaran, Kimin Lee, Aditya Grover, Misha Laskin, Pieter Abbeel,
  Aravind Srinivas, and Igor Mordatch. Decision transformer: Reinforcement learning via sequence
  modeling. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:15084–15097, 2021b.

Shoufa Chen, Chongjian Ge, Zhan Tong, Jiangliu Wang, Yibing Song, Jue Wang, and Ping Luo.
  Adaptformer: Adapting vision transformers for scalable visual recognition. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 35:16664–16678, 2022.

Open X-Embodiment Collaboration, Abhishek Padalkar, Acorn Pooley, Ajinkya Jain, Alex Bewley,
 Alex Herzog, Alex Irpan, Alexander Khazatsky, Anant Rai, Anikait Singh, Anthony Brohan,
 Antonin Raffin, Ayzaan Wahid, et al. Open X-Embodiment: Robotic learning datasets and RT-X
  models. https://robotics-transformer-x.github.io, 2023.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Thomas G Dietterich, Lorien Pratt, and Sebastian Thrun. Special issue on inductive transfer. Machine
  Learning, 28(1), 1997.
Danny Driess, Fei Xia, Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi, Corey Lynch, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Brian Ichter,
  Ayzaan Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Quan Vuong, Tianhe Yu, Wenlong Huang, et al. Palm-e: An
  embodied multimodal language model. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03378, 2023.
Rasool Fakoor, Pratik Chaudhari, Stefano Soatto, and Alexander J. Smola. Meta-q-learning. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Haotian Fu, Shangqun Yu, Michael Littman, and George Konidaris. Model-based lifelong reinforce-
  ment learning with bayesian exploration. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  32369–32382, 2022.
Kristen Grauman, Andrew Westbury, Eugene Byrne, Zachary Chavis, Antonino Furnari, Rohit
  Girdhar, Jackson Hamburger, Hao Jiang, Miao Liu, Xingyu Liu, et al. Ego4d: Around the world in
  3,000 hours of egocentric video. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, pp. 18995–19012, 2022.
Abhishek Gupta, Corey Lynch, Brandon Kinman, Garrett Peake, Sergey Levine, and Karol Hausman.
  Demonstration-bootstrapped autonomous practicing via multi-task reinforcement learning. arXiv,
  2022.
Nicklas Hansen, Zhecheng Yuan, Yanjie Ze, Tongzhou Mu, Aravind Rajeswaran, Hao Su, Huazhe Xu,
  and Xiaolong Wang. On pre-training for visuo-motor control: Revisiting a learning-from-scratch
  baseline. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.05749, 2022.
Junxian He, Chunting Zhou, Xuezhe Ma, Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick, and Graham Neubig. Towards
  a unified view of parameter-efficient transfer learning. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022.
Neil Houlsby, Andrei Giurgiu, Stanislaw Jastrzebski, Bruna Morrone, Quentin De Laroussilhe,
  Andrea Gesmundo, Mona Attariyan, and Sylvain Gelly. Parameter-efficient transfer learning for
  nlp. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2790–2799. PMLR, 2019.
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.
Eric Jang, Alex Irpan, Mohi Khansari, Daniel Kappler, Frederik Ebert, Corey Lynch, Sergey Levine,
  and Chelsea Finn. BC-z: Zero-shot task generalization with robotic imitation learning. In 5th
  Annual Conference on Robot Learning, 2021.
Yunfan Jiang, Agrim Gupta, Zichen Zhang, Guanzhi Wang, Yongqiang Dou, Yanjun Chen, Li Fei-Fei,
  Anima Anandkumar, Yuke Zhu, and Linxi Fan. Vima: General robot manipulation with multimodal
  prompts. In Fortieth International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
Dmitry Kalashnkov, Jake Varley, Yevgen Chebotar, Ben Swanson, Rico Jonschkowski, Chelsea Finn,
 Sergey Levine, and Karol Hausman. Mt-opt: Continuous multi-task robotic reinforcement learning
 at scale. arXiv, 2021.
Liyiming Ke, Sanjiban Choudhury, Matt Barnes, Wen Sun, Gilwoo Lee, and Siddhartha Srinivasa.
  Imitation learning as f -divergence minimization. arXiv preprint 1905.12888, 2020.
James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A
  Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, et al. Overcoming
  catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 114
  (13):3521–3526, 2017.
Ananya Kumar, Aditi Raghunathan, Robbie Matthew Jones, Tengyu Ma, and Percy Liang. Fine-
  tuning can distort pretrained features and underperform out-of-distribution. In International
 Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Saurabh Kumar, Henrik Marklund, and Benjamin Van Roy. Maintaining plasticity via regenerative
  regularization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.11958, 2023.

Yoonho Lee, Annie S Chen, Fahim Tajwar, Ananya Kumar, Huaxiu Yao, Percy Liang, and Chelsea
  Finn. Surgical fine-tuning improves adaptation to distribution shifts. International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2023.

Brian Lester, Rami Al-Rfou, and Noah Constant. The power of scale for parameter-efficient prompt
  tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08691, 2021.

Xiang Lisa Li and Percy Liang. Prefix-tuning: Optimizing continuous prompts for generation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2101.00190, 2021.

Anthony Liang, Ishika Singh, Karl Pertsch, and Jesse Thomason. Transformer adapters for robot
  learning. In CoRL 2022 Workshop on Pre-training Robot Learning, 2022.

Bo Liu, Yifeng Zhu, Chongkai Gao, Yihao Feng, Qiang Liu, Yuke Zhu, and Peter Stone. Libero:
  Benchmarking knowledge transfer for lifelong robot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03310,
  2023a.

Xiao Liu, Yanan Zheng, Zhengxiao Du, Ming Ding, Yujie Qian, Zhilin Yang, and Jie Tang. Gpt
  understands, too. AI Open, 2023b.

Zuxin Liu, Zijian Guo, Yihang Yao, Zhepeng Cen, Wenhao Yu, Tingnan Zhang, and Ding
  Zhao. Constrained decision transformer for offline safe reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.07351, 2023c.

David Lopez-Paz and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. Gradient episodic memory for continual learning. In
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 2017.

Yao Lu, Karol Hausman, Yevgen Chebotar, Mengyuan Yan, Eric Jang, Alexander Herzog, Ted Xiao,
  Alex Irpan, Mohi Khansari, Dmitry Kalashnikov, and Sergey Levine. Aw-opt: Learning robotic
  skills with imitation andreinforcement at scale. In 5th Annual Conference on Robot Learning,
  2021.

Clare Lyle, Mark Rowland, and Will Dabney. Understanding and preventing capacity loss in
  reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.

Yecheng Jason Ma, Shagun Sodhani, Dinesh Jayaraman, Osbert Bastani, Vikash Kumar, and Amy
  Zhang. Vip: Towards universal visual reward and representation via value-implicit pre-training.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.00030, 2022.

Yecheng Jason Ma, William Liang, Vaidehi Som, Vikash Kumar, Amy Zhang, Osbert Bastani, and
  Dinesh Jayaraman. Liv: Language-image representations and rewards for robotic control. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2306.00958, 2023.

Arjun Majumdar, Karmesh Yadav, Sergio Arnaud, Yecheng Jason Ma, Claire Chen, Sneha Silwal,
  Aryan Jain, Vincent-Pierre Berges, Pieter Abbeel, Jitendra Malik, Dhruv Batra, Yixin Lin, Olek-
  sandr Maksymets, Aravind Rajeswaran, and Franziska Meier. Where are we in the search for an
  artificial visual cortex for embodied intelligence? 2023a.

Arjun Majumdar, Karmesh Yadav, Sergio Arnaud, Yecheng Jason Ma, Claire Chen, Sneha Silwal,
  Aryan Jain, Vincent-Pierre Berges, Pieter Abbeel, Jitendra Malik, et al. Where are we in the search
  for an artificial visual cortex for embodied intelligence? arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.18240, 2023b.

Arun Mallya and Svetlana Lazebnik. Packnet: Adding multiple tasks to a single network by iterative
  pruning. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), June 2018.

Ajay Mandlekar, Danfei Xu, Josiah Wong, Soroush Nasiriany, Chen Wang, Rohun Kulkarni, Li Fei-
  Fei, Silvio Savarese, Yuke Zhu, and Roberto Martín-Martín. What matters in learning from offline
  human demonstrations for robot manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.03298, 2021.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yuning Mao, Lambert Mathias, Rui Hou, Amjad Almahairi, Hao Ma, Jiawei Han, Wen-tau Yih, and
  Madian Khabsa. Unipelt: A unified framework for parameter-efficient language model tuning.
  2022.
Michael McCloskey and Neal J Cohen. Catastrophic interference in connectionist networks: The
 sequential learning problem. In Psychology of learning and motivation, volume 24, pp. 109–165.
 Elsevier, 1989.
Suraj Nair, Aravind Rajeswaran, Vikash Kumar, Chelsea Finn, and Abhinav Gupta. R3m: A universal
  visual representation for robot manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.12601, 2022.
Ethan Perez, Florian Strub, Harm de Vries, Vincent Dumoulin, and Aaron Courville. Film: Visual
  reasoning with a general conditioning layer, 2017.
Jonas Pfeiffer, Aishwarya Kamath, Andreas Rücklé, Kyunghyun Cho, and Iryna Gurevych. Adapter-
  fusion: Non-destructive task composition for transfer learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.00247,
  2020a.
Jonas Pfeiffer, Andreas Rücklé, Clifton Poth, Aishwarya Kamath, Ivan Vulić, Sebastian Ruder,
  Kyunghyun Cho, and Iryna Gurevych. Adapterhub: A framework for adapting transformers. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2007.07779, 2020b.
Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. 2019a.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019b.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
S. Rebuffi, A. Vedaldi, and H. Bilen. Efficient parametrization of multi-domain deep neural networks.
   In 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 8119–
   8127, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, jun 2018. IEEE Computer Society. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2018.00847.
   URL https://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/CVPR.2018.00847.
Scott Reed, Konrad Zolna, Emilio Parisotto, Sergio Gómez Colmenarejo, Alexander Novikov, Gabriel
  Barth-maron, Mai Giménez, Yury Sulsky, et al. A generalist agent. Transactions on Machine
  Learning Research, 2022. ISSN 2835-8856. Featured Certification, Outstanding Certification.
David Rolnick, Arun Ahuja, Jonathan Schwarz, Timothy Lillicrap, and Gregory Wayne. Experience
  replay for continual learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Stephane Ross, Geoffrey Gordon, and Drew Bagnell. A reduction of imitation learning and structured
  prediction to no-regret online learning. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 15 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
  pp. 627–635. PMLR, 11–13 Apr 2011.
Jürgen Schmidhuber. Learning complex, extended sequences using the principle of history compres-
  sion. Neural Computation, 4(2):234–242, 1992. doi: 10.1162/neco.1992.4.2.234.
Thomas Schmied, Markus Hofmarcher, Fabian Paischer, Razvan Pascanu, and Sepp Hochreiter.
  Learning to modulate pre-trained models in rl. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.14884, 2023.
Nur Muhammad Mahi Shafiullah, Zichen Jeff Cui, Ariuntuya Altanzaya, and Lerrel Pinto. Behavior
  transformers: Cloning $k$ modes with one stone. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle
  Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Mohit Sharma, Claudio Fantacci, Yuxiang Zhou, Skanda Koppula, Nicolas Heess, Jon Scholz, and
 Yusuf Aytar. Lossless adaptation of pretrained vision models for robotic manipulation. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2304.06600, 2023.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Mohit Shridhar, Lucas Manuelli, and Dieter Fox. Cliport: What and where pathways for robotic
 manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 894–906. PMLR, 2022.
Sebastian Thrun and Tom M Mitchell. Lifelong robot learning. In The biology and technology of
  intelligent autonomous agents, pp. 165–196. Springer, 1995.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez, Armand
 Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language
  models, 2023.
René Traoré, Hugo Caselles-Dupré, Timothée Lesort, Te Sun, Guanghang Cai, Natalia Díaz Ro-
  dríguez, and David Filliat. Discorl: Continual reinforcement learning via policy distillation. CoRR,
  abs/1907.05855, 2019.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Ł ukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio,
  H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017.
Mengdi Xu, Yikang Shen, Shun Zhang, Yuchen Lu, Ding Zhao, Joshua Tenenbaum, and Chuang Gan.
 Prompting decision transformer for few-shot policy generalization. In international conference on
 machine learning, pp. 24631–24645. PMLR, 2022.
Mengdi Xu, Yuchen Lu, Yikang Shen, Shun Zhang, Ding Zhao, and Chuang Gan. Hyper-decision
 transformer for efficient online policy adaptation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.08487, 2023.
Yihang Yao, Zuxin Liu, Zhepeng Cen, Jiacheng Zhu, Wenhao Yu, Tingnan Zhang, and Ding Zhao.
  Constraint-conditioned policy optimization for versatile safe reinforcement learning. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Jesse Zhang, Karl Pertsch, Jiahui Zhang, and Joseph J. Lim. Sprint: Scalable policy pre-training via
  language instruction relabeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.11886, 2023a.
Jesse Zhang, Jiahui Zhang, Karl Pertsch, Ziyi Liu, Xiang Ren, Minsuk Chang, Shao-Hua Sun, and
  Joseph J Lim. Bootstrap your own skills: Learning to solve new tasks with large language model
  guidance. In 7th Annual Conference on Robot Learning, 2023b.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Appendix: TAIL: Task-specific adapters for imitation
          learning with large pretrained models
A      M ODEL A RCHITECTURE D ETAILS

                                                           GMM                                                GMM                                             GMM
                                                        distribution                                       distribution                                    distribution
                                      action                                             action                                           action
                                        t-2                                                t-1                                               t



                                                                Temporal Decoder (GPT2)                                                                                 …



                            Input Fusion Module (FiLM layer)                     Input Fusion Module (FiLM layer)                Input Fusion Module (FiLM layer)
       Task token
                            image         image             state                image         image            state             image        image            state
                            token         token             token                token         token            token             token        token            token


      Instruction                 Spatial                 State                        Spatial                 State                    Spatial               State
        Encoder                  Encoder                 encoder                      Encoder                 encoder                  Encoder               encoder
         (CLIP)                 (CLIP ViT)                                           (CLIP ViT)                                       (CLIP ViT)


    Open the top drawer                              Low-dim states (t-2)                                 Low-dim states (t-1)                            Low-dim states (t)
     of the cabinet and
     put the bowl in it.
      Language task        Agent-view Eye-in-hand                               Agent-view Eye-in-hand                           Agent-view Eye-in-hand
       description         image (t-2) image (t-2)                              image (t-1) image (t-1)                           image (t)  image (t)


Figure 6: A detailed view of the multi-modal, transformer policy architecture we utilize for pretrain-
ing. We encode language task descriptions with a pretrained CLIP instruction encoder and image
observations with a pretrained CLIP spatial encoder. We additionally encode robot state observations
which, along with the observation embeddings, are embedded into a sequence of tokens used by the
temporal decoder transformer to predict single-step action distributions. We include an input fusion
module (FiLM (Perez et al., 2017)) to explicitly combine the task embedding with the observation
and state embeddings for better instruction-following ability.


A.1      P RETRAINED I NPUT E NCODERS

We utilize pretrained CLIP image and textual encoders (Radford et al., 2021) to encode image
observations and language goal descriptions, respectively. Note that we do not use a pre-trained
encoder for the low-dimensional state; the state encoder is learned from scratch.

A.2      I NPUT M ODALITY F USION

We utilize Feature-wise Linear Modulation (FiLM) layers (Perez et al., 2017) (Fig. 1(a), input fusion
module) to fuse language task specifications with image observations. FiLM is a technique in
multi-modal deep learning which modulates the intermediate activations of a neural network based
on external information. Rather than explicitly designing architectures for conditional computation,
FiLM layers simply use the features from one network to modulate the features of another.
Let’s consider a neural network f with intermediate activations x and an external network g which
outputs modulation parameters γ and β. The modulated features x′ are given by:


                                                                    γ, β = g(z)                                                                                           (4)
                                                                            ′
                                                                       x = γ ⊙ x + β,                                                                                     (5)

where z is the input to the external network g; ⊙ represents element-wise multiplication; γ and β are
vectors having the same size as x, with each element modulating a corresponding feature in x.


                                                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Thus, FiLM layers allow for a dynamic and feature-wise conditional computation without needing
explicit architectural changes. As such, task token (language) embeddings are given as input to a
fully connected feedforward network, which outputs scale and translation parameters for the image
and state embeddings. These parameters modulate the image and state embeddings before they are
passed to the transformer backbone.

A.3    T EMPORAL T RANSFORMER BACKBONE

We utilize a standard GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019a) transformer backbone for our policy. Its input
is a sequence of image and low-dim state encodings (robot joint states in LIBERO) and it outputs
an action distribution. Following the literature (Mandlekar et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2023a), we adopt
a stochastic policy parametrization based on a Gaussian-Mixture-Model (GMM) (Bishop, 1994).
Therefore, for every decision-making step, the transformer produces a latent vector of Gaussian
means and variances, one for each of the GMM modes. We optimize the parameters of the model
with the negative log-likelihood loss on the ground truth actions based on the parameters of the GMM
distribution. At evaluation time, we deterministically select the next action parameterized by the
mean of the Gaussian model with the highest density.
The environment configuration and the temporal decoder (GPT-2) hyperparameters are presented in
Table 4.
                  Table 4: Environment configuration and GPT-2 model hyperparameters
          Environment Configuration                       GPT2 Temporal Encoder Configuration
    Action Dim.                  7                Max Seq Length     8       Activation      Gelu New
   Raw State Dim.                9                Number of Heads    8    Number of Layers       6
 Max Episode Length            500                 GMM Min Std    0.0001    GMM Modes            5
  Image Resolution          128 x 128              FiLM Layers       2        Dropout          0.15
    Image Views      Agent Front, Eye-in-Hand



B     I MPLEMENTATION AND T RAINING D ETAILS
B.1    BASELINE D ETAILS

Experience Replay (ER). ER (Chaudhry et al., 2019; Rolnick et al., 2019) is a rehearsal-based
approach that retains a buffer of samples from previous tasks to facilitate the learning of new tasks.
After completing the learning process for a task, a subset of the data is saved into this buffer. During
the training of subsequent tasks, ER draws samples from this buffer and mixes them with current task
data. This process ensures that the training data closely resembles the distribution of data across all
tasks. In our setup, we store all the previous trajectories in a replay buffer. For each training iteration
on a new task, we uniformly sample 50% trajectories from this buffer and 50% from the new task’s
training data, respectively.
Elastic Weight Consolidation (EWC). EWC (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017) is a regularization method
that adds a term to the standard single-task learning objective to constrain the updates of the neural
network. This constraint uses the Fisher information matrix to gauge the significance of each network
parameter. The loss function for task k is represented as:
                                                    Xλ
                                                                     ∗
                           LEWCk (θ) = LBCK (θ) +          Fi (θi − θk−1,i )2
                                                      i
                                                         2
Here, λ is a hyperparameter penalty, and Fi is the diagonal of the Fisher information matrix given by:
                                                                          2
                           Fk = Es∼Dk ,a∼pθ (·|s) (∇θk log pθk (a|s))
For our experiments, we adopt the online version of EWC. It updates the Fisher information matrix
using an exponential moving average throughout the lifelong learning process. The actual Fisher
Information Matrix estimate used is:
                                    F̃k = γFk−1 + (1 − γ)Fk
                                           2
with Fk = E(s,a)∼Dk (∇θk log pθk (a|s)) and k representing the task number. Following the bench-
mark implementation (Liu et al., 2023a), the hyperparameters are set as γ = 0.9 and λ = 5 × 104 .


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Discussions. Both Experience Replay (ER) and Elastic Weight Consolidation (EWC) demonstrate
potential in mitigating catastrophic forgetting. However, they each come with notable limitations,
particularly with respect to forward transfer performance, storage, and computational efficiency.
Storage Overhead: ER demands significant storage space to maintain samples from prior tasks. This
becomes particularly evident when comparing the storage needs of ER for larger datasets, such as the
Kitchen dataset which requires 28GB, with the lightweight LoRA adapter occupies only 7.8MB. The
vast difference in storage demands underscores the inefficiency of the ER approach.
Computational Challenges: EWC, by design, necessitates the maintenance of a copy of the weights
of the previous model in GPU memory. This leads to escalated GPU memory consumption, making
EWC tends to reduce the training batch size, subsequently slowing down the training process.
Training Instability: The regularization approach of EWC can introduce instability during training,
owing to the regularization loss. This is also reflected by the poor forward transfer capability, as
shown in Table 1.
Scalability Concerns: While EWC might be manageable for smaller networks, it is ill-suited for the
fine-tuning of larger decision models due to its computational and storage challenges.
Given these outlined limitations, we advocate TAIL for alternative approaches that are both storage-
efficient and computationally scalable, especially for large pretrained model adaptation.

B.2   TAIL A DAPTER C ONFIGURATIONS

To establish our TAIL adapter configurations, we primarily draw from the AdapterHub implementa-
tion, setup and hyperparameters (Pfeiffer et al., 2020b).
We utilize the default hyperparameters for LoRA, with the rank r = 8 and scaling factor α = 8.
These low-rank matrices are applied in parallel to the Transformer’s query and value matrices (Hu
et al., 2021). We also adopt the default for prefix token length of 30 for the prefix tuning (Li & Liang,
2021) method across all tasks. To improve the training stability, Low-rank matrices (r = 16) are
employed during training to represent the prefix tokens. The Bottleneck Adapter (Houlsby et al.,
2019) employs the bottleneck size of 32, and is applied to both the output layer of the attention
and the intermediate feedforward layers. The RoboAdapter method (Sharma et al., 2023), as the
closest work to us, also applies the sequential adapters to the decision-making domain. It differs
from the Bottleneck Adapter in that they adopt a special insertion of weights to specific layers of the
Transformer, namely, layers 0, 1, 5, 6, 10, 11. They selectively skip certain layers, aiming to increase
the bottleneck size on the remaining layers. Therefore, the bottleneck size is doubled to 64 for this
approach, such that all methods share similar amount of parameters.
In order to maintain balanced adapter parameters number between the two CLIP-based (spatial
and instruction) encoders, and the temporal transformer GPT2 decoder, the rank size for the GPT2
decoder is doubled across all methodologies. This adjustment compensates for the GPT2 decoder’s
fewer layers relative to the encoders.
For the continual learning setup, we use the previous stage’s adapter weight (if any) plus a small
random Gaussian noise with standard deviation 0.001 as an initialization of the current stage. The
goal for adding a minor random noise aims to improve the adapter weight capacity (Kumar et al.,
2022; Agarwal et al., 2022; Lyle et al., 2022), preventing the weights from being trapped into local
optimum. There is a potential to better utilize the trained adapter weights on preceding tasks. We
outline several promising exploration directions in Appendix Section B.4.

B.3   T RAINING H YPERPARAMETERS AND E XPERIMENT C ONFIGURATIONS

Following similar setup as in the LIBERO benchmark (Liu et al., 2023a), we perform data augmenta-
tion for the image observation data for all methods. We adopt the color, affine, and random erase
augmentations to improve the robustness. The hyperparameters are presented in Table 5.
For our training process, we employed the AdamW optimizer combined with a linear learning rate
scheduler. The majority of our task suites—Kitchen, Spatial, Goal, Object, Living Room, and Study
Room—underwent training for 100 epochs. Notably, each suite encompasses multiple tasks, with
Kitchen having 40 and the others containing 8 each. In contrast, the 10 long-horizon adaptation tasks,


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Table 5: Image data augmentation and training hyperparameters
              Image Augmentation                               Training and Optimizer Configuration
     Brightness      0.3     Contrast     0.3       Training Epochs       100/50 Batch Size (per device)   10/14/18
     Saturation      0.3       Hue        0.3   Training Epochs per Eval     5      Eval Episodes/Task         8
  Color Aug Prob.    0.9 Affine Degrees   15         Warm-up Steps         500        Weight Decay            0.1
  Affine Translate   0.1   Affine Prob.   0.6      Learning Rate (LR)      1e-4       LR Scheduler          Linear
 Random Erase Prob. 0.1                           Training Demo Num         40    Validation Demo Num         40



termed LIBERO-10, were trained for 50 epochs, with each task trained sequentially. We performed
evaluations after every 5 training epochs over 8 episodes (unseen in training) for each task.
Computing machine. Our experimental platform was powered by an AMD EPYC 7R32 CPU
running Ubuntu 20.04.06. All trainings utilized 8 NVIDIA A10G GPUs, each with a memory
of 22731 MiB, equipped with driver version 470.199.02 and CUDA version 11.4. We employ
Distributed Data Parallel (DDP) for parallel training across 8 GPUs, and utilize the 16-bit floating
point precision (FP16) training mode to accelerate the training process. To ensure reproducibility, we
adopted 3 distinct random seeds: 0, 21, and 42.
Training time. For a holistic perspective on training duration: FFT and ER methods demanded
between 120 ∼ 140 hours per experiment (1.5 ∼ 1.75 hours per task) for the 6 task suites shown
in Fig. 5, including the evaluation time. In stark contrast, TAIL-based techniques slashed this to
60 ∼ 66 hours (0.75 ∼ 0.825 hours per task). Hence, TAIL would also be much cheaper to train,
considering its significantly shorter training time under identical computing machines.
Batch sizes varied by training method. EWC employed a batch size of 10, given its added memory
demands to store a distinct full parameter set. FFT and ER utilized batch sizes of 14. Owing to
TAIL’s more efficient memory utilization—detailed in Table 3—a larger batch size of 18 was feasible,
which can maximize GPU resource usage on our machine, reducing training duration and cost.

B.4   M ORE D ISCUSSION AND F UTURE D IRECTIONS

The TAIL framework paves the way for a myriad of research opportunities:

1. Better Weight Allocation Method Across Layers: An interesting question within this framework
   is discerning which layers, early or later, derive the most benefit from weight modifications. This
   can offer insights into the adaptability of neural architectures (Lee et al., 2023).
2. Enhanced Reusability of Trained Adapters: Exploring methods to efficiently reuse adapters
   from prior tasks, especially in scenarios with limited data, is a promising direction. AdapterFusion
   techniques (Pfeiffer et al., 2020a) can be potentially useful, enabling the composition of knowledge
   from multiple pre-existing adapters.
3. Building on Knowledge with Parallel Integration: The parallel integration method, particularly
   with LoRA weights, offers the capability to merge trained weights back into the main model. This
   iterative buildup of knowledge makes the approach valuable for continual learning, allowing new
   adapters to capitalize on the expertise of their predecessors.
4. Combining with Established Continual Learning Strategies: The potential to merge the TAIL
   framework with existing continual learning methods, like Experience Replay and EWC, can be
   a beneficial avenue. Such integrations can accommodate the strengths of each method, crafting
   models that are both efficient in memory and robust against forgetting.
5. Extension beyond the Imitation Learning Domain: Taking the TAILframework into other
   decision-making domains, such as reinforcement learning (RL), is also promising. TAIL has the
   potential to address the model capacity loss issue in RL (Agarwal et al., 2022; Lyle et al., 2022).
   Leveraging the TAIL framework can also aid in multitask learning, meta-learning, and efficiently
   adapting offline-trained RL models to new tasks without the necessity of vast amounts of data or
   extensive fine-tuning, thereby potentially accelerating convergence to optimal policies.

The avenues above elucidate the adaptability and potential of the TAIL framework, setting the stage
for future research in this domain.



                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C     M ORE E XPERIMENT R ESULTS
C.1    OVERFITTING
For each task, we used 40 demonstrations for training and 10 for validation. We are interested in
the following question: In scenarios where data is limited, how resilient is TAIL against overfitting
compared to traditional fine-tuning methods? To answer this, we present the training and validation
loss cross the Kitchen, Spatial, Goal, Object, Living Room and Study Room task suites, each with
100 epochs, in Fig. 7.

                        TAIL (LoRA)     TAIL (Bottleneck Adapter)    TAIL (Prefix Tuning)            FFT
                                 Training Loss                                     Validation Loss
                0
            2000
            4000
                    0   100 200 300 400 500 600 0                   100 200 300 400 500 600
                                Epoch                                       Epoch
Figure 7: Adaptation loss trends: Training versus validation. The graph shows that the TAIL model
consistently has more stable validation losses, which means that it is more robust to contexts with
limited data. On the other hand, the full fine-tuning model (FFT) has larger validation losses, which
means that it is more likely to overfit to the training data.

A noteworthy observation from Fig. 7 is the behavior of FFT. Despite achieving the lowest training
loss across all stages, its validation loss spikes significantly after just a few epochs. This pattern
suggests severe overfitting when FFT is applied to the entire parameter space using limited data.
Intriguingly, this overfitting intensifies in the later adaptation phases, potentially signifying a distortion
of pretrained features as alluded to by Kumar et al. (2022). Such distortion could be a contributor to
the suboptimal success rate observed in Fig. 5, and the loss of learning capacity when revisiting a
previous task, as presented in Table 2.
In constrast, TAIL-based methods shows strong resilience                                   Pretrain on Kitchen via FFT
against overfitting. Drawing from the Occam’s razor prin-                      0.6
ciple, TAIL leverages fewer trainable parameters, inher-
                                                                    Success Rate


ently reducing its potential to overfit with scarce data. Ad-                  0.4
ditional, different integration styles provide the flexibility
to effectively utilize the features from pretrained models                     0.2
while preserving them across all the adaptation stages.
                                                              0.0   VC-1            CLIP         Random
This observation underscores the disparities between our                Spatial Encoder Init Weights
decision-making problem, characterized by its limited
data, and the traditional language or vision domains, which Figure 8: Training on the Kitchen task
have data in abundance. Prior studies utilizing parameter- with different pretrained CLIP-ViT en-
efficient fine-tuning techniques for language or vision coder weight. Random means using ran-
tasks often reported superior performance with full fine- dom initialization weight.
tuning due to its low training loss (He et al., 2022; Mao
et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022; Sharma et al., 2023). However, as our results demonstrate, a lower
training loss does not invariably translate to superior performance, especially in the context of a
data-scarce sequential decision-making tasks.

C.2    A NALYSIS OF PRETRAINED WEIGHTS ’ INFLUENCE

We aim to answer the following question: how does the underlying pretrained base model influence the
performance of TAIL, and are certain pretrained weights more conducive to this kind of adaptation?
We initiated our investigation by analyzing the success rates of 40 Kitchen tasks using different
pretrained weights for the spatial encoder. Apart from the CLIP-ViT pretrained encodings as we
adopted in our main results, two other initialization of weights were considered: one sourced from
the Visual Cortex 1 (VC-1) (Majumdar et al., 2023b), recognized for being a leading pretrained


                                                         19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


model for embodied agent tasks, and another using randomly initialized weights. The language
instruction encoder consistently utilized the CLIP text model. From the results in Fig. 8, the VC-1
pretrained weights delivered performance on par with the CLIP-ViT encodings. Both considerably
outperformed the randomly initialized weights, suggesting that large-scale pretraining can indeed
enhance downstream fine-tuning. We then study how does the pretrained base model influence the
performance of TAIL.

C.3    F URTHER E VALUATIONS ON TAIL WITH D IFFERENT BASE M ODELS

To understand the influence of the base model’s features on the performance of TAIL, we conducted
additional evaluations. In Table 6, the methods column showcases different configurations:

       • LoRA (CLIP): The main setup we adopted in the experiment section 5, which keeps the
         pretrained CLIP encodings frozen across all the adaptation stages.
       • LoRA (CLIP with FFT): Starting with the CLIP model, we applied FFT pretraining on the
         Kitchen task before using LoRA for subsequent adaptations. This helps us test out whether
         adaptation plasticity suffers after full fine-tuning as the only difference between this and the
         above method is the addition of full fine-tuning before using LoRA.
       • LoRA (VC-1 with FFT): The VC-1 model, after FFT pretraining on the Kitchen task, was
         adapted using LoRA.
       • LoRA (Random with FFT): A model with randomly initialized weights underwent FFT
         pretraining on the Kitchen task, followed by adaptation with LoRA.

All the pretrained encodings implemented in the same model architecture as described in Appendix
Section A.
Observations from Table 6 highlight several findings:

       • Dominance of Original CLIP: The pure CLIP base model, when combined with LoRA,
         yielded the highest success rates across all task suites, suggesting the inherent quality and
         robustness of the original CLIP features for these tasks.
       • FFT’s Mixed Impact: While FFT pretraining aids in task-specific fine-tuning, when
         combined with CLIP, it leads to a degradation in performance. This could be attributed
         to FFT potentially diluting the comprehensive and rich features within CLIP while also
         reducing adaptation plasticity (Kumar et al., 2022), especially when exposed to a more
         constrained domain with limited data.
       • VC-1’s Comparable Performance: The VC-1 model, though renowned in the domain of
         embodied agent tasks, delivered results that were only marginally better than the randomly
         initialized weights when both were subjected to FFT pretraining and then adapted with
         LoRA. This emphasizes the unique advantages of the original CLIP features.

Interestingly, it is observed that CLIP is pretrained on the most comprehensive dataset, followed by
VC-1. In contrast, the model with random weights only underwent pretraining on the 40 Kitchen
tasks. The success rates mirror this order, underscoring the idea that the efficacy of TAIL is closely
tied to a base model pretrained with rich features on extensive datasets. So in summary, the choice
of base model significantly affects the performance of TAIL, with CLIP’s original features showing
remarkable compatibility and resilience across various task suites

Table 6: Evaluation results of FWT for LoRA with different pretrained model weights. The higher, the better.
We highlight the best method with highest FWT as bold.

         Method                 Spatial        Goal          Object       Living Room     Study Room      Average
      LoRA (CLIP)              0.76 ± 0.02   0.79 ± 0.02    0.73 ± 0.14     0.73 ± 0.07     0.55 ± 0.11   0.71 ± 0.07
   LoRA (CLIP with FFT)        0.62 ± 0.04   0.67 ± 0.13    0.38 ± 0.08     0.32 ± 0.08     0.32 ± 0.01   0.46 ± 0.07
  LoRA (Random with FFT)       0.38 ± 0.19   0.60 ± 0.06    0.37 ± 0.03     0.23 ± 0.01     0.47 ± nan    0.41 ± 0.07
   LoRA (VC-1 with FFT)        0.56 ± 0.07   0.66 ± 0.08    0.25 ± 0.00     0.20 ± 0.06     0.48 ± 0.07   0.43 ± 0.05


                                                           20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.4                  R ANK S IZE A BLATION S TUDY

In order to understand the impact of rank-size on adaptation performance, we conducted experiments
using varying rank sizes for the LoRA and Bottleneck Adapter methods. The results, illustrated in
Fig. 9, present the average success rates across the Spatial, Goal, and Object task suites. It is evident
that increasing the rank size generally enhances performance up to a certain point. Beyond this
optimal threshold, further increasing the rank size does not necessarily lead to higher success rates,
potentially because of overfitting. Notably, in our continual learning context, the parallel insertion
approach of LoRA consistently surpasses the sequential style of the Bottleneck Adapter method.

                                                                                         0.8
                            Success Rate vs. Rank Size                                                                                               TAIL-LoRA
                                                                                         0.7                                                         FFT-CLIP
               0.8                                                                                                                                   FFT-In-Domain
                                                                                         0.6
               0.7


                                                                          Success Rate
                                                                                         0.5
               0.6                                                                       0.4
Success Rate


               0.5                                                                       0.3
               0.4                                                                       0.2
                                                                                         0.1
               0.3
                                                  LoRA                                   0.0
               0.2                                                                             Kitchen   Spatial      Goal       Object     Living       Study
                                                  Bottleneck Adapter                                           Continual Learning Task Suites
                     2      8          32           128   256   512 768
                                Rank Size (log scale)                      Figure 10: Comparison for TAIL-LoRA, sequential
                                                                           FFT with pre-trained CLIP weights, and FFT-In-Domain.
Figure 9: Ablation study of the rank-size of LoRA                          FFT-In-Domain is trained from scratch with task-suite
and Bottleneck adapters. Increasing the rank size                          demonstration data only, which saves a copy of the entire
generally enhances performance up to a certain                             model for each task. FFT with CLIP excels in initial
point. Beyond this optimal threshold, further in-                          Kitchen and Spatial suites, highlighting the value of
creasing the rank size does not necessarily lead                           pretrained models; however, its performance declines
to higher success rates. The parallel insertion ap-                        in subsequent tasks, suggesting reduced adaptability. In
proach of LoRA consistently surpasses the sequen-                          contrast, TAIL-LoRA demonstrates consistent superior
tial style of the Bottleneck Adapter method                                performance across all suites.


Additionally, we would like to note that our TAIL framework exhibits data adaptivity, suggesting that
the rank size could be adjusted based on the quantity of adaptation data. In scenarios with smaller
datasets, a smaller rank size could be more effective, and vice versa.



C.5                  C OMPARISON BETWEEN T RAINING FROM S CRATCH AND U SING P RETRAINED M ODELS

Fig. 10 compares the success rates across task suites for TAIL-LoRA, sequential FFT with pre-trained
CLIP weights, and FFT-In-Domain. Unlike FFT-CLIP, FFT-In-Domain is trained from scratch with
task-suite demonstration data only, i.e., we need to maintain a copy of the entire model for each task
suite. There are three observations:
1. Pretrained Weights Advantage: In the initial Kitchen and Spatial task suites, FFT with CLIP
pretrained weights demonstrates a higher success rate compared to FFT trained from scratch. This
indicates the effectiveness of leveraging pretrained models, particularly in the context of the Kitchen
suite where the benefit is more pronounced.
2. Decline in Model Adaptability: Despite the initial advantage, sequential FFT with CLIP shows a
marked decline in performance in the remaining four task suites - Goal, Object, Living, and Study.
This trend may be indicative of a loss in model plasticity, where the pre-trained model performs well
in the early stages but struggles to adapt to new tasks after the pre-trained weights are contaminated.
3. TAIL-LoRA’s Consistent Performance: Throughout all the task suites, TAIL-LoRA with
pretrained CLIP consistently outperforms the other methods. This suggests that the LoRA approach,
combined with the advantages of pretrained CLIP weights, provides a robust and adaptable framework
capable of handling a variety of tasks with greater efficiency.



                                                                          21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.6       A BLATION STUDY FOR DIFFERENT INTEGRATION STYLE COMBINATIONS

It’s noteworthy that our method allows for the simultaneous use of multiple integration techniques
(Mao et al., 2022). This flexibility lets us explore the performance impact of combining LoRA
(parallel integration), bottleneck adapter (sequential integration), and prefix token (concatenation). To
this end, we conduct an ablation study for each of the combinations over the Spatial, Goal, and Object
task suites. The experiment result is shown in Fig. 11, where the y-axis is the averaged success rate.
A key finding is the critical role of
LoRA (parallel integration) in enhanc-                                            LoRA        Prefix + Adapter           Adapter               Prefix + Adapter + LoRA
                                                                                  Prefix      Prefix + LoRA              Adapter + LoRA
ing adaptation performance. Combi-                                                            Ablation study of different combinations
nations involving LoRA consistently
outperform those without it. For in-                                        0.7                               +LoRA
stance, the standalone use of LoRA                                                                           +Adapter
                                                                            0.6                                                 +LoRA
yields a comparable success rate w.r.t
                                                                            0.5


                                                             Success Rate
the combination with others. This
pattern underscores LoRA’s effective-                                       0.4
ness, either used alone or in conjunc-                                      0.3
tion with other methods. In contrast,
the combination of Prefix and Adapter                                       0.2
without LoRA results in a notably                                           0.1
lower success rate (0.6641), highlight-                                     0.0
ing LoRA’s indispensability.                                                               LoRA               Prefix           Adapter        Prefix+Adapter
                                                                                                                                                  +LoRA
                                                                                                               Interation Method
The integration of all three
methods—Prefix, Adapter, and Figure 11: Ablation study for integration style combinations.
LoRA—achieves a success rate that is LoRA (parallel integration) plays a crucial role in enhancing adap-
comparable to LoRA’s standalone per- tation performance, consistently outperforming methods without
formance. This outcome suggests that it. Whether used alone or in combination with other methods like
while the combination of different Prefix and Adapter, LoRA shows superior effectiveness.
integration methods does not detract
from performance, LoRA remains the
primary driver of successful adaptation. These findings emphasize the importance of LoRA in adapter
weight integration strategies and provide valuable guidance for future approaches in this domain.
C.7       D ETAILED PER - TASK RESULTS IN THE LIBERO-L ONG TASK SUITE

Table 7: Adaptation results on 10 long horizon tasks. The ↑ symbol means the higher, the better. The BWT ↑
for TAIL methods are all 0 (no catastrophic forgetting). We highlight the best method (highest FWT ↑) in bold.
FPF results were omitted due to its near-zero performance.

                                   Conventional Fine-Tuning Methods                                                          TAIL-based Methods (Ours)
Task
             Full Fine-Tuning             Experience Replay                                EWC                   LoRA          Prefix      Bottleneck    RoboAdapter
            FWT ↑       BWT ↑            FWT ↑        BWT ↑                       FWT ↑           BWT ↑          FWT ↑         FWT ↑        FWT ↑          FWT ↑
Task 1     0.42 ± 0.07        -         0.25 ± 0.12        -                  0.38 ± 0.12          -           0.62 ± 0.00   0.38 ± 0.12   0.21 ± 0.14    0.12 ± 0.00
Task 2     0.58 ± 0.07   -0.42 ± 0.06   0.58 ± 0.07   -0.25 ± 0.10            0.54 ± 0.07     -0.38 ± 0.10     0.75 ± 0.00   0.58 ± 0.19   0.75 ± 0.12    0.50 ± 0.12
Task 3     0.71 ± 0.07   -0.50 ± 0.10   0.67 ± 0.07   -0.42 ± 0.19            0.38 ± 0.12     -0.46 ± 0.12     0.96 ± 0.07   0.88 ± 0.22   0.71 ± 0.19    0.50 ± 0.25
Task 4     0.96 ± 0.07   -0.57 ± 0.13   0.92 ± 0.07   -0.50 ± 0.20            0.75 ± 0.25     -0.43 ± 0.12     0.88 ± 0.00   0.71 ± 0.07   0.71 ± 0.19    0.58 ± 0.14
Task 5     0.21 ± 0.07   -0.67 ± 0.21   0.33 ± 0.14   -0.60 ± 0.25            0.17 ± 0.19     -0.50 ± 0.18     0.62 ± 0.12   0.17 ± 0.07   0.25 ± 0.00    0.29 ± 0.07
Task 6     0.83 ± 0.19   -0.57 ± 0.26   0.71 ± 0.19   -0.55 ± 0.25            0.50 ± 0.43     -0.42 ± 0.19     0.75 ± 0.12   0.79 ± 0.14   0.75 ± 0.00    0.75 ± 0.25
Task 7     0.17 ± 0.07   -0.62 ± 0.27   0.12 ± 0.00   -0.58 ± 0.25            0.04 ± 0.07     -0.44 ± 0.24     0.54 ± 0.26   0.38 ± 0.12   0.31 ± 0.09    0.33 ± 0.07
Task 8     0.42 ± 0.07   -0.55 ± 0.29   0.29 ± 0.07   -0.51 ± 0.28            0.12 ± 0.18     -0.46 ± 0.28     0.75 ± 0.25   0.67 ± 0.19   0.25 ± 0.18    0.50 ± 0.22
Task 9     0.17 ± 0.07   -0.54 ± 0.28   0.12 ± 0.05   -0.50 ± 0.28            0.00 ± 0.00     -0.41 ± 0.29     0.38 ± 0.12   0.08 ± 0.07   0.19 ± 0.09    0.21 ± 0.07
Task 10    0.33 ± 0.19   -0.50 ± 0.29   0.50 ± 0.02   -0.46 ± 0.29            0.12 ± 0.18     -0.38 ± 0.31     0.79 ± 0.07   0.50 ± 0.33   0.44 ± 0.09    0.42 ± 0.07
Average    0.48 ± 0.10   -0.55 ± 0.21   0.45 ± 0.09   -0.49 ± 0.23            0.30 ± 0.16     -0.43 ± 0.20     0.70 ± 0.10   0.51 ± 0.15   0.46 ± 0.11    0.42 ± 0.13


D         E VALUATION TASK D ETAILS
We list all the language instructions describing the tasks we adopted in our experiments below. Note
that while certain tasks may share similar descriptions, they are not the same due to variations in the
environment configurations (e.g., different spatial layouts, objects, or goal positions).



                                                                                       22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Task Suite   Instructions
              close the top drawer of the cabinet
              close the top drawer of the cabinet and put the black bowl on top of it
 Kitchen      put the black bowl in the top drawer of the cabinet
              put the butter at the back in the top drawer of the cabinet and close it
              put the butter at the front in the top drawer of the cabinet and close it
              put the chocolate pudding in the top drawer of the cabinet and close it
              open the bottom drawer of the cabinet
              open the top drawer of the cabinet
              open the top drawer of the cabinet and put the bowl in it
              put the black bowl on the plate
              put the black bowl on top of the cabinet
              open the top drawer of the cabinet
              put the black bowl at the back on the plate
              put the black bowl at the front on the plate
              put the middle black bowl on the plate
              put the middle black bowl on top of the cabinet
              stack the black bowl at the front on the black bowl in the middle
              stack the middle black bowl on the back black bowl
              put the frying pan on the stove
              put the moka pot on the stove
              turn on the stove
              turn on the stove and put the frying pan on it
              close the bottom drawer of the cabinet
              close the bottom drawer of the cabinet and open the top drawer
              put the black bowl in the bottom drawer of the cabinet
              put the black bowl on top of the cabinet
              put the wine bottle in the bottom drawer of the cabinet
              put the wine bottle on the wine rack
              close the top drawer of the cabinet
              put the black bowl in the top drawer of the cabinet
              put the black bowl on the plate
              put the black bowl on top of the cabinet
              put the ketchup in the top drawer of the cabinet
              close the microwave
              put the yellow and white mug to the front of the white mug
              open the microwave
              put the white bowl on the plate
              put the white bowl to the right of the plate
              put the right moka pot on the stove
              turn off the stove

                          Table 8: 40 Kitchen scene pretraining tasks


                                                23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Task Suite      Instructions
                 put both the alphabet soup and the tomato sauce in the basket
 Long-horizon    put both the cream cheese box and the butter in the basket
 (LIBERO 10)     turn on the stove and put the moka pot on it
                 put the black bowl in the bottom drawer of the cabinet and close it
                 put the white mug on the left plate and put the yellow and white mug on the right
                 plate
                 pick up the book and place it in the back compartment of the caddy
                 put the white mug on the plate and put the chocolate pudding to the right of the
                 plate
                 put both the alphabet soup and the cream cheese box in the basket
                 put both moka pots on the stove
                 put the yellow and white mug in the microwave and close it
                 pick up the black bowl between the plate and the ramekin and place it on the
                 plate
 Spatial         pick up the black bowl next to the ramekin and place it on the plate
                 pick up the black bowl from table center and place it on the plate
                 pick up the black bowl on the cookie box and place it on the plate
                 pick up the black bowl in the top drawer of the wooden cabinet and place it on
                 the plate
                 pick up the black bowl on the ramekin and place it on the plate
                 pick up the black bowl next to the cookie box and place it on the plate
                 pick up the black bowl on the stove and place it on the plate
                 open the middle drawer of the cabinet
 Goal            put the bowl on the stove
                 put the wine bottle on top of the cabinet
                 open the top drawer and put the bowl inside
                 put the bowl on top of the cabinet
                 push the plate to the front of the stove
                 put the cream cheese in the bowl
                 turn on the stove
                 pick up the alphabet soup and place it in the basket
 Object          pick up the cream cheese and place it in the basket
                 pick up the salad dressing and place it in the basket
                 pick up the bbq sauce and place it in the basket
                 pick up the ketchup and place it in the basket
                 pick up the tomato sauce and place it in the basket
                 pick up the butter and place it in the basket
                 pick up the milk and place it in the basket
                 pick up the alphabet soup and put it in the basket
 Living Room     pick up the butter and put it in the basket
                 pick up the milk and put it in the basket
                 pick up the orange juice and put it in the basket
                 pick up the tomato sauce and put it in the basket
                 pick up the alphabet soup and put it in the tray
                 pick up the butter and put it in the tray
                 pick up the cream cheese and put it in the tray
                 pick up the book and place it in the right compartment of the caddy
 Study Room      pick up the book and place it in the front compartment of the caddy
                 pick up the book and place it in the left compartment of the caddy
                 pick up the book and place it in the right compartment of the caddy
                 pick up the red mug and place it to the right of the caddy
                 pick up the white mug and place it to the right of the caddy
                 pick up the book in the middle and place it on the cabinet shelf
                 pick up the book on the left and place it on top of the shelf

                                 Table 9: Adaptation task suites



                                               24
