Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L ET ’ S REWARD STEP BY STEP :
S TEP -L EVEL REWARD MODEL AS THE NAVIGATORS
FOR R EASONING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         Recent years have seen considerable advancements in multi-step reasoning with
         Large Language Models (LLMs). The previous studies have elucidated the mer-
         its of integrating feedback or search mechanisms during model inference to im-
         prove the reasoning accuracy. The Process-Supervised Reward Model (PRM),
         typically furnishes LLMs with step-by-step feedback during the training phase,
         akin to Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) or reject sampling. Our objective is
         to examine the efficacy of PRM in the inference phase to help discern the optimal
         solution paths for multi-step tasks such as mathematical reasoning and code gen-
         eration. To this end, we propose a heuristic greedy search algorithm that employs
         the step-level feedback from PRM to optimize the reasoning pathways explored by
         LLMs. This tailored PRM demonstrated enhanced results compared to the Chain
         of Thought (CoT) on mathematical benchmarks like GSM8K and MATH. Addi-
         tionally, to explore the versatility of our approach, we develop a novel method
         to automatically generate step-level reward dataset for coding tasks and observed
         similar improved performance in the code generation tasks. Thus highlighting
         the robust nature of our reward-model-based approach to inference for reasoning
         tasks.


1   I NTRODUCTION

In the exciting evolution of Large Language Models (LLMs) such as GPT (OpenAI, 2023; Brown
et al., 2020), LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023a;b), OPT (Zhang et al., 2022a), Falcon (Penedo et al.,
2023), and PaLM (Anil et al., 2023; Chowdhery et al., 2022), a consistent ability to handle tasks from
conversation to text generation has been evident. However, when it comes to reasoning, especially
multi-step reasoning, current LLMs, even with sophisticated prompting techniques like the Chain of
Thought (CoT)(Wei et al., 2023), are still prone to a cascade of errors in their generation processes.
As the number of reasoning steps increases, these LLMs face challenges in providing and integrating
effective feedback, resulting in one error leading to another.
Achieving a refined multi-step reasoning capability for LLMs can unlock their potential across an
even broader array of applications, ranging from complex problem-solving to high-level intellectual
tasks. Furthermore, as these models become foundational tools in numerous domains, ensuring their
reasoning accuracy is paramount to prevent compounding errors and instill trust in their outputs.
To address the challenges of multi-step reasoning, prior research has focused on feedback mech-
anisms and supervisory techniques. Works have incorporated self-reflection (Madaan et al., 2023;
Xie et al., 2023) or external observation (Yao et al., 2023b; Gou et al., 2023) during reasoning, aim-
ing to correct errors and determine correct reasoning steps. Additionally, novel methods like Tree of
Thought (ToT)(Yao et al., 2023a) and RAP(Hao et al., 2023) have integrated traditional search al-
gorithms to convert multi-step reasoning into a path search problem. However, while some of these
solutions have led to improvements, they introduce new sets of problems. For instance, the risk of
LLMs falling into repetitive thought loops or their self-reflection process exceeding the model’s con-
text window constraints. Additionally, direct search processes, such as BFS or DFS, often result in
redundancy and substantial reasoning overhead, which, in extreme cases, can degrade to exhaustive
search complexity.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Building upon previous studies, it’s found that enhancing the reasoning capabilities of large lan-
guage models involves a few essential aspects. These include step-by-step reasoning, which helps
in breaking down complex problems incrementally and guiding the model toward the solution. An-
other crucial element is the incorporation of feedback or self-reflection. Such feedback can be from
the model itself, other models, or even external sources like the results of code execution. Addition-
ally, implementing heuristic search algorithms can be beneficial. Especially when trying to facilitate
the model’s reasoning path search, it becomes important to compress the search space effectively.
Uesato et al. (2022) and Lightman et al. (2023) introduced the process-supervised reward model
(PRM). PRM can provide step-level feedback for the multi-step reasoning result generated by the
language model, but it has traditionally been used in RLHF (Ouyang et al., 2022; Luo et al., 2023) via
proximal policy optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017) or reject sampling (Yuan et al., 2023;
Dong et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2022). Thus, we hypothesized that the fine-grained feedback from
PRM, which enhances RLHF (Wu et al., 2023), could similarly improve reasoning path searching.
PRM was used as a reward model for the PPO process in Luo et al. (2023). Ideally, PRM would
not introduce additional training overhead and could be further utilized in the decoding phase after
the PPO stage to enhance the model’s reasoning capabilities. On the other hand, PRM only requires
evaluation for each step, making its computational cost much lower than model self-reflection.
Consequently, we propose a heuristic greedy search algorithm for large language model reason-
ing tasks that harnesses the process-supervised reward model for step-level feedback(HGS-PRM).
Similar to the Lightman et al. (2023), we trained a process-supervised reward model based on the
open-source model. With our method, each new reasoning step generated by the large language
model undergoes evaluation by the reward model. This determines whether to accept the given step
or continue generating a new one. If a valid new step is unattainable, a backtrack occurs until a
complete reasoning path is identified. Our experimental results on GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021) and
MATH (Hendrycks et al., 2021) both surpassed those achieved with the CoT method. For instance,
with the WizardMath-13B (Luo et al., 2023)model, our method achieved accuracies of 65.4% and
13.7% on the GSM8K and MATH datasets, respectively, surpassing CoT’s 63.2% and 10.4%.
Beyond mathematical problems, we aimed to demonstrate the efficacy of HGS-PRM in code genera-
tion and even more intricate reasoning tasks. By leveraging technologies like Abstract Syntax Trees
(AST) and Mutation Testing, we automatically generated PRM data for code generation challenges
on the MBPP (Austin et al., 2021) dataset. Following this, we trained a process-supervised reward
model specifically tailored for code. Moreover, our approach also yielded improved results on the
HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021) benchmark. For instance, the results for Code-LLaMA-Python-13B
increased from 41.5% to 44.5%.
In summary, our contributions are as follows:

1. We explored the feasibility of utilizing PRM during the decoding phase. Training and deploying
   PRM is a challenging task. By demonstrating the viability of PRM-assisted decoding on open-
   source models, we’ve achieved a significant advancement.
2. We evaluated the strengths and weaknesses of prior methods for enhancing large language model
   reasoning capabilities. Innovatively, we combined PRM with path search, introducing a heuristic
   greedy search algorithm that leverages PRM for step-level feedback.
3. Ours is the pioneering effort to apply PRM in the coding domain. We have released a PRM
   dataset specifically for code and validated that PRM is effective across a broader spectrum of
   reasoning tasks.


2   M ETHOD
In this section, we delve into the technical methodologies we have adopted. First and foremost, we
discussed how to use step-level data to train our process-supervised reward model(PRM). Moreover,
we provide an in-depth examination of the heuristic greedy search algorithm with PRM (HGS-
PRM), discussing its operational mechanics and core concepts. To demonstrate the versatility of
this method for other reasoning tasks, We will also introduce how we generated our code-specific
PRM data by employing Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) techniques to automate the generation of PRM
data tailored for code-related tasks.


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: The illustrations of the differences among multi-step reasoning, multi-step search, and
multi-step search with PRM


2.1   P ROCESS - SUPERVISED REWARD MODEL

Following Taori et al. (2023) and Lightman et al. (2023), we trained our reward model, with the
entire process divided into two phases:

1. To equip the foundational LLaMA model with mathematical instruction capabilities and
   strengthen its mathematical proficiency, we initially used the training portion of the MATH
   dataset. In line with Taori et al. (2023) approach, we mapped ’question’ and ’solution’ from
   the MATH(Hendrycks et al., 2021) training dataset to ’instruction’ and ’response’, respectively.
   We then performed instruction tuning(Wang et al., 2023c) on the LLaMA-7B(Touvron et al.,
   2023a) model and got LLaMA-7B-SFT.
2. Building on the instruction-tuning basis, we trained a reward model using PRM800k(Lightman
   et al., 2023) based on LLaMA-7B-SFT. This model is designed to score each step of the Solution
   on a step-by-step dimension. The labels fall into three categories: Positive, Negative, and Neutral.

2.2   H EURISTIC G REEDY S EARCH WITH PRM

Heuristic search is an algorithmic strategy that utilizes heuristic information in problem-solving to
guide the search direction, thereby finding solutions more rapidly. A classic example of heuristic
greedy search is the A* algorithm, which combines the benefits of best-first search and Dijkstra’s
algorithm. It efficiently finds the shortest path by using a heuristic to estimate the cost to the goal
from a given node.
During the mathematical problem-solving process with large language models, each chain of reason-
ing can be broken down step by step. This can be translated into a search problem for the optimal
reasoning path within a vast space. Assessing the reward of each step, or the value of a specific


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


state, is crucial for enhancing the inference capabilities of large language models through search
algorithms.
Utilizing the language model’s self-evaluation to judge the value of a step can lead to significant
computational overhead. For autoregressive models like GPT(Radford et al., 2019) that rely solely
on decoding, the computational time complexity is O(N 2 ). The introduction of self-assessment
lengthens the sequence, causing the time complexity to grow exponentially. Additionally, traditional
search methods like BFS and DFS have an expansive search space and involve many redundant
nodes.
In comparison, using only a process-supervised reward model for assessment significantly reduces
overhead compared to self-assessment. Moreover, heuristic greedy search algorithms can effectively
minimize the search space, yielding faster results.


Figure 2: The illustration above depicts the workflow of the heuristic greedy search assisted by
the process-supervised reward model, encompassing the expansion of the next step, scoring by the
reward model, backtracking, and pinpointing the final result. Red denotes a negative step, Green
indicates a positive step, and Orange signifies a neutral step.


Figure 3: An example of HGS-PRM process. Red denotes a negative step, Green indicates a
positive step, and Orange signifies a neutral step.

Consequently, we propose a Heuristic Greedy search algorithm for large language models based on
feedback from the process-supervised reward model(Figure 2) as detailed in Appendix A. Figure 3
shows an example of HGS-PRM for a GSM8K problem.


                                                 4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The Algorithm in the AppendixA illustrates the process of our heuristic greedy search algorithm.
Given an input question x, our algorithm expands to the next potential node and then evaluates it
using a reward model. If the reward is positive, the algorithm advances using this new node. If not,
it continues to explore the next potential node, assessing it with the reward model until it reaches the
maximum bandwidth B. If a node expands to the maximum bandwidth without finding a positive
step, two scenarios are considered: If neutral sub-nodes exist, one is selected. If all sub-nodes are
negative, this indicates an erroneous step. The large language model is unable to determine the cor-
rect subsequent step, prompting a backtrack. To constrain our search space efficiently and balance
exploration with efficiency, we’ve set max bandwidth B and max iterations T parameters. Once
the algorithm reaches the max iteration count, it will generate an answer from the current step. In
our actual implementation, we also tried BFS and MCTS. However, we found that they introduced
a more redundant search space and did not effectively improve the results. Our ultimate goal is to
enhance the model’s mathematical reasoning ability, not to increase algorithmic complexity. There-
fore, the heuristic greedy search achieves a better trade-off between exploration and efficiency and
is a more optimal choice.


2.3   P ROCESS - SUPERVISED DATA FOR C ODE



To extend our approach to the field of code, a step-level reward dataset for code is necessary. As
opposed to maths problems where it is difficult to assess the correctness of a given reasoning step
without human intervention, coding problems with unit-tests are uniquely suited for automated la-
beling of step-level reward data. In our work, we use MBPP as seed dataset from which our PRM
for code dataset is created.
Figure 4 provides an illustration of our method for generating code PRM data. Similar to PRM data
where the validity of each reasoning step is evaluated in the context of previous steps, the format
of our PRM-Code data code also includes components such as (PREVIOUS DATA, STEP and
LABEL). As Python programs are naturally divided into lines separated by the new-line token, we
first collect positive results from the ground truth data. For example, if we select the n-th step as
the current annotated step, the PREVIOUS DATA includes the prompt and steps 0 to n-1, the STEP
is the n-th step, and the LABEL is positive .
The creation of step-level reward data with neutral and negative reward for code can the be ac-
complished with a combination of code mutation and unit-testing. Automatic code mutation (as in
Mutation Testing) is a standard practice in code development where operators (such as addition) in
a given code block is automatically mutated to similar operators (such as division). Such mutation
requires first transforming a given code block into an abstract syntax tree (AST) representation, and
defining rules of how different nodes on the AST are to be mutated. This yields N mutated code
variants for each line of code where each mutated code is executable, and each variant undergoes
only one mutation. These mutated codes are then executed with unit tests. If a mutated code passes
the unit tests, its LABEL for the corresponding step is marked as neutral . If it fails to pass the unit
tests, the LABEL is marked as negative . The PREVIOUS DATA includes the prompt and steps 0
to the previous step of the mutation step, the STEP corresponds to the mutation step generated.
We note that mutation testing primarily focus on atomic operators such as arithmetic operations and
array slicing, which limits the generality of our PRM-Code dataset. Natural extensions of our cur-
rent approach involves defining more elaborate mutation rules that involve, for example, mutating
for-loops into while-loops that correspond to changes of multiple lines of code. However, despite
this limitation, our PRM-Code dataset has proven effectively in improving the code generation per-
formance as we demonstrate in subsequent sections.


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: The process of generating the PRM-Code dataset with ground truth code and unit
test.


3     E XPERIMENT

In this section, we will delve into the intricacies of training our processed reward model and present
the evaluation results of our heuristic greedy search algorithm, based on this processed reward
model, in mathematical and code generation tasks.

3.1   P ROCESS - SUPERVISED REWARD MODEL TRAINING

For mathematical tasks, we trained our process-supervised reward model(PRM) based on LLaMA-
7B(Touvron et al., 2023a). As previously mentioned, our model training method first involved di-
rective fine-tuning using the MATH training set, followed by reward model training. However, it
should be noted that we also directly trained our reward model on LLaMA-7B. Our experimental
results indicate that models fine-tuned with mathematical directives perform superiorly in all aspects
compared to the base model.


               Figure 5: Key metrics of different processed-supervised reward model

From our result shown in Figure 5, the Instruction-tuning model with math data before the training
reward model results in improved performance. We also find positive labels exhibit the highest
precision and recall. Therefore, we adopted a greedy strategy when designing our search algorithm,
directly selecting the step when a positive step is identified. We also find The ability to distinguish


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


neutral labels is inadequate, so give them less consideration during decoding. They can be treated
as either positive or negative.
Penalty miss rate refers to the proportion of classifying positives as negatives and negatives as pos-
itives in the mis-classification, which we consider to be the most serious classification error of the
reward model. For neutral samples, We can avoid misjudgments by adjusting the action of our search
algorithm for neutral samples.
We also trained a process-supervised reward model specifically for code. Drawing from our experi-
ments with math, we directly use Code-LLaMA-7B(Rozière et al., 2023), which had been fine-tuned
with code instructions, to train our process-supervised reward model for code. Our code step-level
data was automatically generated on MBPP(Austin et al., 2021) with the method in Figure 4.
From our result in Figure 5, the process-supervised reward model(PRM) demonstrated a signifi-
cantly better ability to discern negative cases in code compared to math. This suggests that there’s
greater potential in applying the PRM within the coding domain.


3.2   M ATH RESULT

For mathematical problems, we first conducted evaluation experiments on the general models
LLaMA-7B and LLaMA-13B using GSM8K and MATH datasets. We achieved results on both
GSM8K and MATH datasets that were superior to those of CoT. For the MATH task, we follow the
setting of (Lightman et al., 2023) and evaluate our models only on the 500 MATH test problems
because 4.5K MATH test problems are in the PRM800K training set, which we used to train the
reward model. Apart from general models, we also conducted experiments on math-specific models
WizardMath-7B and WizardMath-13B(Luo et al., 2023). We similarly achieved superior results to
CoT on both the GSM8K and MATH datasets. Moreover, we observed that math-specific models
benefit more from the reward model. If the language model’s intrinsic capability is too weak, even
with the aid of a reward model, it remains challenging to sample the correct reasoning path. On the
other hand, if the linguistic capacity of the model significantly surpasses that of the reward model,
the benefits might not be pronounced. Therefore, aligning the capabilities of the reward model and
the language model is of paramount importance.



Table 1: We adopted the sampling setting with temperature=0.1 and top-p=0.95. For LLaMA, we
use an 8-shot prompt for GS8K and a 4-shot prompt for the MATH task. For WizardMath, we follow
the Luo et al. (2023) prompt
                      model          method         GSM8K            MATH
                 LLaMA2-7B             CoT                15.7%            2.4%
                 LLaMA2-7B           HGS-PRM          16.2%(+0.5%)    2.6%(+0.2%)
                 LLaMA2-13B            CoT                31.7%            2.8%
                 LLaMA2-13B          HGS-PRM          32.9%(+1.2%)    4.1%(+1.3%)
                WizardMath-7B          CoT                54.3%            9.7%
                WizardMath-7B        HGS-PRM          57.2%(+2.9%)    11.1%(+1.4%)
                WizardMath-13B         CoT                63.2%           10.4%
                WizardMath-13B       HGS-PRM          65.4%(+2.2%)    13.7%(+3.3%)



3.3   C ODE RESULT

To avoid data leakage, our code PRM’s step-level training data is created based on MBPP
dataset(Austin et al., 2021), and the resulting reward model is evaluated on the HumanEval(Chen
et al., 2021) benchmark. HumanEval is a widely recognized benchmark for testing large language
models on coding tasks. It consists of 164 original programming questions, with an average of 9.6
test cases assigned to each question.


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: We follow the previous works Chen et al. (2021) to estimate the pass@1 score with the
same set of hyper-parameters: temperate=0.2, and top-p=0.95
                          model                method     HumanEval pass@1
                Code-LLaMA-Python-7B            CoT                36.6%
                Code-LLaMA-Python-7B          HGS-PRM          41.5%(+4.9%)
                Code-LLaMA-Python-13B           CoT                41.5%
                Code-LLaMA-Python-13B         HGS-PRM          44.5%(+3.0%)


For our evaluation, we selected models Code-LLaMA-Python-7B and Code-LLaMA-Python-13B.
On the HumanEval benchmark, our approach improved pass@1 result by 4.9%(36.6% VS 41.5%)
for Code-LLaMA-Python-7B model and 3.0% (41.5% VS 44.5%) for Code-LLaMA-Python-13B
model over CoT, respectively. This performance also surpassed the greedy decoding results pre-
sented in the Code-LLaMA paper(Rozière et al., 2023), which is 3.1%(38.4% VS 41.5%) and
1.2%(43.3% VS 44.5%). The accuracy improvement we observed in code is generally higher than
in mathematics. This aligns with our prior evaluation results during the PRM training reward phase
where the precision and recall for the Code PRM negative label were notably higher than for math.
We hypothesize that this might be because both HumanEval and MBPP involve relatively simple
programming challenges, whereas MATH presents more complex mathematical problems which
are intrinsically more challenging for both PRM and the language models themselves to learn.

3.4   F URTHER A NALYSIS

Is the result obtained through HGS-PRM reliable? We further analyzed the relationship between
PRM feedback and the correctness of the results. The actual process is often not so ideal. As
indicated in 5, the actual precision of PRM is lower than 90%. If the accuracy of PRM is not up
to par, HGS-PRM might reduce the accuracy of the results. Therefore, besides the greedy search
method, we can also use the approach of scoring after sampling to verify whether PRM is effective.
For the field of mathematics, we sampled 10 times from the MATH dataset with LLaMA2-13B
and then scored the sampled reasoning paths at the step-level using PRM. According to our HGS-
PRM algorithm, the correct reasoning path should not have any negative steps, so we filtering all
samples with negative steps. For code, we sampled 100 times from the HumanEval dataset using
Star-Coder(Li et al., 2023) and scored in the same manner.
From our results in Table 3, the “Accuracy after filtering”(14.4%, 36.66%) is much higher than the
original accuracy(4.25%, 30.13%), demonstrating the correlation between the step-level feedback
provided by PRM and the correctness of the result. The computational cost of filtering after re-
peated sampling is higher than that of HGS-PRM, because, for complex reasoning problems, it’s
challenging for large language models to sample reasoning paths that don’t contain negative steps.
This is also why we use search instead of sampling.


Table 3: We adopted the sampling setting with temperature=0.8 and top-p=0.95 for reasoning path
sampling using LLaMA2-13B model. The Accuracy after filtering refers to the accuracy of sam-
pled responses filtered by PRM model that contain no negative reasoning steps.
                                                   MATH HumanEval
                             Accuracy                 4.25%     30.13%
                       Accuracy after filtering       14.4%     36.66%


3.5   C ASE S TUDY

Appendix B displays some correct reasoning paths and erroneous paths obtained by HGS-PRM,
further detailing what mistakes PRM specifically identified such as parsing errors, computational
errors, and semantic errors.


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4   RELATED W ORKS

Large Language Models For reasoning Large language models (LLMs) have faced challenges in
complex reasoning tasks, covering mathematical reasoning (Lu et al., 2023; Frieder et al., 2023) and
code generation (Chen et al., 2021; Li et al., 2023; Rozière et al., 2023). Key datasets for mathemat-
ical reasoning are GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021), MATH (Hendrycks et al., 2021), AddSub (Hosseini
et al., 2014), MultiArith (Roy & Roth, 2015), and SingleEQ (Koncel-Kedziorski et al., 2015) while
code generation evaluations employ HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021), MBPP (Austin et al., 2021),
and DS1000 (Lai et al., 2022).. Wei et al. (2023) proposed ”Chain-of-Thought Prompting” (CoT)
to improve LLMs’ performance by prompting step-by-step decompositions. The Zero-shot-CoT
by Kojima et al. (2023) enhances this by adding ’Let’s think step by step’ to responses, detailing
the model’s reasoning. Gao et al. (2023) introduced the Program-aided Language Model (PAL) to
assist LLMs in reasoning, while Wang et al. (2023b) presented a self-consistent method building
upon CoT for consistent responses. Zhao et al. (2023) combined both CoT and PAL for improved
reasoning, allowing concurrent use with the self-consistent approach. Lastly, Zhang et al. (2022b)’s
Auto-CoT leverages LLMs to produce diverse reasoning chains autonomously.
Reasoning with feedback Beyond prompt-based enhancements, Pan et al. (2023) reviews methods
combining self-feedback, search, and tools (Gou et al., 2023) to amplify large language model rea-
soning. Research by Madaan et al. (2023), Gero et al. (2023), Chen et al. (2023), Weng et al. (2023)
and Shinn et al. (2023) demonstrate that these models can serve as feedback sources to bolster rea-
soning. Xie et al. (2023) offers a prompting method integrating self-evaluation via stochastic beam
search to refine multi-step inference. Yao et al. (2023a)’s ”ToT” (Tree of Thoughts) advances CoT,
enabling models to explore varied reasoning paths, evaluate decisions, and adjust strategies. Hao
et al. (2023) transforms the LLM to act as both a world model and logical agent, using a planning
method inspired by Monto Carlo Tree Search. Wang et al. (2023a)’s LeTI uses textual feedback
from code errors for better code generation. Yang et al. (2023) takes a retrieval approach, allowing
LLMs to extract data from Lean and engage with proof environments. Finally, Yao et al. (2023b)
presents a framework blending advances in reasoning and action for a broader spectrum of linguistic
challenges.
PRM & ORM
While much attention has been given to other areas, the process-supervised reward model (PRM)
and outcome-supervised reward model (ORM) have seen less exploration. Uesato et al. (2022)
first introduced PRM, highlighting its advantages over ORM in several applications, from few-shot
prompting to reward modeling. Expanding on this, Lightman et al. (2023) released PRM800K, a
dataset based on MATH annotations, showcasing the reliability of process supervision over out-
come supervision. This high-quality dataset has been invaluable to our research. Luo et al. (2023)
introduced ”Reinforcement Learning from Evol-Instruct Feedback (RLEIF)”, using PRM as a re-
ward model within the PPO framework (Schulman et al., 2017). While these studies have focused
on PRM for math, there’s a noticeable gap in PRM research for coding, pointing to a ripe area for
further investigation.

5   C ONCLUSIONS AND F UTURE W ORK
In this study, we introduce an approach that integrates the process-supervised reward Model (PRM)
into heuristic greedy search, demonstrating the value of incorporating PRM feedback in multi-step
inference tasks within large language models. This offers fresh insights into utilizing the PRM
framework rather than RLHF or reject sampling. Our experimental results on the MATH and
GSM8K datasets validate the effectiveness of our proposed HGS-PRM method and explore the
potential of PRM in the decoding phase experiment.
Moreover, we take advantage of the Mutating Testing technique for code PRM data generation,
enabling rapid scaling of step-level reward data for code applications. We release a PRM dataset
tailored for coding, which holds pivotal significance for further research on PRM’s application in
code-related tasks. We believe that the potential of the process-supervised reward model in multi-
step reasoning within expansive models remains under-explored, especially in coding tasks. En-
hancing code-specific PRM data and reward models could significantly bolster the capabilities of
large language models in code generation.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Rohan Anil, Andrew M. Dai, Orhan Firat, Melvin Johnson, Dmitry Lepikhin, Alexandre Passos,
  Siamak Shakeri, Emanuel Taropa, Paige Bailey, Zhifeng Chen, Eric Chu, Jonathan H. Clark,
  Laurent El Shafey, Yanping Huang, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Gaurav Mishra, Erica Moreira, Mark
  Omernick, Kevin Robinson, Sebastian Ruder, Yi Tay, Kefan Xiao, Yuanzhong Xu, Yujing Zhang,
  Gustavo Hernandez Abrego, Junwhan Ahn, Jacob Austin, Paul Barham, Jan Botha, James Brad-
  bury, Siddhartha Brahma, Kevin Brooks, Michele Catasta, Yong Cheng, Colin Cherry, Christo-
  pher A. Choquette-Choo, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Clément Crepy, Shachi Dave, Mostafa De-
  hghani, Sunipa Dev, Jacob Devlin, Mark Dı́az, Nan Du, Ethan Dyer, Vlad Feinberg, Fangxiaoyu
  Feng, Vlad Fienber, Markus Freitag, Xavier Garcia, Sebastian Gehrmann, Lucas Gonzalez, Guy
  Gur-Ari, Steven Hand, Hadi Hashemi, Le Hou, Joshua Howland, Andrea Hu, Jeffrey Hui, Jeremy
  Hurwitz, Michael Isard, Abe Ittycheriah, Matthew Jagielski, Wenhao Jia, Kathleen Kenealy,
  Maxim Krikun, Sneha Kudugunta, Chang Lan, Katherine Lee, Benjamin Lee, Eric Li, Music Li,
  Wei Li, YaGuang Li, Jian Li, Hyeontaek Lim, Hanzhao Lin, Zhongtao Liu, Frederick Liu, Mar-
  cello Maggioni, Aroma Mahendru, Joshua Maynez, Vedant Misra, Maysam Moussalem, Zachary
  Nado, John Nham, Eric Ni, Andrew Nystrom, Alicia Parrish, Marie Pellat, Martin Polacek, Alex
  Polozov, Reiner Pope, Siyuan Qiao, Emily Reif, Bryan Richter, Parker Riley, Alex Castro Ros,
  Aurko Roy, Brennan Saeta, Rajkumar Samuel, Renee Shelby, Ambrose Slone, Daniel Smilkov,
  David R. So, Daniel Sohn, Simon Tokumine, Dasha Valter, Vijay Vasudevan, Kiran Vodrahalli,
  Xuezhi Wang, Pidong Wang, Zirui Wang, Tao Wang, John Wieting, Yuhuai Wu, Kelvin Xu, Yun-
  han Xu, Linting Xue, Pengcheng Yin, Jiahui Yu, Qiao Zhang, Steven Zheng, Ce Zheng, Weikang
  Zhou, Denny Zhou, Slav Petrov, and Yonghui Wu. Palm 2 technical report, 2023.

Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan,
  Ellen Jiang, Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le, and Charles Sutton. Program synthesis with large
  language models, 2021.

Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones,
  Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, Carol Chen, Catherine Ols-
  son, Christopher Olah, Danny Hernandez, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Dustin Li, Eli Tran-
  Johnson, Ethan Perez, Jamie Kerr, Jared Mueller, Jeffrey Ladish, Joshua Landau, Kamal Ndousse,
  Kamile Lukosuite, Liane Lovitt, Michael Sellitto, Nelson Elhage, Nicholas Schiefer, Noemi Mer-
  cado, Nova DasSarma, Robert Lasenby, Robin Larson, Sam Ringer, Scott Johnston, Shauna
  Kravec, Sheer El Showk, Stanislav Fort, Tamera Lanham, Timothy Telleen-Lawton, Tom Con-
  erly, Tom Henighan, Tristan Hume, Samuel R. Bowman, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Ben Mann, Dario
  Amodei, Nicholas Joseph, Sam McCandlish, Tom Brown, and Jared Kaplan. Constitutional ai:
  Harmlessness from ai feedback, 2022.

Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M.
  Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin,
  Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners, 2020.

Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
 Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri,
 Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan,
 Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian,
 Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fo-
 tios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex
 Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saunders,
 Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Josh Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa, Alec
 Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob Mc-
 Grew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. Evaluating large
 language models trained on code. 2021.

Xinyun Chen, Maxwell Lin, Nathanael Schärli, and Denny Zhou. Teaching large language models
  to self-debug, 2023.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh,
  Kensen Shi, Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek Rao, Parker Barnes, Yi Tay, Noam
  Shazeer, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Ben Hutchinson, Reiner Pope, James
  Bradbury, Jacob Austin, Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin, Toju Duke, Anselm Lev-
  skaya, Sanjay Ghemawat, Sunipa Dev, Henryk Michalewski, Xavier Garcia, Vedant Misra, Kevin
  Robinson, Liam Fedus, Denny Zhou, Daphne Ippolito, David Luan, Hyeontaek Lim, Barret
  Zoph, Alexander Spiridonov, Ryan Sepassi, David Dohan, Shivani Agrawal, Mark Omernick,
  Andrew M. Dai, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Marie Pellat, Aitor Lewkowycz, Erica
  Moreira, Rewon Child, Oleksandr Polozov, Katherine Lee, Zongwei Zhou, Xuezhi Wang, Bren-
  nan Saeta, Mark Diaz, Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason Wei, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Douglas
  Eck, Jeff Dean, Slav Petrov, and Noah Fiedel. Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways,
  2022.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
  Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John
  Schulman. Training verifiers to solve math word problems, 2021.
Hanze Dong, Wei Xiong, Deepanshu Goyal, Yihan Zhang, Winnie Chow, Rui Pan, Shizhe Diao,
  Jipeng Zhang, Kashun Shum, and Tong Zhang. Raft: Reward ranked finetuning for generative
  foundation model alignment, 2023.
Simon Frieder, Luca Pinchetti, Alexis Chevalier, Ryan-Rhys Griffiths, Tommaso Salvatori, Thomas
  Lukasiewicz, Philipp Christian Petersen, and Julius Berner. Mathematical capabilities of chatgpt,
  2023.
Luyu Gao, Aman Madaan, Shuyan Zhou, Uri Alon, Pengfei Liu, Yiming Yang, Jamie Callan, and
  Graham Neubig. Pal: Program-aided language models, 2023.
Zelalem Gero, Chandan Singh, Hao Cheng, Tristan Naumann, Michel Galley, Jianfeng Gao, and
  Hoifung Poon. Self-verification improves few-shot clinical information extraction, 2023.
Zhibin Gou, Zhihong Shao, Yeyun Gong, Yelong Shen, Yujiu Yang, Nan Duan, and Weizhu Chen.
  Critic: Large language models can self-correct with tool-interactive critiquing, 2023.
Shibo Hao, Yi Gu, Haodi Ma, Joshua Jiahua Hong, Zhen Wang, Daisy Zhe Wang, and Zhiting Hu.
  Reasoning with language model is planning with world model, 2023.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang, Dawn Song,
  and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring mathematical problem solving with the math dataset. NeurIPS,
  2021.
Mohammad Javad Hosseini, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Oren Etzioni, and Nate Kushman. Learning to
 solve arithmetic word problems with verb categorization. In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference
 on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 523–533, Doha, Qatar,
 October 2014. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.3115/v1/D14-1058. URL
 https://aclanthology.org/D14-1058.
Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large
  language models are zero-shot reasoners, 2023.
Rik Koncel-Kedziorski, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Ashish Sabharwal, Oren Etzioni, and Siena Du-
  mas Ang. Parsing algebraic word problems into equations. Transactions of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics, 3:585–597, 2015. doi: 10.1162/tacl a 00160. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/Q15-1042.
Yuhang Lai, Chengxi Li, Yiming Wang, Tianyi Zhang, Ruiqi Zhong, Luke Zettlemoyer, Scott Wen
  tau Yih, Daniel Fried, Sida Wang, and Tao Yu. Ds-1000: A natural and reliable benchmark for
  data science code generation. ArXiv, abs/2211.11501, 2022.
Raymond Li, Loubna Ben Allal, Yangtian Zi, Niklas Muennighoff, Denis Kocetkov, Chenghao
  Mou, Marc Marone, Christopher Akiki, Jia Li, Jenny Chim, Qian Liu, Evgenii Zheltonozhskii,
  Terry Yue Zhuo, Thomas Wang, Olivier Dehaene, Mishig Davaadorj, Joel Lamy-Poirier, João


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Monteiro, Oleh Shliazhko, Nicolas Gontier, Nicholas Meade, Armel Zebaze, Ming-Ho Yee, Lo-
  gesh Kumar Umapathi, Jian Zhu, Benjamin Lipkin, Muhtasham Oblokulov, Zhiruo Wang, Rudra
  Murthy, Jason Stillerman, Siva Sankalp Patel, Dmitry Abulkhanov, Marco Zocca, Manan Dey,
  Zhihan Zhang, Nour Fahmy, Urvashi Bhattacharyya, Wenhao Yu, Swayam Singh, Sasha Luc-
  cioni, Paulo Villegas, Maxim Kunakov, Fedor Zhdanov, Manuel Romero, Tony Lee, Nadav Timor,
  Jennifer Ding, Claire Schlesinger, Hailey Schoelkopf, Jan Ebert, Tri Dao, Mayank Mishra, Alex
  Gu, Jennifer Robinson, Carolyn Jane Anderson, Brendan Dolan-Gavitt, Danish Contractor, Siva
  Reddy, Daniel Fried, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Yacine Jernite, Carlos Muñoz Ferrandis, Sean Hughes,
  Thomas Wolf, Arjun Guha, Leandro von Werra, and Harm de Vries. Starcoder: may the source
  be with you!, 2023.
Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yura Burda, Harri Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee, Jan
  Leike, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. Let’s verify step by step, 2023.
Pan Lu, Liang Qiu, Wenhao Yu, Sean Welleck, and Kai-Wei Chang. A survey of deep learning for
  mathematical reasoning, 2023.
Haipeng Luo, Qingfeng Sun, Can Xu, Pu Zhao, Jianguang Lou, Chongyang Tao, Xiubo Geng, Qing-
  wei Lin, Shifeng Chen, and Dongmei Zhang. Wizardmath: Empowering mathematical reasoning
  for large language models via reinforced evol-instruct, 2023.
Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri
 Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, Sean Welleck, Bodhisattwa Prasad Ma-
 jumder, Shashank Gupta, Amir Yazdanbakhsh, and Peter Clark. Self-refine: Iterative refinement
 with self-feedback, 2023.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kel-
  ton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike,
  and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In
  S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 27730–27744. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2022. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/
  file/b1efde53be364a73914f58805a001731-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Liangming Pan, Michael Saxon, Wenda Xu, Deepak Nathani, Xinyi Wang, and William Yang
  Wang. Automatically correcting large language models: Surveying the landscape of diverse self-
  correction strategies, 2023.
Guilherme Penedo, Quentin Malartic, Daniel Hesslow, Ruxandra Cojocaru, Alessandro Cappelli,
  Hamza Alobeidli, Baptiste Pannier, Ebtesam Almazrouei, and Julien Launay. The RefinedWeb
  dataset for Falcon LLM: outperforming curated corpora with web data, and web data only. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2306.01116, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.01116.
Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. 2019.
Subhro Roy and Dan Roth. Solving general arithmetic word problems. In Proceedings of the 2015
  Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 1743–1752, Lisbon, Por-
  tugal, September 2015. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D15-1202.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/D15-1202.
Baptiste Rozière, Jonas Gehring, Fabian Gloeckle, Sten Sootla, Itai Gat, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Yossi
  Adi, Jingyu Liu, Tal Remez, Jérémy Rapin, Artyom Kozhevnikov, Ivan Evtimov, Joanna Bitton,
  Manish Bhatt, Cristian Canton Ferrer, Aaron Grattafiori, Wenhan Xiong, Alexandre Défossez,
  Jade Copet, Faisal Azhar, Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Nicolas Usunier, Thomas Scialom, and
  Gabriel Synnaeve. Code llama: Open foundation models for code, 2023.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms, 2017.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Beck Labash, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu
  Yao. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning, 2023.

Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Stanford alpaca: An instruction-following llama model.
  https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca, 2023.

Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez, Ar-
  mand Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. Llama: Open and efficient foundation
  language models, 2023a.

Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher,
  Cristian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy
  Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn,
  Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel
  Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee,
  Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra,
  Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi,
  Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh
  Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen
  Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic,
  Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models,
  2023b.

Jonathan Uesato, Nate Kushman, Ramana Kumar, Francis Song, Noah Siegel, Lisa Wang, Antonia
  Creswell, Geoffrey Irving, and Irina Higgins. Solving math word problems with process- and
  outcome-based feedback, 2022.

Xingyao Wang, Hao Peng, Reyhaneh Jabbarvand, and Heng Ji. Leti: Learning to generate from
  textual interactions, 2023a.

Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdh-
  ery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models,
  2023b.

Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A. Smith, Daniel Khashabi, and
  Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-instruct: Aligning language models with self-generated instructions. In
  Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
  1: Long Papers), pp. 13484–13508, Toronto, Canada, July 2023c. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.754. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2023.acl-long.754.

Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc
  Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models,
  2023.

Yixuan Weng, Minjun Zhu, Fei Xia, Bin Li, Shizhu He, Kang Liu, and Jun Zhao. Large language
  models are better reasoners with self-verification, 2023.

Zeqiu Wu, Yushi Hu, Weijia Shi, Nouha Dziri, Alane Suhr, Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Noah A. Smith,
  Mari Ostendorf, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Fine-grained human feedback gives better rewards for
  language model training, 2023.

Yuxi Xie, Kenji Kawaguchi, Yiran Zhao, Xu Zhao, Min-Yen Kan, Junxian He, and Qizhe Xie.
  Decomposition enhances reasoning via self-evaluation guided decoding, 2023.

Kaiyu Yang, Aidan Swope, Alex Gu, Rahul Chalamala, Peiyang Song, Shixing Yu, Saad Godil,
  Ryan Prenger, and Anima Anandkumar. LeanDojo: Theorem proving with retrieval-augmented
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.15626, 2023.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Thomas L. Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik
  Narasimhan. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models, 2023a.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models, 2023b.
Zheng Yuan, Hongyi Yuan, Chuanqi Tan, Wei Wang, Songfang Huang, and Fei Huang. Rrhf: Rank
  responses to align language models with human feedback without tears, 2023.
Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christo-
  pher Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, Todor Mihaylov, Myle Ott, Sam Shleifer, Kurt
  Shuster, Daniel Simig, Punit Singh Koura, Anjali Sridhar, Tianlu Wang, and Luke Zettlemoyer.
  Opt: Open pre-trained transformer language models, 2022a.
Zhuosheng Zhang, Aston Zhang, Mu Li, and Alex Smola. Automatic chain of thought prompting in
  large language models, 2022b.
Xu Zhao, Yuxi Xie, Kenji Kawaguchi, Junxian He, and Qizhe Xie. Automatic model selection with
  large language models for reasoning, 2023.


                                              14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    H EURISTIC G REEDY S EARCH WITH PRM(HGS-PRM)

     1. Node definition Each node of the search tree possesses the following elements.

         (a) State S = [x, s1 ...si ], where the input prompt and question Q represented as x, each
             step i represented as si
         (b) Step si , the reasoning step for this node
         (c) Reward r, the reward for the step i(si ) evaluated from the PRM
         (d) Value V , the cumulative reward for each step leading to that node.
         (e) Parent parent, the parent of the node
         (f) Children children, the children node of the node

     2. Expand Expand the possible next steps from the current node, and create a new child
        node:P (si+1 |S) = P (si+1 |x, s1 si ). the sampling diversity is influenced by the sample
        hyper-parameter like temperature, top-p, top-k.

     3. Get Reward: after expanding a new node, the process reward model will evaluate the
        new step and feedback reward range from [−1, 0, 1], which means negative , neutral ,
         positive step.


     4. Go ahead: when the reward of the step is positive (r = 1), we will choose this step and go
        ahead to this new child node.

     5. Backup: When this node cannot expand into different steps or the number of child nodes
        reaches the maximum bandwidth, it will backtrack to its parent node.



Algorithm 1 Heuristic Greedy Search with PRM(HGS-PRM)
Require: Input Question x, LLM generate functionP (), next step Expand function E(), get re-
    ward function R(), max bandwidth B, max iterations T , end token or end sequence of LLM
    eos token
 1: cur node ← {x}
 2: for i = 1 to T do
 3:   if number of cur node.child < B then
 4:       next node ← E(P, cur node)
 5:       if eos token in next node.step then
 6:          return next node.state
 7:       else if next node.reward == 1 then
 8:          cur node ← next node
 9:       end if
10:   else
11:       if child.reward = 0 for any child in cur node.children then
12:          cur node ← one of the child
13:       else
14:          cur node ← cur node.parent
15:       end if
16:   end if
17: end for
18: result ← P (cur node.state)
19: return result


                                                 15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B     C ASE STUDY


B.1   MATH C ASE STUDY


 Question               Riproarin’ Ringo was roping a recalcitrant dogie. Ringo decided to give
                        the dogie a reprieve by calculating
                                                        |(1 − i)8 |
                        before riding after the dogie. What answer should Ringo have found?
 Ground Truth           540
                         We are given a complex number in the form of (1 − i), and we need to
 Correct path
                         find the magnitude of its eightfold, which is (1 − i)8 .
                         The magnitude of a product is the product of the magnitudes, i.e., |ab| =
                         |a||b|. In our case, we have (1 − i)8 , and we want to find |(1 − i)8 |.
                         Using the property from Step 2, we can rewrite |(1 − i)8 | as |1||(1 −
                         i)|8 |1|. Since the magnitude of a number is always non-zero, we can
                         safely cancel out the |1| terms, leaving us with |(1 − i)|8 .
                         Now, we need to find the magnitude√of (1 − i). The magnitude of a
                         complex number a + bi is given by ap       2 + b2 . In our case, a = 1 and
                                                                                      √
                         b = −1, so the magnitude of (1 − i) is 12 + (−1)2 = 2.
                                                                                                √
                         Finally, we need to find |(1 − i)8 |. √
                                                               Since we found that |(1 − i)| = 2,
                         we can raise it to the power of 8: ( 2)8 .
                                             √        8
                         We can simplify ( 2)8 as 2 2 . Since 82 is equal to 4, we have 24 = 16.

                         So, the final answer is 16 .
                         The answer is: 16.
                         We are given a complex number in the form of (1 − i), and we need to
 Wrong path
 (computational   er-    find the magnitude of its eightfold, which is (1 − i)8 .
 rors)                   Before finding the magnitude of (1 − i)8 , we need to find the magnitude
                         of (1 − i)2 . To do this, we can use the formula for the square of a
                         complex number: (a + bi)2 = a2 + 2abi + b2 . In our case, a = 1 and
                         b = −1, so (1 − i)2 = (1)2 + 2(1)(−1) + (−1)2 = 1 − 2i + 1 = 2 − 2i.
                         Now, we need to find the magnitude of (2 − 2i)4 . Using the same
                         formula for the square of a complex number, we get (2 − 2i)4 = (2)4 +
                         2(2)(−2)i + (−2)4 = 16 − 32i + 16 = 32 − 32i.
                         Next, we need to find the magnitude of (32 − 32i)2 . Using the formula
                         for the square of a complex number again, we get (32−32i)2 = (32)2 +
                         2(32)(−32)i + (−32)2 = 1024 − 2048i + 1024 = 2048 − 2048i.
                        Finally, we need to find the magnitude of (2048 − 2048i)4 . Using
                        the formula for the square of a complex number one more time, we
                        get (2048 − 2048i)4 = (2048)4 + 2(2048)(−2048)i + (−2048)4 =
                        16, 777, 216 − 4, 195, 392i + 16, 777, 216 = 33, 554, 508. Now, we
                        take the absolute value of the result: |33, 554, 508| = 33, 554, 508. So,
                        the final answer is 33, 554, 508 . The answer is: 33,554,508.

                         Table 4: MATH case with WizardMath-13B


                                               16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.2   GSM8K C ASE STUDY

 Question               James decides to run 3 sprints 3 times a week. He runs 60 meters each
                        sprint. How many total meters does he run a week?
 Ground Truth           540
 Correct path            First, we need to calculate how many meters James runs in each session.
                         Since he runs 3 sprints of 60 meters each, we can calculate the total
                         distance he runs in each session by multiplying the number of sprints
                         by the distance of each sprint.
                         Therefore, James runs 3*60=180 meters in each session.
                         Second, we need to calculate how many meters James runs in a week.
                         Since he runs 3 sessions per week, we can calculate the total distance
                         he runs in a week by multiplying the distance he runs in each session by
                         the number of sessions he runs per week.
                         Therefore, James runs 180*3=540 meters in a week.
                         Therefore, the final answer is that James runs 540 meters in a week.
                         The answer is: 540.
 Wrong path              First, we need to calculate how many meters James runs in one sprint.
 (parsing errors)        According to the question, James runs 60 meters each sprint.
                        Therefore, we can calculate the total distance he runs in one week by
                        multiplying the distance of one sprint by the number of sprints he runs
                        in one week.
                        Since James runs 3 sprints 3 times a week, he runs 60*3=180 meters in
                        one week.
                        Therefore, the total distance James runs in one week is 180 meters.
                        Thus, the final answer is 180. The answer is: 180.

                         Table 5: GSM8K case with WizardMath-13B


                                               17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.3   H UMAN E VAL CASE STUDY

 Prompt
                         def how_many_times(string: str, substring: str) -> int:
                             """ Find how many times a given substring
                             can be found in the original string.
                             Count overlaping cases.
                             >>> how_many_times(’’, ’a’)
                             0
                             >>> how_many_times(’aaa’, ’a’)
                             3
                             >>> how_many_times(’aaaa’, ’aa’)
                             3
                             """


 Correct path
                              if len(substring) == 0:
                                  return 0
                              if len(string) == 0:
                                  return 0
                              if len(string) < len(substring):
                                  return 0
                              count = 0
                              for i in range(len(string) - len(substring) + 1):
                                   if string[i:i + len(substring)] == substring:
                                      count += 1
                              return count


 Wrong path
 (semantic errors)            if len(substring) == 0:
                                  return 0
                              return string.replace(substring, ’’, 1).count(substring)



                     Table 6: HumanEval case with Code-LLaMA-Python-13B


                                             18
