Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A P RIMAL -D UAL A PPROACH TO S OLVING VARIA -
TIONAL I NEQUALITIES WITH G ENERAL C ONSTRAINTS

 Tatjana ChavdarovaвҲ—                                                  Tong YangвҲ—
 University of California, Berkeley                                   Carnegie Mellon University
 tatjana.chavdarova@berkeley.edu                                      tongyang@andrew.cmu.edu

 Matteo Pagliardini                                                   Michael I. Jordan
 University of California, Berkeley & EPFL                            University of California, Berkeley
 matteo.pagliardini@epfl.ch                                           jordan@cs.berkeley.edu



                                              A BSTRACT

            Yang et al. (2023) recently showed how to use first-order gradient methods to solve
            general variational inequalities (VIs) under a limiting assumption that analytic so-
            lutions of specific subproblems are available. In this paper, we circumvent this
            assumption via a warm-starting technique where we solve subproblems approxi-
            mately and initialize variables with the approximate solution found at the previous
            iteration. We prove the convergence of this method and show that the gap function
            of the last iterate of the method decreases at a rate of O( вҲҡ1K ) when the operator
            is L-Lipschitz and monotone. In numerical experiments, we show that this tech-
            nique can converge much faster than its exact counterpart. Furthermore, for the
            cases when the inequality constraints are simple, we introduce an alternative vari-
            ant of ACVI and establish its convergence under the same conditions. Finally, we
            relax the smoothness assumptions in Yang et al., yielding, to our knowledge, the
            first convergence result for VIs with general constraints that does not rely on the
            assumption that the operator is L-Lipschitz.


1       I NTRODUCTION

We study variational inequalities (VIs), a general class of problems that encompasses both equilibria
and optima. The general (constrained) VI problem involves finding a point xвӢҶ вҲҲ X such that:
                                    вҹЁx вҲ’ xвӢҶ , F (xвӢҶ )вҹ© вүҘ 0,   вҲҖx вҲҲ X ,                              (cVI)
                                                                  n                           n
where X is a subset of the Euclidean n-dimensional space R , and where F : X 7вҶ’ R is a con-
tinuous map. VIs generalize standard constrained minimization problems, where F is a gradient
field F вүЎ вҲҮf , and, by allowing F to be a general vector field, they also include problems such
as finding equilibria in zero-sum games and general-sum games (Cottle & Dantzig, 1968; Rock-
afellar, 1970). This increased expressivity underlies their practical relevance to a wide range of
emerging applications in machine learning, such as (i) multi-agent games (Goodfellow et al., 2014;
Vinyals et al., 2017), (ii) robustification of single-objective problems, which yields min-max formu-
lations (Szegedy et al., 2014; Mazuelas et al., 2020; Christiansen et al., 2020; RothenhaМҲusler et al.,
2018), and (iii) statistical approaches to modeling complex multi-agent dynamics in stochastic and
adversarial environments. We refer the reader to (Facchinei & Pang, 2003; Yang et al., 2023) for
further examples.
Such generality comes, however, at a price in that solving for equilibria is notably more challenging
than solving for optima. In particular, as the Jacobian of F is not necessarily symmetric, we may
have rotational trajectories or limit cycles (Korpelevich, 1976; Hsieh et al., 2021). Moreover, in sharp
contrast to standard minimization, the last iterate can be quite far from the solution even though the
average iterate converges to the solution (Chavdarova et al., 2019). This has motivated recent efforts
    вҲ—
        Equal contribution. Source code: https://github.com/Chavdarova/I-ACVI.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


to study specifically the convergence of the last iterate produced by gradient-based methods. Thus,
herein, our focus and discussions refer to the last iterate.
Recent work has focused primarily on solving VIs in two cases of the domain X : (i) the uncon-
strained setting where X вүЎ Rn (Golowich et al., 2020b; Chavdarova et al., 2023; Gorbunov et al.,
2022a; Bot et al., 2022) and for (ii) the constrained setting with projection-based methods (Tseng,
1995; Daskalakis et al., 2018; Diakonikolas, 2020; Nemirovski, 2004; Mertikopoulos et al., 2019;
Cai et al., 2022). The latter approach assumes that the projection is вҖңsimple,вҖқ in the sense that this
step does not require gradient computation. This holds, for example, for inequality constraints of the
form x вүӨ П„ where П„ is some constant, in which case fast operations such as clipping suffice. How-
ever, as is the case in constrained minimization, the constraint setвҖ”denoted herein with C вҠҶ X вҖ”is,
in the general case, an intersection of finitely many inequalities and linear equalities:
                           C = {x вҲҲ Rn |ПҶi (x) вүӨ 0, i вҲҲ [m], Cx = d} ,                            (CS)
                    n                 pГ—n                p
where each ПҶi : R 7вҶ’ R, C вҲҲ R              , and d вҲҲ R . Given a general CS (without assuming
additional structure), implementing the projection requires second-order methods, which quickly
become computationally prohibitive as the dimension n increases. If the second-order derivative
computation is approximated, the derived convergence rates will yet be multiplied with an additional
factor; thus, the resulting rate of convergence may not match the known lower bound (Golowich
et al., 2020a; Cai et al., 2022). This motivates a third thread of research, focusing on projection-
free methods for the constrained VI problem, where the update rule does not rely on the projection
operator. This is the case we focus on in this paper.
There has been significant work on developing second-order projection-free methods for the formu-
lation in cVI; we refer the interested reader to (Chapter 7, Nesterov & Nemirovski, 1994) and (Chap-
ter 11, Facchinei & Pang, 2003, vol. 2) for example. We remark that the seminal mirror-descent and
mirror-prox methods (Nemirovski & Yudin, 1983; Beck & Teboulle, 2003; Nemirovski, 2004) (see
App. A.5) exploit a certain structure of the domain and avoid the projection operator, but cannot be
applied for general CS.
In recent work, Yang et al. (2023) presented a first-order method, referred to as the ADMM-based
Interior Point Method for Constrained VIs (ACVI), for solving the cVI problem with general
constraints. ACVI combines path-following interior point (IP) methods and primal-dual meth-
ods. Regarding the latter, it generalizes the alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM)
method (Glowinski & Marroco, 1975; Gabay & Mercier, 1976), an algorithmic paradigm that is
central to large-scale optimization (Boyd et al., 2011; Tibshirani, 2017)вҖ“see (Yang et al., 2023) and
App. A.1; but which has been little explored in the cVI context. On a high level, ACVI has two
nested loops: (i) the outer loop smoothly decreases the weight Вөi of the inequality constraints as in
IP methods, whereas (ii) the inner loop performs a primal-dual update (for a fixed Вөi ) as follows:
вҖў solve a subproblem whose main (primal) variable xji aims to satisfy the equality constraints,
вҖў solve a subproblem whose main (primal) variable yij aims to satisfy the inequality constraints,
вҖў update the dual variable О»ji .
The first two steps solve the subproblems exactly using an analytical expression of the solution, and
the variables converge to the same value, thus eventually satisfying both the inequality and equality
constraints. See Algorithm 3 for a full description, and see Fig. 2 for illustrative examples. The
authors documented that projection-based methods may extensively zig-zag when hitting a con-
straint when there is a rotational component in the vector field, an observation that further motivates
projection-free approaches even when the projection is simple.
Yang et al. showed that the gap function of the last iterate of ACVI decreases at a rate of O( вҲҡ1K )
when the operator is L-Lipschitz, monotone, and at least one constraint is active. It is, however, an
open problem to determine if the same rate on the gap function applies while assuming only that
the operator is monotone (where monotonicity for VIs is analogous to convexity for standard min-
imization, see Def. 2.1). Moreover, in some cases, the subproblems of ACVI may be cumbersome
to solve analytically. Hence, a natural question is whether we can show convergence approximately
when the subproblems are solved. As a result, we raise the following questions:
       вҖў Does the last iterate of ACVI converge when the operator is monotone without requiring it
         to be L-Lipschitz?


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       вҖў Does ACVI converge when the subproblems are solved approximately?
In this paper, we answer the former question affirmatively. Specifically, we prove that the last iterate
of ACVI converges at a rate of O( вҲҡ1K ) in terms of the gap function (Def. 2.2) even when assuming
only the monotonicity of the operator. The core of our analysis lies in identifying a relationship
between the reference point of the gap function and a KKT point that ACVI targets implicitly (i.e.,
it does not appear explicitly in the ACVI algorithm). This shows that ACVI explicitly works to
decrease the gap function at each iteration. The argument further allows us to determine a con-
vergence rate by making it possible to upper bound the gap function. This is in contrast to the
approach of Yang et al. (2023), who upper bound the iterate distance and then the gap function, an
approach that requires a Lipschitz assumption. This is the first convergence rate for the last iterate
for monotone VIs with constraints that does not rely on an L-Lipschitz assumption on the operator.
To address the latter question, we leverage a fundamental property of the ACVI algorithmвҖ”namely,
its homotopic structure as it smoothly transitions to the original problem, a homotopy that inher-
ently arises from its origin as an interior-point method (Boyd & Vandenberghe, 2004). Moreover,
due to the alternating updates of the two sets of parameters of ACVI (x and y; see Algorithm 3), the
subproblems change negligibly, with the changes proportional to the step sizes. This motivates the
standard warm-start technique where, at every iteration, instead of initializing at random, we ini-
tialize the corresponding optimization variable with the approximate solution found at the previous
iteration. We refer to the resulting algorithm as inexact ACVI, described in Algorithm 1. Further-
more, inspired by the work of Schmidt et al. (2011), which focuses on the proximal gradient method
for standard minimization, we prove that inexact ACVI converges with the same rate of O( вҲҡ1K ),
under a condition on the rate of decrease of the approximation errors. We evaluate inexact ACVI
empirically on 2D and high-dimensional games and show how multiple inexact yet computationally
efficient iterations can lead to faster wall-clock convergence than fewer exact ones.
Finally, we provide a detailed study of a special case of the problem class that ACVI can solve. In
particular, we focus on the case when the inequality constraints are simple, in the sense that projec-
tion on those inequalities is fast to compute. Such problems often arise in machine learning, e.g.,
whenever the constraint set is an Lp -ball, with p вҲҲ {1, 2, вҲһ} as in adversarial training (Goodfellow
et al., 2015). We show that the same convergence rate holds for this variant of ACVI. Moreover, we
show empirically that when using this method to train a constrained GAN on the MNIST (Lecun &
Cortes, 1998) dataset, it converges faster than the projected variants of the standard VI methods.
In summary, our main contributions are as follows:
вҖў We show that the gap function of the last iterate of ACVI (Yang et al., 2023, Algorithm 1 therein)
  decreases at a rate of O( вҲҡ1K ) for monotone VIs, without relying on the assumption that the oper-
  ator is L-Lipschitz.
вҖў We combine a standard warm-start technique with ACVI and propose a precise variant with ap-
  proximate solutions, named inexact ACVIвҖ”see Algorithm 1. We show that inexact ACVI recovers
  the same convergence rate as ACVI, provided that the errors decrease at appropriate rates.
вҖў We propose a variant of ACVI designed for inequality constraints that are fast to project toвҖ”see
  Algorithm 2. We guarantee its convergence and provide the corresponding rate; in this case, we
  omit the central path, simplifying the convergence analysis.
вҖў Empirically, we: (i) verify the benefits of warm-start of the inexact ACVI; (ii) observe that I-ACVI
  can be faster than other methods by taking advantage of cheaper approximate steps; (iii) train a
  constrained GAN on MNIST and show the projected version of ACVI is faster to converge than
  other methods; and (iv) provide visualizations contrasting the different ACVI variants.

1.1   R ELATED W ORKS

Last-iterate convergence of first-order methods on VI-related problems. When solving VIs,
the last and average iterates can be far apart; see examples in (Chavdarova et al., 2019). Thus,
an extensive line of work has aimed at obtaining last-iterate convergence for special cases of VIs
that are important in applications, including bilinear or strongly monotone games (e.g., Tseng,
1995; Malitsky, 2015; Facchinei & Pang, 2003; Daskalakis et al., 2018; Liang & Stokes, 2019;
Gidel et al., 2019b; Azizian et al., 2020; Thekumparampil et al., 2022), and VIs with cocoercive
operators (Diakonikolas, 2020). Several papers exploit continuous-time analyses as these provide


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


direct insights on last-iterate convergence and simplify the derivation of the Lyapunov potential
function (Ryu et al., 2019; Bot et al., 2020; Rosca et al., 2021; Chavdarova et al., 2023; Bot et al.,
2022). For monotone VIs, (i) Golowich et al. (2020b;a) established that the lower bound of pМғ-
stationary canonical linear iterative (pМғ-SCLI) first-order methods (Arjevani et al., 2016) is O( pМғвҲҡ1K ),
(ii) Golowich et al. (2020b) obtained a rate in terms of the gap function, relying on first- and second-
order smoothness of F , (iii) Gorbunov et al. (2022a) and Gorbunov et al. (2022b) obtained a rate of
     1
O( K   ) for extragradient (Korpelevich, 1976) and optimistic GDA (Popov, 1980), respectivelyвҖ”in
terms of reducing the squared norm of the operator, relying on first-order smoothness of F , and (iv)
Golowich et al. (2020b) and Chavdarova et al. (2023) provided the best iterate rate for OGDA while
assuming first-order smoothness of F . Daskalakis & Panageas (2019) focused on zero-sum convex-
concave constrained problems and provided an asymptotic convergence guarantee for the last iterate
of the optimistic multiplicative weights update (OMWU) method. For constrained and monotone
VIs with L-Lipschitz operator, Cai et al. (2022) recently showed that the last iterate of extragradient
and optimistic GDA have a rate of convergence that matches the lower bound. Gidel et al. (2017)
consider strongly convex-concave zero-sum games with strongly convex constraint set to study the
convergence of the Frank-Wolfe method (Lacoste-Julien & Jaggi, 2015).
Interior point (IP) methods for VIs. IP methods are a broad class of algorithms for solving prob-
lems constrained by general inequality and equality constraints. One of the widely adopted sub-
classes within IP methods utilizes log-barrier terms to handle inequality constraints. They typically
rely on NewtonвҖҷs method, which iteratively approaches the solution from the feasible region. Sev-
eral works extend IP methods for constrained VI problems. Among these, Nesterov & Nemirovski
(Chapter 7, 1994) study extensions to VI problems while relying on NewtonвҖҷs method. Further,
an extensive line of work discusses specific settings (e.g., Chen et al., 1998; Qi & Sun, 2002; Qi
et al., 2000; Fan & Yan, 2010). On the other hand, Goffin et al. (1997) described a second-order
cutting-plane method for solving pseudomonotone VIs with linear inequalities. Although these
methods enjoy fast convergence regarding the number of iterations, each iteration requires comput-
ing second-order derivatives, which becomes computationally prohibitive for large-scale problems.
Recently, Yang et al. (2023) derived the aforementioned ACVI method which combines IP methods
and the ADMM method, resulting in a first-order method that can handle general constraints.

2    P RELIMINARIES
Notation. Bold small and bold capital letters denote vectors and matrices, respectively, while curly
capital letters denote sets. We let [n] denote {1, . . . , n} and let e denote vector of all 1вҖҷs. The
Euclidean norm of v is denoted by вҲҘvвҲҘ, and the inner product in Euclidean space by вҹЁВ·, В·вҹ©. вҠҷ
denotes element-wise product.
Problem. Let rank(C) = p be the rank of C as per (CS). With abuse of notation, let ПҶ be
the concatenated ПҶi (В·), i вҲҲ [m]. We assume that each of the inequality constraints is convex and
ПҶi вҲҲ C 1 (Rn ), i вҲҲ [m]. We define the following sets:
CвүӨ вүң {x вҲҲ Rn |ПҶ(x) вүӨ 0 } , C< вүң {x вҲҲ Rn |ПҶ(x) < 0 } , and C= вүң {y вҲҲ Rn |Cy = d} ;
thus the relative interior of C is int C вүң C< вҲ© C= . We assume int C Мё= вҲ… and that C is compact.
In the following, we list the necessary definitions and assumptions; see App. A for additional back-
ground. We define these for a general domain set S, and by setting S вүЎ Rn and S вүЎ X , these refer
to the unconstrained and constrained settings, respectively. We will use the standard gap function as
a convergence measure, which requires S to be compact to define it.
Definition 2.1 (monotone operators). An operator F : X вҠҮ S вҶ’ Rn is monotone on S if and only
if the following inequality holds for all x, xвҖІ вҲҲ S: вҹЁx вҲ’ xвҖІ , F (x) вҲ’ F (xвҖІ )вҹ© вүҘ 0.
Definition 2.2 (gap function). Given a candidate point xвҖІ вҲҲ X and a map F : X вҠҮ S вҶ’ Rn where
S is compact, the gap function G : Rn вҶ’ R is defined as: G(xвҖІ , S) вүң maxвҹЁF (xвҖІ ), xвҖІ вҲ’ xвҹ© .
                                                                           xвҲҲS
Definition 2.3 (Пғ-approximate solution). Given a map F : X вҶ’ Rn and a positive scalar Пғ, x вҲҲ X
is said to be a Пғ-approximate solution of F (x) = 0 iff вҲҘF (x)вҲҘ вүӨ Пғ.
Definition 2.4 (Оө-minimizer). Given a minimization problem min h(x), s.t. x вҲҲ S, and a fixed
                                                                     x
positive scalar Оө, a point xМӮ вҲҲ S is said to be an Оө-minimizer of this problem if and only if it holds
that: h(xМӮ) вүӨ h(x) + Оө, вҲҖx вҲҲ S.


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              central path
              initial point
              (I-)ACVI


        (a) ACVI                    (b) I-ACVI, K=20, в„“=2 (c) I-ACVI, K=10, в„“=2   (d) I-ACVI, K=5, в„“=2

Figure 1: Convergence of ACVI and I-ACVI on the (2D-BG) problem. The central path is
depicted in yellow. For all methods, we show the y-iterates initialized at the same point (blue
circle). Each subsequent point on the trajectory depicts the (exact or approximate) solution at the
end of the inner loop. A yellow star represents the gameвҖҷs Nash equilibrium (NE), and the constraint
set is the interior of the red square. (a): As we decay Вөt , the solutions of the inner loop of ACVI
follow the central path. As Вөt вҶ’ 0, the solution of the inner loop of ACVI converges to the NE. (b,
c, d): When the x and y subproblems are solved approximately with a finite K and в„“, the iterates
need not converge as the approximation error increases (and K decreases). See В§ 5 for a discussion.


Algorithm 1 Inexact ACVI (I-ACVI) pseudocode.
 1: Input: operator F : X вҶ’ Rn , constraints Cx = d and ПҶi (x) вүӨ 0, i = [m], hyperparameters
    ВөвҲ’1 , ОІ > 0, Оҙ вҲҲ (0, 1), barrier map в„ҳ (в„ҳ1 or в„ҳ2 ), inner optimizers Ax (e.g. EG, GDA) and Ay
    (GD) for the x and y subproblems, resp.; outer and inner loop iterations T and K, resp.
                   (0)          (0)      (0)
 2: Initialize: x0 вҲҲ Rn , y0 вҲҲ Rn , О»0 вҲҲ Rn
 3: Pc вүң I вҲ’ C вҠә (CC вҠә )вҲ’1 C                                                      where Pc вҲҲ RnГ—n
                       вҠә вҲ’1
             вҠә
 4: dc вүң C (CC ) d                                                                  where dc вҲҲ Rn
 5: for t = 0, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 do
 6:   Вөt = ОҙВөtвҲ’1
 7:   for k = 0, . . . , K вҲ’ 1 do
               (t)                                                            (t)       (t)
 8:      Set xk+1 to be a Пғk+1 -approximate solution of: x+ ОІ1 Pc F (x)вҲ’Pc yk + ОІ1 Pc О»k вҲ’dc = 0
                                          (t)                                                         (t)
         (w.r.t. x), by running в„“x steps of Ax , with x initialized to the previous solution (xk if
                       (tвҲ’1)
         k > 0, else xK )
                                                                                                  2
               (t)                                  Pm                              (t)       (t)
         Set yk+1 to be an Оөk+1 -minimizer of miny i=1 в„ҳ ПҶi (y), Вө + ОІ2 y вҲ’ xk+1 вҲ’ ОІ1 О»k

 9:                                                                                                 ,
                              (t)                                  (t)                 (tвҲ’1)
         by running в„“y steps of Ay , with y initialized to yk when k > 0, or yK                otherwise
           (t)       (t)        (t)     (t)
10:      О»k+1 = О»k + ОІ(xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 )
11:   end for
         (t+1)    (t+1)        (t)  (t)
12:   (y0      , О»0      ) вүң (yK , О»K )
13: end for



3     C ONVERGENCE OF THE E XACT AND I NEXACT ACVI A LGORITHMS FOR
      M ONOTONE VI S

In this section, we present our main theoretical findings: (i) the rate of convergence of the last iterate
of ACVI (the exact ACVI algorithm is stated in App. A) while relying exclusively on the assumption
that the operator F is monotone; and (ii) the corresponding convergence when the subproblems are
solved approximatelyвҖ”where the proposed algorithm is referred to as inexact ACVIвҖ”Algorithm 1
(в„ҳ1 , в„ҳ2 are defined below). Note that we only assume F is L-Lipschitz for the latter result, and if
we run Algorithm 1 with extragradient for line 8, for example, the method only has a convergence
guarantee if F is L-Lipschitz (see Korpelevich, 1976, Theorem 1). For easier comparison with one
loop algorithms, we will state both of these results for a fixed ВөвҲ’1 (hence only have the k вҲҲ [K]
iteration count) as in (Yang et al., 2023); nonetheless, the same rates hold without knowing ВөвҲ’1 вҖ”see
App. B.4 in Yang et al. (2023) and our App. B.3. Thus, both guarantees are parameter-free.


                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.1   L AST ITERATE CONVERGENCE OF EXACT ACVI

Theorem 3.1 (Last iterate convergence rate of ACVIвҖ”Algorithm 1 in (Yang et al., 2023)). Given a
continuous operator F : X вҶ’ Rn , assume: (i) F is monotone on C= , as per Def. 2.1; (ii) either F
                                                                   (t) (t)  (t)
is strictly monotone on C or one of ПҶi is strictly convex. Let (xK , yK , О»K ) denote the last iterate
of ACVI.Given any fixed K вҲҲ N+ , run with sufficiently small ВөвҲ’1 , then вҲҖt вҲҲ [T ], it holds that:
                          (t)            1              (t)    (t)         1
                      G(xK , C) вүӨ O( вҲҡ ) , and xK вҲ’ yK вүӨ O( вҲҡ ) .
                                         K                                  K
App. B gives the details on the constants that appear in the rates and the proof of Theorem 3.1.

3.2   L AST ITERATE CONVERGENCE RATE OF INEXACT ACVI

For some problems, the equation in line 8 or the convex optimization problem in line 9 of ACVI
may not have an analytic solution, or the exact solution may be expensive to compute. Thus we
consider solving these two problems approximately, using warm-starting. At each iteration, we set
the initial variable x and y to be the solution at the previous step when solving the x and y sub-
problems, respectively, as described in Algorithm 1. The following TheoremвҖ”inspired by (Schmidt
et al., 2011)вҖ”establishes that when the errors in the calculation of the subproblems satisfy certain
conditions, the last iterate convergence rate of inexact ACVI recovers that of (exact) ACVI. The
theorem holds for the standard barrier function used for IP methods, as well as for a new barrier
function (в„ҳ2 ) that we propose that is smooth and defined in the entire domain, as follows:
                                                                                            c
                                                                                  z вүӨ вҲ’eвҲ’ Вө

                                                               вҲ’Вө log(вҲ’z) ,
      в„ҳ1 (z, Вө) вүң вҲ’Вө log(вҲ’z)         (в„ҳ1 )     в„ҳ 2 (z, Вө) вүң       c                                (в„ҳ2 )
                                                               Вөe Вө z + Вө + c , otherwise
where c in (в„ҳ2 ) is fixed constant. Choosing among these is denoted with в„ҳ(В·) in Algorithm 1.
Theorem 3.2 (Last iterate convergence rate of Inexact ACVIвҖ”Algorithm 1 with в„ҳ1 or в„ҳ2 ). Given
a continuous operator F : X вҶ’ Rn , assume: (i) F is monotone on C= , as per Def. 2.1; (ii) either
F is strictly monotone on C or one of ПҶi is strictly convex; and (iii) F is L-Lipschitz on X , that is,
                                                                              (t)   (t) (t)
вҲҘF (x) вҲ’ F (xвҖІ )вҲҘ вүӨ L вҲҘx вҲ’ xвҖІ вҲҘ, for all x, xвҖІ вҲҲ X and some L > 0. Let (xK , yK , О»K ) denote the
last iterate of Algorithm 1; and let Пғk and Оөk denote the approximation errors at step k of lines 8 and
                                                                             PK+1 вҲҡ
9 (as per Def. 2.3 and 2.4), respectively. Further, suppose: limKвҶ’вҲһ вҲҡ1K k=1 (k( Оөk + Пғk )) <
+вҲһ . Given any fixed K вҲҲ N+ , run with sufficiently small ВөвҲ’1 , then for all t вҲҲ [T ], it holds:
                           (t)             1             (t)    (t)        1
                       G(xK , C) вүӨ O( вҲҡ ) , and xK вҲ’ yK вүӨ O( вҲҡ ) .
                                           K                                K
As is the case for Theorem 3.1, Theorem 3.2 gives a nonasymptotic convergence guarantee. While
the condition involving the sequences {Пөk }K+1                K+1
                                              k=1 and {Пғk }k=1 requires the given expression to be
summable, the convergence rate is nonasymptotic as it holds for any K. App. B gives details on
the constants in the rates of Theorem 3.2, provides the proof, and also discusses the algorithms
Ax , Ay for the sub-problems that satisfy the conditions. App. C discusses further details of the
implementation of Algorithm 1; and we will analyze the effect of warm-starting in В§ 5.

4     S PECIALIZATION OF ACVI FOR S IMPLE I NEQUALITY C ONSTRAINTS
We now consider that the inequality constraints are simple in that the projection is fast to compute.
This scenario frequently occurs in machine learning, particularly when dealing with LвҲһ -ball con-
straints, for instance. Projections onto the L2 and
                                                   L1 -balls can also be obtained efficiently through
simple normalization for L2 and a O n log(n) algorithm for L1 (Duchi et al., 2008). In ACVI,
we have the flexibility to substitute the y-subproblem with a projection onto the set defined by the
inequalities. The x-subproblem still accounts for equality constraints, and if there are none, this
simplifies the x-subproblem further since Pc вүЎ I, and dc вүЎ 0. Projection-based methods can-
not leverage this structural advantage of simple inequality constraints as the intersection with the
equality constraints can be nontrivial.
The P-ACVI Algorithm: omitting the log barrier. Assume that the provided inequality con-
straints can be met efficiently through a projection О вүӨ (В·) : Rn вҶ’ CвүӨ . In that case, we no longer
need the log barrier, and we omit Вө and the outer loop of ACVI over t вҲҲ [T ]. Differentiating the
remaining expression of the y subproblem with respect to y and setting it to zero gives:


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 2 P-ACVI: ACVI with simple inequalities.
 1: Input: operator F : X вҶ’ Rn , constraints Cx = d and projection operator О вүӨ for the inequal-
    ity constraints, hyperparameter ОІ > 0, and number of iterations K.
 2: Initialize: y0 вҲҲ Rn , О»0 вҲҲ Rn
 3: Pc вүң I вҲ’ C вҠә (CC вҠә )вҲ’1 C                                                    where Pc вҲҲ RnГ—n
                      вҠә вҲ’1
             вҠә
 4: dc вүң C (CC ) d                                                                 where dc вҲҲ Rn
 5: for k = 0, . . . , K вҲ’ 1 do
 6:    Set xk+1 to be the solution of: x + ОІ1 Pc F (x) вҲ’ Pc yk + ОІ1 Pc О»k вҲ’ dc = 0 (w.r.t. x)
 7:    yk+1 = О вүӨ (xk+1 + ОІ1 О»k )
 8:    О»k+1 = О»k + ОІ(xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 )
 9: end for


                                                                      2
                                   ОІ           1                                            1
                         argmin      y вҲ’ xk+1 вҲ’ О»k                        = xk+1 +            О»k .
                               y   2           ОІ                                            ОІ
This implies that line 9 of the exact ACVI algorithm (given in App. A) can be replaced with the
solution of the y problem without the inequality constraints, and we can cheaply project to satisfy
the inequality constraints, as follows: yk+1 = О вүӨ (xk+1 + ОІ1 О»k ) , where the ПҶi (В·) are included
in the projection. We describe the resulting procedure in Algorithm 2 and refer to it as P-ACVI.
In this scenario with simple ПҶi , the y problem is always solved exactly; nonetheless, when the
x-subproblem is also solved approximately, we refer to it as PI-ACVI.

                                                                102
                                                                                                          8


                                                                101                                       6
                                                          FID


                                                                                                     IS
                                                                                                          4          P-GDA
                                                                100                                                  P-EG
                                                                                                                     PI-ACVI `0 = 500
                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                     PI-ACVI `0 = 100

                                                                      0     500     1000      1500            0    500     1000    1500
                                                                           Time (seconds)                         Time (seconds)

   (a) xk of PI-ACVI         (b) yk of PI-ACVI              (a) FID, lower is better                  (b) IS, higher is better

Figure 2: Intermediate iterates of PI-ACVI           Figure 3: Experiments on the (C-GAN) game,
(Algorithm 2) on the 2D minmax game                  using GDA, EG, and PI-ACVI on MNIST. All
(2D-BG). The boundary of the constraint set is       curves are averaged over 4 seeds. (a): Frechet
shown in red. (b) depicts the yk (from line 7        Inception Distance (FID, lower is better) given
in Algorithm 2) which we obtain through pro-         CPU wall-clock time. (b): Inception Score (IS,
jections. In (a), each spiral corresponds to iter-   higher is better) given wall-clock time. We ob-
atively solving the xk subproblem for в„“ = 20         serve that PI-ACVI converges faster than EG and
steps (line 6 in Algorithm 2). Jointly, the trajec-  GDA for both metrics. Moreover, we see that us-
tories of x and y illustrate the ACVI dynamics:      ing a large в„“ for the first iteration (в„“0 ) can give a
x and the constrained y вҖңcollaborateвҖқ and con-       significant advantage. The two PI-ACVI curves
verge to the same point.                             use the same в„“+ = 20.
Last-iterate convergence of P-ACVI. The following theorem shows that P-ACVI has the same last-
iterate rate as ACVI. Its proof can be derived from that of Theorem 3.1, which focuses on a more
general setting, see App. B. We state it as a separate theorem, as it cannot be deduced directly from
the statement of the former.
Theorem 4.1 (Last iterate convergence rate of P-ACVIвҖ”Algorithm 2). Given a continuous opera-
tor F : X вҶ’ Rn , assume F is monotone on C= , as per Def. 2.1. Let (xK , yK , О»K ) denote the last
iterate of Algorithm 2. Then for all K вҲҲ N+ , it holds that:
                                         1                                  1
                       G(xK , C) вүӨ O( вҲҡ ) , and xK вҲ’ y K вүӨ O( вҲҡ ) .
                                          K                                  K
Remark 4.2. Note that Theorem 4.1 relies on weaker assumptions than Theorem. 3.1. This is a
ramification of removing the central path in the P-ACVI Algorithm. Thus, assumption (ii) in Theo-
rem 3.1вҖ”used earlier to guarantee the existence of the central path (see App. A)вҖ”is not needed.


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                   800                                                           50
                                          P-GDA
                                          P-EG
                                                                                                                             1                                    8000
                                                                                                                             5


                                                          number of iterations
                   600                    P-OGDA                                 40
                                                                                                                            10


    CPU time (s)
                                          P-LA4-GDA
                                                                                                                            20
                                          ACVI                                   30                                                                               6000


                                                                                                                       K+
                   400                    I-ACVI                                                                            30
                                                                                                                            40
                                                                                 20                                         50
                   200
                                                                                                                            60
                                                                                                                                                                  4000
                                                                                 10                                         70
                     0
                                                                                                                                 5 10      50        100   130
                         10вҲ’3      10вҲ’2      10вҲ’1                                     0.0          0.5         1.0
                                relative error                                                      О·                                           K0

                         (a) fixed error                                         (b) rotational intensity                        (c) I-ACVI: effect of K0 , K+

Figure 4: Comparison between I-ACVI, (exact) ACVI, and projection-based algorithms on
the (HBG) problem. (a): CPU time (in seconds) to reach a given relative error (x-axis), where the
rotational intensity is fixed to О· = 0.05 in (HBG) for all methods. (b): Number of iterations to reach
a relative error of 0.02 for varying values of the rotational intensity О·. We fix the maximum number
of iterations to 50. (c): joint impact of the number of inner-loop iterations K0 at t = 0 and different
choices of inner-loop iterations for K+ at any t > 0 on the number of iterations needed to reach a
fixed relative error of 10вҲ’4 . We see that irrespective of the selection of K+ , I-ACVI converges fast if
K0 is large enough. For instance, (K0 = 130, K+ = 1) converges faster than (K0 = 20, K+ = 20).
We fix в„“ = 10 for all the experiments, in all of (a), (b), and (c).


5                  E XPERIMENTS

Methods. We compare ACVI, Inexact-ACVI (I-ACVI), and Projected-Inexact-ACVI (PI-ACVI)
with the projected variants of Gradient Descent Ascent (P-GDA), Extragradient (Korpelevich, 1976)
(P-EG), Optimistic-GDA (Popov, 1980) (P-OGDA), and Lookahead-Minmax (Zhang et al., 2019;
Chavdarova et al., 2021) (P-LA). We always use GDA as an inner optimizer for I-ACVI, PI-ACVI,
and P-ACVI. See App. D and C for comparison with additional methods and implementation.
Problems. We study the empirical performance of these methods on three different problems:
вҖў 2D bilinear game: a version of the bilinear game with LвҲһ constraints, as follows
                                   min max x1 x2 ,                                           with        в–і ={x вҲҲ R| вҲ’ 0.4 вүӨ x вүӨ 2.4} .                           (2D-BG)
                                  x1 вҲҲв–і x2 вҲҲв–і

вҖў High-dimensional bilinear game: where each player is a 500-dimensional vector. The iterates are
  constrained to the probability simplex. A parameter О· вҲҲ (0, 1) controls the rotational component
  of the game (when О· = 1 the game is a potential, when О· = 0 the game is Hamiltonian):
             min max О·xвҠә1 x1 + (1 вҲ’ О·) xвҠә1 x2 вҲ’ О·xвҠә2 x2 , with в–і ={xi вҲҲ R500 |xi вүҘ 0, and eвҠә xi = 1} .
         x1 вҲҲв–іx2 вҲҲв–і
                                                                                                                                                                   (HBG)
вҖў MNIST. We train GANs on the MNIST (Lecun & Cortes, 1998) dataset. We use linear inequality
  constraints and no equality constraints, as follows:
                                                     min max                                 E [log D(s)] + E [log(1вҲ’D(G(z)))]                                   (C-GAN)
                                                    GвҲҲв–іОё DвҲҲв–іО¶                               sвҲјpd                     zвҲјpz

                                                    where в–іОё ={Оё|A1 Оё вүӨ b1 }, в–іО¶ ={О¶|A2 О¶ вүӨ b2 } ,
    with pz , pd respectively, noise and data distributions; Оё and О¶ are the parameters of the generator
    and discriminator, resp. D and G are the Generator and Discriminator maps, parameterized with
    Оё and О¶, resp. Ai вҲҲ R100Г—ni and bi вҲҲ Rni , where ni is the number of parameters of D or G.
5.1                  I NEXACT ACVI
2D bilinear game. In Fig. 1, we compare exact and inexact ACVI on the 2D-Bilinear game. Rather
than solving the subproblems of I-ACVI until we reach appropriate accuracy of the solutions of the
subproblems, herein, we fix the K and в„“ number of iterations in I-ACVI. We observe how I-ACVI
can converge following the central path when the inner loop of I-ACVI over k вҲҲ [K] is solved with
sufficient precision. The two parameters influencing the convergence of the iterates to the central
path are K and в„“, where the latter is the number of iterations to solve the two subproblems (line 8 and
line 9 in Algorithm 1). Fig. 1 shows that small values such as K = 20 and в„“ = 2 are sufficient for
convergence for this purely rotational game. Nonetheless, as K and в„“ decrease further, the iterates


                                                                                                           8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


of I-ACVI may not converge. This accords with Theorem 3.2, which indicates that the sum of errors
is bounded only if K is large. Hence, larger K implies a smaller error.
HD bilinear game. In Fig. 4(a) and Fig. 4(b) we compare I-ACVI with ACVI and the projection-
based algorithms on the (HBG) problem. We observe that both ACVI and I-ACVI outperform the
remaining baselines significantly in terms of speed of convergence measured in both CPU time and
the number of iterations. Moreover, while I-ACVI requires more iterations than ACVI to reach a
given relative error, those iterations are computationally cheaper relative to solving exactly each
subproblem; hence, I-ACVI converges much faster than any other method. Fig. 4(c) aims to demon-
strate that the subproblems of I-ACVI are suitable for warm-starting. Interestingly, we notice that the
choice of the number of iterations at the first step t = 0 plays a crucial role. Given that we initialize
variables at each iteration with the previous solution, it aids the convergence to solve the subprob-
lems as accurately as possible at t = 0. This initial accuracy reduces the initial error, subsequently
decreasing the error at all subsequent iterations. We revisit this observation in В§ 5.3.

5.2   P ROJECTED -I NEXACT-ACVI
2D bilinear game. In Fig. 2 we show the dynamics of PI-ACVI on the 2D game defined by (2D-BG).
Compared to ACVI in Fig. 1, the iterates converge to the solution without following the central path.
A comparison with other optimizers is available in App. D.
MNIST. In Fig. 3 we compare PI-ACVI and baselines on the (C-GAN) game trained on the MNIST
dataset. We employ the greedy projection algorithm (Beck, 2017) for the projections. Since ACVI
was derived primarily for handling general constraints, a question that arises is how it (and its vari-
ants) performs when the projection is fast to compute. Although the projection is fast to compute
for these experiments, PI-ACVI converges faster than the projection-based methods. Compared to
the projected EG method, which only improves upon GDA when the rotational component of F is
high, it gives more consistent improvements over the GDA baseline.

5.3   E FFECT OF WARM - UP ON I-ACVI AND PI-ACVI
I-ACVI. The experiments in Fig. 1 motivate increasing the number of iterations K only at the first
iteration t = 0вҖ”denoted K0 , so that the early iterates are close to the central path. Recall that the K
steps (corresponding to line 7 in Algorithm 1) bring the iterates closer to the central path as K вҶ’ вҲһ
(see App. B). After those K0 steps, Вө is decayed, which moves the problemвҖҷs solution along the
central path. For I-ACVI, from Fig. 4(c)вҖ”where в„“ is fixed to 10вҖ”we observed that regardless of
the selected value of K+ for t > 0, it can be compensated by a large enough K0 .
PI-ACVI. We similarly study the impact of the warmup technique for the PI-ACVI method (Algo-
rithm 2). Compared to I-ACVI, this method omits the outer loop over t вҲҲ [T ]. Hence, instead of
varying K0 , we experiment with increasing the first в„“ at iteration k = 0, denoted by в„“0 . In Fig. 3 we
solve the constrained MNIST problem with PI-ACVI using either в„“0 = 500 or в„“0 = 100, в„“+ is set
to 20 in both cases. Increasing the в„“0 value significantly improves the convergence speed.
Conclusion. We observe consistently that using a large K0 or I-ACVI, or large l0 for PI-ACVI
aids the convergence. Conversely, factors such as l and K+ in I-ACVI, or l+ in PI-ACVI, exert a
comparatively lesser influence. Further experiments and discussions are available in App. D.


6     D ISCUSSION

We contributed to an emerging line of research
                                          вҲҡ     on the ACVI method, showing that the last iterate of
ACVI converges at a rate of order O(1/ K) for monotone VIs. This result is significant because
it does not rely on the first-order smoothness of the operator, resolving an open problem in the VI
literature. To address subproblems that cannot always be solved in closed form, we introduced an
inexact ACVI (I-ACVI) variant that uses warm-starting for its subproblems and proved last iterate
convergence under certain weak assumptions. We вҲҡ      also proposed P-ACVI for simple inequality
constraints and showed that it converges with O(1/ K) rate. Our experiments provided insights
into I-ACVIвҖҷs behavior when subproblems are solved approximately, emphasized the impact of
warm-starting, and highlighted advantages over standard projection-based algorithms.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We acknowledge support from the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF), grants
P2ELP2 199740 and P500PT 214441 The work of T. Yang is supported in part by the NSF grant
CCF-2007911 to Y. Chi.

R EFERENCES
Yossi Arjevani, Shai Shalev-Shwartz, and Ohad Shamir. On lower and upper bounds for smooth and
  strongly convex optimization problems. In JMLR, 2016.
WaДұМҲss Azizian, Ioannis Mitliagkas, Simon Lacoste-Julien, and Gauthier Gidel. A tight and unified
 analysis of gradient-based methods for a whole spectrum of differentiable games. In AISTATS,
 pp. 2863вҖ“2873, 2020.
Amir Beck. First-Order Methods in Optimization. SIAM, 2017.
Amir Beck and Marc Teboulle. Mirror descent and nonlinear projected subgradient methods for
 convex optimization. Oper. Res. Lett., 31(3):167вҖ“175, 2003.
Dimitri Bertsekas, Angelia Nedic, and Asuman Ozdaglar. Convex Analysis and Optimization, vol-
  ume 1. Athena Scientific, 2003.
Radu Ioan Bot, ErnoМҲ Robert Csetnek, and Phan Tu Vuong. The forward-backward-forward method
  from continuous and discrete perspective for pseudo-monotone variational inequalities in Hilbert
  spaces. arXiv:1808.08084, 2020.
Radu Ioan Bot, ErnoМҲ Robert Csetnek, and Dang-Khoa Nguyen. Fast OGDA in continuous and
  discrete time. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.10947, 2022.
Stephen Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex Optimization. Cambridge university press, 2004.
Stephen Boyd, Neal Parikh, Eric Chu, Borja Peleato, and Jonathan Eckstein. Distributed optimiza-
  tion and statistical learning via the alternating direction method of multipliers. Foundations and
  Trends in Machine Learning, 3, 2011. ISSN 1935-8237. doi: 10.1561/2200000016.
Yang Cai, Argyris Oikonomou, and Weiqiang Zheng. Tight last-iterate convergence of the extragra-
  dient method for constrained monotone variational inequalities. arXiv:2204.09228, 2022.
Tatjana Chavdarova, Gauthier Gidel, FrancМ§ois Fleuret, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. Reducing noise
  in GAN training with variance reduced extragradient. In NeurIPS, 2019.
Tatjana Chavdarova, Matteo Pagliardini, Sebastian U Stich, FrancМ§ois Fleuret, and Martin Jaggi.
  Taming GANs with Lookahead-Minmax. In ICLR, 2021.
Tatjana Chavdarova, Michael I. Jordan, and Manolis Zampetakis. Last-iterate convergence of saddle
  point optimizers via high-resolution differential equations. In Minimax Theory and its Applica-
  tions, 2023.
Xiaojun Chen, Liqun Qi, and Defeng Sun. Global and superlinear convergence of the smoothing
  newton method and its application to general box constrained variational inequalities. Mathemat-
  ics of Computation, 67(222):519вҖ“540, 1998.
Rune Christiansen, Niklas Pfister, Martin Emil Jakobsen, Nicola Gnecco, and Jonas Peters. A causal
  framework for distribution generalization. arXiv:2006.07433, 2020.
Liang-Ju Chu. On the continuity of trajectories for nonlinear monotone complementarity problems.
  Scientiae Mathematicae, 1(3):263вҖ“275, 1998.
Richard W. Cottle and George B. Dantzig. Complementary pivot theory of mathematical program-
  ming. Linear Algebra and its Applications, 1(1):103вҖ“125, 1968. ISSN 0024-3795.
Constantinos Daskalakis and Ioannis Panageas. Last-iterate convergence: Zero-sum games and
  constrained min-max optimization. In ITCS, 2019.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Constantinos Daskalakis, Andrew Ilyas, Vasilis Syrgkanis, and Haoyang Zeng. Training GANs with
  optimism. In ICLR, 2018.
Jelena Diakonikolas. Halpern iteration for near-optimal and parameter-free monotone inclusion and
   strong solutions to variational inequalities. COLT, 125, 2020.
Jim Douglas and H. H. Jr. Rachford. On the numerical solution of heat conduction problems in
  two and three space variables. Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, 82:421вҖ“439,
  1956.
John Duchi, Shai Shalev-Shwartz, Yoram Singer, and Tushar Chandra. Efficient projections onto
  the l1-ball for learning in high dimensions. In ICML, pp. 272вҖ“279, 2008. doi: 10.1145/1390156.
  1390191.
J. Eckstein. Splitting Methods for Monotone Operators with Applications to Parallel Optimization.
   Ph.D. dissertation. MIT, Cambridge, 1989.
Francisco Facchinei and Jong-Shi Pang. Finite-dimensional Variational Inequalities and Comple-
  mentarity Problems. Springer, 2003.
Xiaona Fan and Qinglun Yan. An interior point algorithm for variational inequality problems. In-
  ternational Journal of Contemporary Mathematical Sciences, 5(52):2595вҖ“2604, 2010.
Daniel Gabay. Applications of the method of multipliers to variational inequalities. In Studies in
  Mathematics and its Applications, volume 15, pp. 299вҖ“331. Elsevier, 1983.
Daniel Gabay and Bertrand Mercier. A dual algorithm for the solution of nonlinear variational
  problems via finite element approximation. Computers & Mathematics with Applications, 2:17вҖ“
  40, 1976. ISSN 0898-1221.
Gauthier Gidel, Tony Jebara, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. Frank-Wolfe algorithms for saddle point
  problems. In AISTATS, 2017.
Gauthier Gidel, Hugo Berard, Pascal Vincent, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. A variational inequality
  perspective on generative adversarial nets. In ICLR, 2019a.
Gauthier Gidel, Reyhane Askari Hemmat, Mohammad Pezeshki, ReМҒmi Le Priol, Gabriel Huang, Si-
  mon Lacoste-Julien, and Ioannis Mitliagkas. Negative momentum for improved game dynamics.
  In AISTATS, 2019b.
R. Glowinski and A. Marroco. Sur lвҖҷapproximation, par eМҒleМҒments finis dвҖҷordre un, et la reМҒsolution,
  par peМҒnalisation-dualiteМҒ dвҖҷune classe de probleМҖmes de Dirichlet non lineМҒaires. ESAIM: Mathemat-
  ical Modelling and Numerical Analysis - ModeМҒlisation MatheМҒmatique et Analyse NumeМҒrique, 9
  (R2):41вҖ“76, 1975.
Roland Glowinski and Patrick Le Tallec. Augmented Lagrangian and Operator-Splitting Methods
  in Nonlinear Mechanics. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 1989. doi: 10.1137/1.
  9781611970838.
Jean-Louis Goffin, Patrice Marcotte, and Daoli Zhu. An analytic center cutting plane method for
  pseudomonotone variational inequalities. Operations Research Letters, 20(1):1вҖ“6, 1997. ISSN
  0167-6377.
Noah Golowich, Sarath Pattathil, and Constantinos Daskalakis. Tight last-iterate convergence rates
  for no-regret learning in multi-player games. In NeurIPS, 2020a.
Noah Golowich, Sarath Pattathil, Constantinos Daskalakis, and Asuman Ozdaglar. Last iterate is
  slower than averaged iterate in smooth convex-concave saddle point problems. In COLT, pp.
  1758вҖ“1784, 2020b.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. In NIPS, 2014.
Ian Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial
  examples. In ICLR, 2015.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Eduard Gorbunov, Nicolas Loizou, and Gauthier Gidel. Extragradient method: O(1/K) last-iterate
  convergence for monotone variational inequalities and connections with cocoercivity. In AISTATS,
  2022a.
Eduard Gorbunov, Adrien Taylor, and Gauthier Gidel. Last-iterate convergence of optimistic gradi-
  ent method for monotone variational inequalities. arXiv:2205.08446, 2022b.
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
 GANs trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local Nash equilibrium. In NIPS,
 2017.
Ya-Ping Hsieh, Panayotis Mertikopoulos, and Volkan Cevher. The limits of min-max optimization
  algorithms: convergence to spurious non-critical sets. In ICML, 2021.
Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by
  reducing internal covariate shift. In ICML, 2015.
Galina Michailovna Korpelevich. The extragradient method for finding saddle points and other
  problems. Matecon, 1976.
Simon Lacoste-Julien and Martin Jaggi. On the global linear convergence of Frank-Wolfe optimiza-
  tion variants. In NIPS, 2015.
Yann Lecun and Corinna Cortes. The MNIST database of handwritten digits, 1998. URL http:
  //yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist/.
Tengyuan Liang and James Stokes. Interaction matters: A note on non-asymptotic local convergence
  of generative adversarial networks. Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2019.
Zhouchen Lin, Huan Li, and Cong Fang. Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers for Machine
  Learning. Springer, 2022.
P. L. Lions and B. Mercier. Splitting algorithms for the sum of two nonlinear operators. SIAM
   Journal on Numerical Analysis, 16(6):964вҖ“979, 1979.
Yu. Malitsky. Projected reflected gradient methods for monotone variational inequalities. SIAM
  Journal on Optimization, 25:502вҖ“520, 2015.
Santiago Mazuelas, Andrea Zanoni, and Aritz PeМҒrez. Minimax classification with 0-1 loss and
  performance guarantees. In NeurIPS, volume 33, 2020.
Panayotis Mertikopoulos, Bruno Lecouat, Houssam Zenati, Chuan-Sheng Foo, Vijay Chan-
  drasekhar, and Georgios Piliouras. Optimistic mirror descent in saddle-point problems: Going
  the extra(-gradient) mile. In ICLR, 2019.
Aryan Mokhtari, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Sarath Pattathil. A unified analysis of extra-gradient and op-
  timistic gradient methods for saddle point problems: Proximal point approach. arXiv:1901.08511,
  2019.
Arkadi Nemirovski. Prox-method with rate of convergence o(1/t) for variational inequalities with
  lipschitz continuous monotone operators and smooth convex-concave saddle point problems.
  SIAM Journal on Optimization, 15(1):229вҖ“251, 2004. doi: 10.1137/S1052623403425629.
Arkadi Nemirovski and David Yudin. Problem complexity and Method Efficiency in Optimization,
  volume 1. Wiley, New York, 1983.
Yurii Nesterov and Arkadi Nemirovski. Interior-point polynomial algorithms in convex program-
  ming. In Siam Studies in Applied Mathematics, 1994.
Robert Nishihara, Laurent Lessard, Ben Recht, Andrew Packard, and Michael Jordan. A general
  analysis of the convergence of admm. In ICML, volume 37 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 343вҖ“352, 2015.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Soumith Chintala, and Gregory Chanan. PyTorch. https://github.
  com/pytorch/pytorch, 2017.

                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Leonid Denisovich Popov. A modification of the arrowвҖ“hurwicz method for search of saddle points.
  Mathematical Notes of the Academy of Sciences of the USSR, 28(5):845вҖ“848, 1980.
Liqun Qi and Defeng Sun. Smoothing functions and smoothing newton method for complementarity
  and variational inequality problems. Journal of Optimization Theory and Applications, 113(1):
  121вҖ“147, 2002.
Liqun Qi, Defeng Sun, and Guanglu Zhou. A new look at smoothing Newton methods for nonlinear
  complementarity problems and box constrained variational inequalities. Mathematical Program-
  ming, 87(1):1вҖ“35, 2000.
Alec Radford, Luke Metz, and Soumith Chintala. Unsupervised representation learning with deep
  convolutional generative adversarial networks. In ICLR, 2016.
Ralph Tyrrell Rockafellar. Monotone operators associated with saddle-functions and minimax prob-
  lems. Nonlinear functional analysis, 18(part 1):397вҖ“407, 1970.
Mihaela Rosca, Yan Wu, Benoit Dherin, and David G. T. Barrett. Discretization drift in two-player
 games. In ICML, 2021.
Dominik RothenhaМҲusler, Nicolai Meinshausen, Peter BuМҲhlmann, and Jonas Peters. Anchor regres-
  sion: heterogeneous data meets causality. ArXiv:1801.06229, 2018.
Ernest K. Ryu and Wotao Yin. Large-Scale Convex Optimization via Monotone Operators. Springer
  Publishing Company, Incorporated, 2022.
Ernest K. Ryu, Kun Yuan, and Wotao Yin. Ode analysis of stochastic gradient methods with opti-
  mism and anchoring for minimax problems. arXiv:1905.10899, 2019.
Tim Salimans, Ian Goodfellow, Wojciech Zaremba, Vicki Cheung, Alec Radford, and Xi Chen.
  Improved techniques for training GANs. In NIPS, 2016.
Mark Schmidt, Nicolas Roux, and Francis Bach. Convergence rates of inexact proximal-gradient
 methods for convex optimization. NIPS, 24, 2011.
Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan, Ian Goodfellow,
  and Rob Fergus. Intriguing properties of neural networks. arXiv:1312.6199, 2014.
Kiran Koshy Thekumparampil, Niao He, and Sewoong Oh. Lifted primal-dual method for bilinearly
  coupled smooth minimax optimization. In AISTATS, 2022.
Ryan J Tibshirani. Dykstra's algorithm, admm, and coordinate descent: Connections, insights, and
  extensions. In NeurIPS, volume 30, 2017.
Paul Tseng. On linear convergence of iterative methods for the variational inequality problem.
  Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics, 60:237вҖ“252, 1995. ISSN 0377-0427.
Oriol Vinyals, Timo Ewalds, Sergey Bartunov, Petko Georgiev, Alexander Sasha Vezhnevets,
  Michelle Yeo, Alireza Makhzani, Heinrich KuМҲttler, John Agapiou, Julian Schrittwieser, John
  Quan, Stephen Gaffney, Stig Petersen, Karen Simonyan, Tom Schaul, Hado van Hasselt, David
  Silver, Timothy Lillicrap, Kevin Calderone, Paul Keet, Anthony Brunasso, David Lawrence, An-
  ders Ekermo, Jacob Repp, and Rodney Tsing. Starcraft II: A new challenge for reinforcement
  learning. arXiv:1708.04782, 2017.
Tong Yang, Michael I. Jordan, and Tatjana Chavdarova. Solving constrained variational inequalities
  via an interior point method. In ICLR, 2023.
Michael Zhang, James Lucas, Jimmy Ba, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Lookahead optimizer: k steps
 forward, 1 step back. In NeurIPS, 2019.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A      A DDITIONAL BACKGROUND
In this section, we give background in addition to that presented in the main part. This includes:
        (i) in A.1 we describe the ADMM method,
       (ii) in App. A.2 we list relevant definitions,
      (iii) details of the ACVI method, including its derivation, required for the proofs of the theorems
            in this paper are explained in App. A.3, and
      (iv) the baseline methods used in В§ 5 of the main part are described in App. A.5.

A.1     A LTERNATING DIRECTION METHOD OF MULTIPLIERS вҖ“ADMM

The ADMM method. ADMM (Glowinski & Marroco, 1975; Gabay & Mercier, 1976; Lions &
Mercier, 1979; Glowinski & Le Tallec, 1989) was proposed for objectives separable into two or
more different functions whose arguments are nondisjoint, as follows:
                               min f (x) + g(y) s.t. Ax + By = b ,                         (ADMM-Pr)
                               x,y
                                                                             вҖІ                вҖІ
where f, g : Rn вҶ’ R are often assumed convex, x, y вҲҲ Rn , A, B вҲҲ Rn Г—n , and b вҲҲ Rn . ADMM
relies on the augmented Lagrangian function LОІ (В·):
                                                        ОІ
        LОІ (x, y, О») = f (x) + g(y) + вҹЁAx + By вҲ’ b, О»вҹ© +  вҲҘAx + By вҲ’ bвҲҘ2 ,       (AL-CVX)
                                                        2
where ОІ > 0. If the augmented Lagrangian method is used to solve (AL-CVX), at each step k we
have:
                            xk+1 , yk+1 = argmin LОІ (x, y, О»k ) and
                                                  x,y

                                  О»k+1 = О»k + ОІ(Axk+1 + Byk+1 вҲ’ b) ,
where the latter step is gradient ascent on the dual. In contrast, ADMM updates x and y in an
alternating way as follows:
                               xk+1 = argmin LОІ (x, yk , О»k ) ,
                                              x
                               yk+1 = argmin LОІ (xk+1 , yk , О»k ) ,                           (ADMM)
                                              y

                               О»k+1 = О»k + ОІ(Axk+1 + Byk+1 вҲ’ b) ,
where the key difference is that for the y update the latest iterate of x is used.
ADMMвҖҷs popularity stems largely from its computational efficiency for large-scale machine learn-
ing problems (Boyd et al., 2011) and its rapid convergence in certain settings (e.g., Nishihara et al.,
2015). In particular, it achieves linear convergence when one of the objective terms is strongly
convex (Nishihara et al., 2015), and it is known in the community that it can converge faster than
the proximal point method in some regression examples. It can be viewed as equivalent to the
Douglas-Rachford operator splitting technique (Douglas & Rachford, 1956) applied within the dual
space (see e.g. Gabay, 1983; Eckstein, 1989; Lin et al., 2022).

A.2     A DDITIONAL VI DEFINITIONS AND EQUIVALENT FORMULATIONS

Here we give the complete statement of the definition of an L-Lipschitz operator for completeness,
which assumption was used in Theorem 3.2.
Definition A.1 (L-Lipschitz operator). Let F : X вҠҮ S вҶ’ Rn be an operator, we say that F satisfies
L-first-order smoothness on S if F is an L-Lipschitz map; that is, there exists L > 0 such that:
                          вҲҘF (x) вҲ’ F (xвҖІ )вҲҘ вүӨ L вҲҘx вҲ’ xвҖІ вҲҘ ,        вҲҖx, xвҖІ вҲҲ S .

To define cocoercive operatorsвҖ”mentioned in the discussions of the related work, we will first
introduce the inverse of an operator.
Seeing an operator F : X вҶ’ Rn as the graph GrF = {(x, y)|x вҲҲ X , y = F (x)}, its inverse F вҲ’1
is defined as GrF вҲ’1 вүң {(y, x)|(x, y) вҲҲ GrF } (see e.g. Ryu & Yin, 2022).


                                                        14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Definition A.2 ( Вө1 -cocoercive operator). An operator F : X вҠҮ S вҶ’ Rn is Вө1 -cocoercive (or Вө1 -
inverse strongly monotone) on S if its inverse (graph) F вҲ’1 is Вө-strongly monotone on S, that is,
                                                                                       2
           вҲғВө > 0,       s.t.     вҹЁx вҲ’ xвҖІ , F (x) вҲ’ F (xвҖІ )вҹ© вүҘ Вө вҲҘF (x) вҲ’ F (xвҖІ )вҲҘ , вҲҖx, xвҖІ вҲҲ S .
It is star Вө1 -cocoercive if the above holds when setting xвҖІ вүЎ xвӢҶ where xвӢҶ denotes a solution, that is:
                                                                                   2
      вҲғВө > 0,    s.t.    вҹЁx вҲ’ xвӢҶ , F (x) вҲ’ F (xвӢҶ )вҹ© вүҘ Вө вҲҘF (x) вҲ’ F (xвӢҶ )вҲҘ , вҲҖx вҲҲ S, xвӢҶ вҲҲ SXвӢҶ ,F .

Notice that cocoercivity implies monotonicity, and is thus a stronger assumption.
In the following, we will make use of the natural and normal mappings of an operator F : X вҶ’ Rn ,
where X вҠӮ Rn . We denote the projection to the set X with О X . Following similar notation as
in (Facchinei & Pang, 2003), the natural map FXNAT : X вҶ’ Rn is defined as:

                           FXNAT вүң x вҲ’ О X x вҲ’ F (x) ,

                                                              вҲҖx вҲҲ X ,                    (F-NAT)

whereas the normal map FXNOR : Rn вҶ’ Rn is:

                     FXNOR вүң F О X (x) + x вҲ’ О X (x),                        вҲҖx вҲҲ Rn .

                                                                                                    (F-NOR)
Moreover, we have the following solution characterizations:

      (i) xвӢҶ вҲҲ SXвӢҶ ,F       iff     FXNAT (xвӢҶ ) = 0, and
      (ii) xвӢҶ вҲҲ SXвӢҶ ,F      iff     вҲғxвҖІ вҲҲ Rn s.t. xвӢҶ = О X (xвҖІ ) and FXNOR (xвҖІ ) = 0.

A.3     D ETAILS ON ACVI

For completeness, herein we state the ACVI algorithm and show its derivation, see (Yang et al.,
2023) for details. We will use these equations also for the proofs of our main results.

Derivation of ACVI. We first restate the cVI problem in a form that will allow us to derive an
interior-point procedure. By the definition of cVI it follows (see В§1.3 in Facchinei & Pang, 2003)
that:
                    пЈұ
                    пЈҙ w=x                           пЈұ              вҠә          вҠә
                                                    пЈІ F (x) + вҲҮПҶ (x)О» + C ОҪ = 0
                    пЈҙ
                    пЈІ x = argminF (w)вҠә z
                    пЈҙ
             вӢҶ
       x вҲҲ SC,F вҮ”                z              вҮ” Cx = d                                    (KKT)
                      s.t. ПҶ(z) вүӨ 0
                                                          вүӨ          вүӨ
                    пЈҙ                               пЈі
                    пЈҙ
                    пЈҙ                                  0    О»вҠҘПҶ(x)      0,
                           Cz = d
                    пЈі

where О» вҲҲ Rm and ОҪ вҲҲ Rp are dual variables. Recall that we assume that int C =       Мё вҲ…, thus, by
the Slater condition (using the fact that ПҶi (x), i вҲҲ [m] are convex) and the KKT conditions, the
second equivalence holds, yielding the KKT system of cVI. Note that the above equivalence also
guarantees the two solutions coincide; see Facchinei & Pang (2003, Prop. 1.3.4 (b)).
Analogous to the method described in В§ 2, we add a log-barrier term to the objective to remove the
inequality constraints and obtain the following modified version of (KKT):
                                                             F (x) + вҲҮПҶвҠә (x)О» + C вҠә ОҪ = 0
    пЈұ                                                     пЈұ
    пЈҙ  w=x                                                пЈҙ
                                     m
    пЈҙ                                                     пЈҙ
                                                             О» вҠҷ ПҶ(x) + Вөe = 0
    пЈІ                                                     пЈІ
       x = argmin F (w)вҠә z вҲ’ Вө
                                     P
                                        log вҲ’ПҶi (z) вҮ”                                     (KKT-2)
    пЈҙ
    пЈҙ             z                 i=1                   пЈҙ
                                                          пЈҙ  Cx вҲ’ d = 0
       s.t. Cz = d
    пЈі                                                     пЈі
                                                             ПҶ(x) < 0, О» > 0,
with Вө > 0, e вүң [1, . . . , 1]вҠә вҲҲ Rm . The equivalence holds by the KKT and the Slater condition.
The update rule at step k is derived by the following subproblem:
                                                            m
                                                            X
                                    min F (wk )вҠә x вҲ’ Вө

                                                                  log вҲ’ ПҶi (x) ,
                                      x
                                                            i=1
                                    s.t. Cx = d ,


                                                           15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where we fix w = wk . Notice that (i) wk is a constant vector in this subproblem, and (ii) the
objective is split, making ADMM a natural choice to solve the subproblem. To apply an ADMM-
type method, we introduce a new variable y вҲҲ Rn yielding:
                                               m
           пЈұ
           пЈІ min F (w )вҠә x + 1[Cx = d] вҲ’ Вө P log вҲ’ ПҶ (y)
                        k                                  i
              x,y                             i=1               ,          (ACVI:subproblem)
              s.t.    x=y
           пЈі

where:
                                                           0,    if Cx = d
                                    1[Cx = d] вүң                             ,
                                                           +вҲһ,   if Cx Мё= d

is a generalized real-valued convex function of x.
As in Algorithm 1, for ACVI we also have the same projection matrix:
                                          Pc вүң I вҲ’ C вҠә (CC вҠә )вҲ’1 C ,                               (Pc )
and:
                                                dc вүң C вҠә (CC вҠә )вҲ’1 d ,                          (dc -EQ)
                nГ—n                 n
where Pc вҲҲ R          and dc вҲҲ R .
The augmented Lagrangian of (ACVI:subproblem) is thus:
                                          m
                                         X                               ОІ       2
 LОІ (x, y, О»)=F (wk )вҠә x + 1(Cx = d) вҲ’ Вө     log(вҲ’ПҶi (y)) + вҹЁ О», x вҲ’ yвҹ© + вҲҘx вҲ’ yвҲҘ , (AL)
                                         i=1
                                                                         2
where ОІ > 0 is the penalty parameter. Finally, using ADMM, we have the following update rule for
x at step k:
                         xk+1 = arg min LОІ (x, yk , О»k )                                        (Def-X)
                                            x
                                                                                2
                                               ОІ         1
                                = arg min        x вҲ’ yk + (F (wk ) + О»k )           .
                                          xвҲҲC= 2         ОІ

This yields the following update for x:

                                             1
                              xk+1 = Pc yk вҲ’   F (wk ) + О»k + dc .                              (X-EQ)
                                             ОІ
For y and the dual variable О», we have:
          yk+1 = argmin LОІ (xk+1 , y, О»k )                                                      (Def-Y)
                         y
                                        m
                                                                                        !
                                                                           2
                                        X                 ОІ            1
                 = argmin вҲ’Вө                log вҲ’ ПҶi (y) +   y вҲ’ xk+1 вҲ’ О»k                  .   (Y-EQ)
                         y
                                        i=1
                                                           2           ОІ

To derive the update rule for w, wk is set to be the solution of the following equation:
                                1                       1
                           w + Pc F (w) вҲ’ Pc yk + Pc О»k вҲ’ dc = 0.                               (W-EQ)
                                ОІ                       ОІ
The following theorem ensures the solution of (W-EQ) exists and is unique, see App. B in (Yang
et al., 2023) for proof.
Theorem A.3 (W-EQ: solution uniqueness). If F is monotone on C= , the following statements hold
true for the solution of (W-EQ):
       1. it always exists,
       2. it is unique, and
       3. it is contained in C= .
Finally, notice that w as it is redundant to be considered in the algorithm, since wk = xk+1 , and it
is thus removed.


                                                           16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 3 (exact) ACVI pseudocode (Yang et al., 2023).
 1: Input: operator F : X вҶ’ Rn , constraints Cx = d and ПҶi (x) вүӨ 0, i = [m], hyperparameters
    ВөвҲ’1 , ОІ > 0, Оҙ вҲҲ (0, 1), number of outer and inner loop iterations T and K, resp.
                   (0)          (0)
 2: Initialize: y0 вҲҲ Rn , О»0 вҲҲ Rn
                           вҠә вҲ’1
                   вҠә
 3: Pc вүң I вҲ’ C (CC ) C                                                           where Pc вҲҲ RnГ—n
 4: dc вүң C вҠә (CC вҠә )вҲ’1 d                                                           where dc вҲҲ Rn
 5: for t = 0, . . . , T вҲ’ 1 do
 6:   Вөt = ОҙВөtвҲ’1
 7:   for k = 0, . . . , K вҲ’ 1 do
               (t)                                              (t)        (t)
 8:      Set xk+1 to be the solution of: x + ОІ1 Pc F (x) вҲ’ Pc yk + ОІ1 Pc О»k вҲ’ dc = 0 (w.r.t. x)
                                                                                2
           (t)                     Pm                               (t)     (t)
         yk+1 = argmin вҲ’ Вө i=1 log вҲ’ ПҶi (y) + ОІ2 y вҲ’ xk+1 вҲ’ ОІ1 О»k

 9:
                     y
          (t)    (t)    (t)    (t)
10:      О»k+1 = О»k + ОІ(xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 )
11:   end for
         (t+1)    (t+1)       (t)  (t)
12:   (y0      , О»0     ) вүң (yK , О»K )
13: end for


The ACVI algorithm. Algorithm 3 describes the (exact) ACVI algorithm (Yang et al., 2023).

A.4   E XISTENCE OF THE CENTRAL PATH

In this section, we discuss the results that establish guarantees of the existence of the central path.
Let:
                         L(x, О», ОҪ) вүң F (x) + вҲҮПҶвҠә (x)О» + C вҠә ОҪ ,          and
                                         h(x) = C вҠә x вҲ’ d .

For (О», w, x, ОҪ) вҲҲ R2m+n+p , let
                                              wв—ҰО»
                                            пЈ«          пЈ¶
                                          пЈ¬ w + ПҶ(x) пЈ·
                          G(О», w, x, ОҪ) вүң пЈӯ              вҲҲ R2m+n+p ,
                                            L(x, О», ОҪ) пЈё
                                              h(x)

and
                                                w + ПҶ(x)
                                                             !
                          H(О», w, x, ОҪ) вүң       L(x, О», ОҪ)       вҲҲ Rm+n+p .
                                                  h(x)

Let H++ вүң H(R2m    n   p
             ++ Г— R Г— R ).

By (Corollary 11.4.24, Facchinei & Pang, 2003) we have the following proposition.
Proposition A.4 (sufficient condition for the existence of the central path). If F is monotone, ei-
ther F is strictly monotone or one of ПҶi is strictly convex, and C is bounded. The following four
statements hold for the functions G and H:

      1. G maps R2m
                 ++ Г— R
                        n+p
                            homeomorphically onto Rm
                                                   ++ Г— H++ ;

      2. Rm             2m
          ++ Г— H++ вҠҶ G(R+ Г— R
                              n+p
                                  );
      3. for every vector a вҲҲ Rm
                               + , the system

                                      H(О», w, x, ОҪ) = 0,      wв—ҰО»=a
         has a solution (О», w, x, ОҪ) вҲҲ R2m
                                        + Г—R
                                             n+p
                                                 ; and
      4. the set H++ is convex.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.5    S ADDLE - POINT OPTIMIZATION METHODS

In this section, we describe in detail the saddle point methods that we compare with in the main
paper in В§ 5. We denote the projection to the set X with О X , and when the method is applied in the
unconstrained setting О X вүЎ I.
For an example of the associated vector field and its Jacobian, consider the following constrained
zero-sum game:
                                     min max f (x1 , x2 ) ,                                (ZS-G)
                                        x1 вҲҲX1 x2 вҲҲX2
where f : X1 Г— X2 вҶ’ R is smooth and convex in x1 and concave in x2 . As in the main paper, we
write x вүң (x1 , x2 ) вҲҲ Rn . The vector field F : X вҶ’ Rn and its Jacobian J are defined as:

                        вҲҮx1 f (x)                     вҲҮ2x1 f (x)     вҲҮx2 вҲҮx1 f (x)
            F (x) =                  ,      J(x) =                                   .
                        вҲ’вҲҮx2 f (x)                  вҲ’вҲҮx1 вҲҮx2 f (x)    вҲ’вҲҮ2x2 f (x)

In the remaining of this section, we will only refer to the joint variable x, and (with abuse of notation)
the subscript will denote the step. Let Оі вҲҲ [0, 1] denote the step size.
(Projected) Gradient Descent Ascent (GDA). The extension of gradient descent for the cVI prob-
lem is gradient descent ascent (GDA). The GDA update at step k is then:

                                  xk+1 = О X xk вҲ’ ОіF (xk ) .                            (GDA)

(Projected) Extragradient (EG). EG (Korpelevich, 1976) uses  a вҖңpredictionвҖқ step to obtain an ex-
trapolated point xk+ 12 using GDA: xk+ 21 = О X xk вҲ’ОіF (xk ) , and the gradients at the extrapolated
point are then applied to the current iterate xt :


                           xk+1 = О X xk вҲ’ ОіF О X xk вҲ’ ОіF (xk )           .                     (EG)

In the original EG paper, (Korpelevich, 1976) proved that the EG method (with a fixed step size)
converges for monotone VIs, as follows.
Theorem A.5 (Korpelevich (1976)). Given a map F : X 7вҶ’ Rn , if the following is satisfied:
      1. the set X is closed and convex,
      2. F is single-valued, definite, and monotone on X вҖ“as per Def. 2.1,
      3. F is L-LipschitzвҖ“as per Asm. A.1.
then there exists a solution xвӢҶ вҲҲ X , such that the iterates xk produced by the EG update rule with
a fixed step size Оі вҲҲ (0, L1 ) converge to it, that is xk вҶ’ xвӢҶ , as k вҶ’ вҲһ.
 Facchinei & Pang (2003) also show that for any convex-concave function f and any closed convex
sets x1 вҲҲ X1 and x2 вҲҲ X2 , the EG method converges (Facchinei & Pang, 2003, Theorem 12.1.11).
(Projected) Optimistic Gradient Descent Ascent (OGDA). The update rule of Optimistic Gradient
Descent Ascent OGDA ((OGDA) Popov, 1980) is:

                             xn+1 = О X xn вҲ’ 2ОіF (xn ) + ОіF (xnвҲ’1 ) .                          (OGDA)
(Projected) LookaheadвҖ“Minmax (LA). The LA algorithm for min-max optimization (Chavdarova
et al., 2021), originally proposed for minimization by Zhang et al. (2019), is a general wrapper of
a вҖңbaseвҖқ optimizer where, at every step t: (i) a copy of the current iterate xМғn is made: xМғn вҶҗ xn ,
(ii) xМғn is updated k вүҘ 1 times, yielding ПүМғn+k , and finally (iii) the actual update xn+1 is obtained
as a point that lies on a line between the current xn iterate and the predicted one xМғn+k :
                              xn+1 вҶҗ xn + Оұ(xМғn+k вҲ’ xn ), Оұ вҲҲ [0, 1] .                           (LA)
In this work, we use solely GDA as a base optimizer for LA, and denote it with LAk-GDA.
Mirror-Descent. The mirror-descent algorithm (Nemirovski & Yudin, 1983; Beck & Teboulle,
2003) can be seen as a generalization of gradient descent in which the geometry of the space is
controlled by a mirror map ОЁ : X 7вҶ’ R. We define the Prox(В·) mapping:
                                                          1
                        Prox(xn , g) вүң argminxвҲҲX g вҠӨ x + DОЁ (x, xn ) ,
                                                          Оі

                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where DОЁ is the Bregman divergence associated with the mirror map ОЁ : X 7вҶ’ R, characterizing
the geometry of our space. The mirror descent algorithm uses the Prox mapping to obtain the next
iterate:
                                  xn+1 вҶҗ Prox(xn , F (xn )) .                             (MD)

Mirror-Prox. Similarly to Mirror Descent, Mirror Prox (Nemirovski, 2004) generalizes extragradi-
ent to spaces where the geometry can be controlled by a mirror map ОЁ:
                                xn+1/2 вҶҗ Prox(xn , F (xn )),
                                xn+1 вҶҗ Prox(xn , F (xn+1/2 )) .                           (MP)


                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B      M ISSING P ROOFS

In this section, we provide the proofs of Theorems 3.1, 3.2 and 4.1, stated in the main part. In the
subsections B.3 and B.4, we also discuss the practical implications of Theorems 3.1 and 3.2, and the
algorithms that can be used for the subproblems in Algorithm 1, respectively.

B.1     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.1: L AST- ITERATE CONVERGENCE OF ACVI FOR M ONOTONE
        VARIATIONAL I NEQUALITIES

Recall from Theorem 3.1 that we have the following assumptions:

        вҖў F is monotone on C= , as per Def. 2.1; and
        вҖў either F is strictly monotone on C or one of ПҶi is strictly convex.

B.1.1    S ETTING AND NOTATIONS
Before we proceed with the lemmas needed for the proof of Theorem 3.1, herein we introduce some
definitions and notations.

Subproblems and definitions. We remark that the ACVI derivationвҖ”given in App. A.3вҖ”is help-
ful for following the proof herein. Recall from it, that in order to derive the update rule for x, we
introduced a new variable w, and the relevant subproblem that yields the update rule for x includes
                                                                                            (t)
a term вҹЁF (w), xвҹ©, where F is evaluated at some fixed point. As the proof relates the xk iterate
                             Вө
of ACVI with the solution xt of (KKT-2), in the following we will define two different maps each
                                 (t)
with fixed w вүЎ xВөt and w вүЎ xk+1 . That is, for convenience, we define the following maps from
  n
R to R:
                      f (t) (x) вүң F (xВөt )вҠә x + 1(Cx = d) ,                                        (f (t) )
                      fk (x) вүң F (xk+1 )вҠә x + 1(Cx = d) , and
                        (t)           (t)                                                             (t)
                                                                                                   (fk )
                                      m
                                      X                 m
                                                      X
                      g (t) (y) вүң вҲ’Вөt   log вҲ’ ПҶi (y) =    в„ҳ1 (ПҶi (y), Вөt ) ,                       (g (t) )
                                      i=1                     i=1

                                                             (t)
where xВөt is a solution of (KKT-2) when Вө = Вөt , and xk+1 is the solution of the x-subproblem
in ACVI at step (t, k)вҖ“see line 8 in Algorithm 3. Note that the existence of xВөt is guaranteed by
                                                                           (t)
the existence of the central path-see App. A.4. Also, notice that f (t) , fk and g (t) are all convex
                                                                                            (t)
functions. In the following, unless otherwise specified, we drop the superscript (t) of xk+1 , f (t) ,
 (t)
fk and subscript t of Вөt to simplify the notation.
In the remainder of this section, we introduce the notation of the solution points of the above KKT
systems and that of the ACVI iterates.
Let y Вө = xВө . In this case, from (KKT-2) we can see that (xВө , y Вө ) is an optimal solution of:
                                      (
                                         min f (x) + g(y)
                                          x,y               .                                    (f -Pr)
                                           s.t.   x=y

There exists О»Вө вҲҲ Rn such that (xВө , y Вө , О»Вө ) is a KKT point of (f -Pr). By Prop. A.4, xВө = y Вө
converges to a solution of (KKT). We denote this solution by xвӢҶ . Then (xВө , y Вө , О»Вө ) converges
to the KKT point of (ACVI:subproblem) with wk = xвӢҶ . Let (xвӢҶ , y вӢҶ , О»вӢҶ ) denote this KKT point,
where xвӢҶ = y вӢҶ .
On the other hand, let us denote with (xВөk , ykВө , О»Вөk ) the KKT point of the analogous problem of fk (В·)
of:                                   (
                                          min fk (x) + g(y)
                                           x,y                    .                             (fk -Pr)
                                             s.t.        x=y

                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Note that the KKT point (xВөk , ykВө , О»Вөk ) is guaranteed to exist by SlaterвҖҷs condition. Also, recall from
the derivation of ACVI that (fk -Pr) is вҖңnon-symmetricвҖқ for x, y when using ADMM-like approach,
in the sense that: when we derive the update rule for x we fix y to yk (see Def-X), but when
we derive the update rule for y we fix x to xk+1 (see Def-Y). This fact is used later in (LB.3-1)
and LB.3-2 in Lemma B.3 for example.
Then, for the solution point, which we denoted with (xВөk , ykВө , О»Вөk ), we also have that xВөk = ykВө . By
        that the objective above is equivalent to F (xk+1 ) x + 1(Cx = d) вҲ’ Вөt i=1 log вҲ’
                                                              вҠә
                                                                                          Pm
noticing
ПҶi (y) , it follows that the above problem (fk -Pr) is an approximation of:
                           min вҹЁF (xk+1 ), xвҹ© + 1(Cx = d) + 1(ПҶ(y) вүӨ 0)

                            x                                                    ,            (fk -Pr-2)
                                            s.t.     x=y
where, as a reminder, the constraint set C вҠҶ X is defined as an intersection of finitely many inequal-
ities and linear equalities:
                                 C = {x вҲҲ Rn |ПҶi (x) вүӨ 0, i вҲҲ [m], Cx = d} ,                             (CS)
                        n                pГ—n         p
where each ПҶi : R 7вҶ’ R, C вҲҲ R                  , d вҲҲ R , and we assumed rank(C) = p.
In fact, when Вө вҶ’ 0+, corollary 2.11 in (Chu, 1998) guarantees that (xВөk , ykВө , О»Вөk ) converges to
a KKT point of problem (fk -Pr-2)вҖ”which immediately follows here since (fk -Pr-2) is a convex
problem. Let (xвӢҶk , ykвӢҶ , О»вӢҶk ) denote this KKT point, where xвӢҶk = ykвӢҶ .

Summary. To conclude, (xВө , y Вө , О»Вө )вҖ”the solution of (f -Pr), converges to (xвӢҶ , y вӢҶ , О»вӢҶ ), a KKT
point of (ACVI:subproblem) with wk = xвӢҶ , where xвӢҶ = y вӢҶ вҲҲ SC,F         вӢҶ
                                                                             ; (xВөk , ykВө , О»Вөk ) converges to
(xвӢҶk , ykвӢҶ , О»вӢҶk )вҖ”a KKT point of problem (fk -Pr-2), where (xВөk , ykВө , О»Вөk ) (in which xВөk = ykВө ) is a
KKT point of problem (fk -Pr). Table 1 summarizes the notation for convenience.


        Solution point          Description                                                 Problem


          (xвӢҶ , y вӢҶ , О»вӢҶ )      cVI solution, more precisely xвӢҶ = y вӢҶ вҲҲ SC,F
                                                                         вӢҶ
                                                                                              (cVI)

                                                    central path point,
      (xВөt , y Вөt , О»Вөt )                                                                     (f -Pr)
                                also solution point of the subproblem with fixed F (xВөt )
                                                                                   (t)
      (xВөk t , ykВөt , О»Вөk t )   solution point of the subproblem with fixed F (xk+1 )        (fk -Pr)
                                where the indicator function is replaced with log-barrier
                                                                                   (t)
          (xвӢҶk , ykвӢҶ , О»вӢҶk )    solution point of the subproblem with fixed F (xk+1 )       (fk -Pr-2)

Table 1: Summary of the notation used for the solution points of the different problems. (fk -Pr) is an
approximation of (fk -Pr-2) which replaces the indicator function with log-barrier. The t emphasizes
that these solution points change for different Вө(t). Where clear from the context that we focus on a
particular step t, we drop the super/sub-script t to simplify the notation. See App. B.1.1.

B.1.2     I NTERMEDIATE RESULTS
We will repeatedly use the following proposition that relates the output differences of fk (В·) and f (В·),
defined above.
Proposition B.1 (Relation between fk and f ). If F is monotone, then вҲҖk вҲҲ N, we have that:
                                    fk (xk+1 ) вҲ’ fk (xВө ) вүҘ f (xk+1 ) вҲ’ f (xВө ).


Proof of Proposition B.1. It suffices to notice that:
          fk (xk+1 ) вҲ’ fk (xВө ) вҲ’ f (xk+1 ) вҲ’ f (xВө ) = вҹЁF (xk+1 ) вҲ’ F (xВө ), xk+1 вҲ’ xВө вҹ©.


The proof follows by applying the definition of monotonicity to the right-hand side.


                                                         21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We will use the following lemmas.
Lemma B.2. For all x and y, we have:
                       f (x) + g(y) вҲ’ f (xВө ) вҲ’ g(y Вө ) + вҹЁО»Вө , x вҲ’ yвҹ© вүҘ 0,               (LB.2-f )
and:
                      fk (x) + g(y) вҲ’ fk (xВөk ) вҲ’ g(ykВө ) + вҹЁО»Вөk , x вҲ’ yвҹ© вүҘ 0 .          (LB.2-fk )


Proof. The Lagrange function of (f -Pr) is:
                            L(x, y, О») = f (x) + g(y) + вҹЁО», x вҲ’ yвҹ©.

And by the property of KKT point, we have:
                L(xВө , y Вө , О») вүӨ L(xВө , y Вө , О»Вө ) вүӨ L(x, y, О»Вө ),      вҲҖ(x, y, О») ,
from which (LB.2-f ) follows.
(LB.2-fk ) can be shown in an analogous way.

The following lemma lists some simple but useful facts that we will use in the following proofs.
Lemma B.3. For the problems (f -Pr), (fk -Pr) and the xk , yk , О»k of Algorithm 3, we have:
                               0 вҲҲ вҲӮfk (xk+1 ) + О»k + ОІ(xk+1 вҲ’ yk ) ,                     (LB.3-1)
                               0 вҲҲ вҲӮg(yk+1 ) вҲ’ О»k вҲ’ ОІ(xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 ) ,                     (LB.3-2)
                       О»k+1 вҲ’ О»k = ОІ(xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 ) ,                                      (LB.3-3)
                            вҲ’О»Вө вҲҲ вҲӮf (xВө ) ,                                              (LB.3-4)
                                вҲ’О»Вөk вҲҲ вҲӮfk (xВөk ) ,                                       (LB.3-5)
                                 О»Вө вҲҲ вҲӮg(y Вө ) ,                                          (LB.3-6)
                                  О»Вөk вҲҲ вҲӮg(ykВө ) ,                                        (LB.3-7)
                                  xВө = y Вө ,                                              (LB.3-8)
                                  xВөk = ykВө .                                             (LB.3-9)
Remark B.4. Since g is differentiable, вҲӮg could be replaced by вҲҮg in Lemma B.3. Here we use вҲӮg
so that the results could be easily extended to Lemma B.31 for the proofs of Theorem 4.1, where we
replace the current g(y) by the indicator function 1(ПҶ(y) вүӨ 0), which is non-differentiable.

Proof of Lemma B.3. We can rewrite (AL) as:
                                                                      ОІ        2
                   LОІ (x, y, О») = f k (x) + g(y) + вҹЁО», x вҲ’ yвҹ© +         вҲҘx вҲ’ yвҲҘ .          (re-AL)
                                                                      2

(LB.3-1) and (LB.3-2) follow directly from (Def-X) and (Def-Y), resp. (LB.3-3) follows from line
10 in Algorithm 3, and (LB.3-4)-(LB.3-9) follows by the property of the KKT point.

We also define the following two maps (whose naming will be evident from the inclusions shown
after):
                         ЛҶ k (xk+1 ) вүң вҲ’О»k вҲ’ ОІ(xk+1 вҲ’ yk ) ,
                         вҲҮf                                             and                   ЛҶ k)
                                                                                             (вҲҮf
                          ЛҶ
                          вҲҮg(y k+1 ) вүң О»k + ОІ(xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 ) .
                                                                                               ЛҶ
                                                                                              (вҲҮg)


Then, from (LB.3-1) and (LB.3-2) it follows that:
                     ЛҶ k (xk+1 ) вҲҲ вҲӮfk (xk+1 ) and вҲҮg(y
                     вҲҮf                            ЛҶ   k+1 ) вҲҲ вҲӮg(yk+1 ) .                         (1)

                                                               ЛҶ k and вҲҮg.
We continue with two equalities for the dot products involving вҲҮf      ЛҶ


                                                      22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma B.5. For the iterates xk+1 , yk+1 , and О»k+1 of the ACVIвҖ”Algorithm 3вҖ”we have:
                         ЛҶ
                       вҹЁвҲҮg(y  k+1 ), yk+1 вҲ’ yвҹ© = вҲ’вҹЁО»k+1 , y вҲ’ yk+1 вҹ©,              (LB.5-1)
and
 ЛҶ k (xk+1 ), xk+1 вҲ’ xвҹ© + вҹЁвҲҮg(y
вҹЁвҲҮf                        ЛҶ    k+1 ), yk+1 вҲ’ yвҹ© = вҲ’ вҹЁО»k+1 , xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҲ’ x + yвҹ©
                                                         + ОІвҹЁвҲ’yk+1 + yk , xk+1 вҲ’ xвҹ©.
                                                                                             (LB.5-2)


Proof of Lemma B.5. The first part of the lemma (LB.5-1), follows trivially by noticing that
ЛҶ
вҲҮg(y k+1 ) = О»k+1 .

                                     ЛҶ k ) and (вҲҮg)
For the second part, from (LB.3-3), (вҲҮf         ЛҶ we have:
           ЛҶ k (xk+1 ), xk+1 вҲ’ xвҹ© = вҲ’ вҹЁО»k + ОІ(xk+1 вҲ’ yk ), xk+1 вҲ’ xвҹ©
          вҹЁвҲҮf
                                                                                                    (2)
                                    = вҲ’ вҹЁО»k+1 , xk+1 вҲ’ xвҹ© + ОІвҹЁвҲ’yk+1 + yk , xk+1 вҲ’ xвҹ©,
and
                            ЛҶ
                           вҹЁвҲҮg(y k+1 ), yk+1 вҲ’ yвҹ© = вҲ’вҹЁО»k+1 , y вҲ’ yk+1 вҹ©.                            (3)
Adding these together yields (LB.5-2).



The following Lemma further builds on the previous Lemma B.5, and upper-bounds some dot prod-
               ЛҶ k and вҲҮg
ucts involving вҲҮf        ЛҶ with a sum of only squared norms.
Lemma B.6. For the xk+1 , yk+1 , and О»k+1 iterates of the ACVIвҖ”Algorithm 3вҖ”we have:
            ЛҶ k (xk+1 ), xk+1 вҲ’ xВө вҹ© + вҹЁвҲҮg(y
           вҹЁвҲҮf                          ЛҶ                   Вө      Вө
                                             k+1 ), yk+1 вҲ’ y вҹ© + вҹЁО» , xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҹ©
                1                 1                ОІ              ОІ
           вүӨ       вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ2 вҲ’    вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ2 + вҲҘy Вө вҲ’ yk вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘy Вө вҲ’ yk+1 вҲҘ2
               2ОІ                2ОІ                2              2
                   1                 ОІ
               вҲ’     вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘyk вҲ’ yk+1 вҲҘ2 ,
                  2ОІ                 2
and
           ЛҶ k (xk+1 ), xk+1 вҲ’ xВө вҹ© + вҹЁвҲҮg(y
          вҹЁвҲҮf                           ЛҶ                  Вө       Вө
                                            k+1 ), yk+1 вҲ’ yk вҹ© + вҹЁО»k , xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҹ©
                                  k
              1                  1                   ОІ                ОІ
           вүӨ     вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»Вөk вҲҘ2 вҲ’     вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»Вөk вҲҘ2 + вҲҘykВө вҲ’ yk вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘykВө вҲ’ yk+1 вҲҘ2
             2ОІ                 2ОІ                   2                2
                 1                   ОІ
             вҲ’     вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘyk вҲ’ yk+1 вҲҘ2 .
                2ОІ                   2

Proof of Lemma B.6. For the left-hand side of the first part of Lemma B.6:
      LHS = вҹЁвҲҮfЛҶ k (xk+1 ), xk+1 вҲ’ xВө вҹ© + вҹЁвҲҮg(y
                                             ЛҶ                     Вө       Вө
                                                   k+1 ), yk+1 вҲ’ y вҹ© + вҹЁО» , xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҹ© ,
we let (x, y, О») = (xВө , y Вө , О»Вө ) in (LB.5-2), and using the result of that lemma, we get that:
LHS = вҲ’вҹЁО»k+1 , xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҲ’ xВө + y Вө вҹ© + ОІвҹЁвҲ’yk+1 + yk , xk+1 вҲ’ xВө вҹ© + вҹЁО»Вө , xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҹ© ,
and since xВө = y Вө (LB.3-8):
      LHS = вҲ’вҹЁО»k+1 , xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҹ© + ОІвҹЁвҲ’yk+1 + yk , xk+1 вҲ’ xВө вҹ© + вҹЁО»Вө , xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҹ©
          = вҲ’вҹЁО»k+1 вҲ’ О»Вө , xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҹ© + ОІвҹЁвҲ’yk+1 + yk , xk+1 вҲ’ xВө вҹ© ,
where in the last equality, we combined the first and last terms together. Using (LB.3-3) that
 1
ОІ (О»k+1 вҲ’ О»k ) = (xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 ) yields (for the second term above, we add and subtract yk+1
in its second argument, and use xВө = y Вө ):
                          1
                LHS = вҲ’ вҹЁО»k+1 вҲ’ О»Вө , О»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҹ© + вҹЁвҲ’yk+1 + yk , О»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҹ©
                          ОІ
                        вҲ’ ОІвҹЁвҲ’yk+1 + yk , вҲ’yk+1 + y Вө вҹ©                                     (4)


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                    2
Using the 3-point identityвҖ”that for any vectors a, b, c it holds вҹЁb вҲ’ a, b вҲ’ cвҹ© = 21 (вҲҘa вҲ’ bвҲҘ +
        2           2
вҲҘb вҲ’ cвҲҘ вҲ’ вҲҘa вҲ’ cвҲҘ )вҖ”for the first term above we get that:
                                      1           2              2              2
       вҹЁО»k+1 вҲ’ О»Вө , О»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҹ© =       вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ + вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ вҲ’ вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ ,
                                      2
and similarly,
                                    1             2                2               2
   вҹЁвҲ’yk+1 + yk , вҲ’yk+1 + y Вө вҹ© =      вҲҘвҲ’yk + y Вө вҲҘ вҲ’ вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + y Вө вҲҘ вҲ’ вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲҘ ,
                                    2
and by adding these together, we get:
                          1                 1                  1
                 LHS =       вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ2 вҲ’    вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ2 вҲ’    вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ2
                         2ОІ                2ОІ                 2ОІ
                            ОІ                 ОІ                  ОІ
                         + вҲҘвҲ’yk + y Вө вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + y Вө вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲҘ2
                            2                 2                  2
                         + вҹЁвҲ’yk+1 + yk , О»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҹ© .                                              (5)

                                               ЛҶ
On the other hand, (LB.5-1) which states that вҹЁвҲҮg(y k+1 ), yk+1 вҲ’ yвҹ© + вҹЁО»k+1 , вҲ’yk+1 + yвҹ© = 0,
also asserts:
                            ЛҶ
                           вҹЁвҲҮg(y k ), yk вҲ’ yвҹ© + вҹЁО»k , вҲ’yk + yвҹ© = 0 .                       (6)

Letting y = yk in (LB.5-1), and y = yk+1 in (6), and adding them together yields:
                  ЛҶ
                 вҹЁвҲҮg(y        ЛҶ
                      k+1 ) вҲ’ вҲҮg(yk ), yk+1 вҲ’ yk вҹ© + вҹЁО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k , вҲ’yk+1 + yk вҹ© = 0 .


By the monotonicity of вҲӮg, we know that the first term of the above equality is non-negative. Thus,
we have:
                               вҹЁО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k , вҲ’yk+1 + yk вҹ© вүӨ 0 .                                  (7)

Lastly, plugging it into (5) gives the first inequality of Lemma B.6.
The second inequality of Lemma B.6 follows similarly.



The following Lemma upper-bounds the sum of (i) the difference of f (В·) evaluated at xk+1 and
at xВө and (ii) the difference of g(В·) evaluated at yk+1 and at y Вө ; up to a term that depends on
xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 as well. Recall that (xВө , y Вө , О»Вө ) is a point on the central path.
Lemma B.7. For the xk+1 , yk+1 , and О»k+1 iterates of the ACVIвҖ”Algorithm 3вҖ”we have:
        f (xk+1 ) + g(yk+1 ) вҲ’ f (xВө ) вҲ’ g(y Вө ) + вҹЁО»Вө , xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҹ©
                                          1                   1
                                       вүӨ     вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ2 вҲ’      вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ2
                                         2ОІ                  2ОІ
                                            ОІ                   ОІ
                                         + вҲҘвҲ’yk + y Вө вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + y Вө вҲҘ2
                                            2                   2
                                             1                    ОІ
                                         вҲ’      вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ вҲ’ вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲҘ2
                                                             2
                                                                                                (LB.7)
                                            2ОІ                    2


Proof of Lemma B.7. From the convexity of fk (x) and g(y); from proposition B.1 on the relation
between fk (В·) and f (В·) which asserts that f (xk+1 ) вҲ’ f (xВө ) вүӨ fk (xk+1 ) вҲ’ fk (xВө ); as well as from
                           ЛҶ k (xk+1 ) вҲҲ вҲӮfk (xk+1 ) and вҲҮg(y
Eq. (1) which asserts that вҲҮf                                ЛҶ    k+1 ) вҲҲ вҲӮg(yk+1 ); it follows for the
LHS of Lemma B.7 that:
  f (xk+1 )+g(yk+1 ) вҲ’ f (xВө ) вҲ’ g(y Вө ) + вҹЁО»Вө , xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҹ©
             вүӨ fk (xk+1 ) + g(yk+1 ) вҲ’ fk (xВө ) вҲ’ g(y Вө ) + вҹЁО»Вө , xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҹ©                     (8)
                ЛҶ k (xk+1 ), xk+1 вҲ’ xВө вҹ© + вҹЁвҲҮg(y
             вүӨ вҹЁвҲҮf                             ЛҶ                    Вө      Вө
                                                    k+1 ), yk+1 вҲ’ y вҹ© + вҹЁО» , xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҹ©


                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Finally, by plugging in the first part of Lemma B.6, Lemma B.7 follows, that is:
                   f (xk+1 ) + g(yk+1 ) вҲ’ f (xВө ) вҲ’ g(y Вө ) + вҹЁО»Вө , xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҹ©
                                           1                    1
                                        вүӨ     вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ2 вҲ’       вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ2
                                          2ОІ                   2ОІ
                                             ОІ                    ОІ                                 (9)
                                          + вҲҘвҲ’yk + y Вө вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + y Вө вҲҘ2
                                             2                    2
                                              1                     ОІ
                                          вҲ’     вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ вҲ’ вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲҘ2 .
                                                               2
                                             2ОІ                     2



The following theorem upper bounds the analogous quantity but for fk (В·) (instead of f as does
Lemma B.7), and further asserts that the difference between the xk+1 and yk+1 iterates of exact
ACVI (Algorithm 3) tends to 0 asymptotically. The inequality in Theorem B.8 plays an important
role later when deriving the nonasymptotic convergence rate of ACVI.
Theorem B.8 (Asymptotic convergence of (xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 ) of ACVI). For the xk+1 , yk+1 , and
О»k+1 iterates of the ACVIвҖ”Algorithm 3вҖ”we have:
      fk (xk+1 ) вҲ’ fk (xВөk ) + g(yk+1 ) вҲ’ g(ykВө )
                                                                                          (TB.8-fk -UB)
                 вүӨ вҲҘО»k+1 вҲҘ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҲҘ + ОІ вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ yk вҲҘ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ xВөk вҲҘ вҶ’ 0 ,
and
                                  xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҶ’ 0 ,        as k вҶ’ вҲһ .

Proof of Theorem B.8: Asymptotic convergence of (xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 ) of ACVI. Recall from (LB.2-f )
of Lemma B.2 that by setting x вүЎ xk+1 , y вүЎ yk+1 we asserted that:
                   f (xk+1 ) вҲ’ f (xВө ) + g(yk+1 ) вҲ’ g(y Вө ) + вҹЁО»Вө , xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҹ© вүҘ 0 .
Further, notice that the LHS of the above inequality overlaps with that of (LB.7). This implies that
the RHS of (LB.7) has to be non-negative. Hence, we have that:
        1                ОІ                  1                1
          вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ2 + вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲҘ2 вүӨ    вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ2 вҲ’    вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ2
       2ОІ                2                 2ОІ               2ОІ
                                                                                                   (10)
                                              ОІ                ОІ
                                           + вҲҘвҲ’yk + y Вө вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + y Вө вҲҘ2 .
                                              2                2
Summing over k = 0, . . . , вҲһ gives:
        вҲһ
        X   1                        ОІ                   1              ОІ
                   вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ2 +     вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲҘ2 вүӨ    вҲҘО»0 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ2 + вҲҘвҲ’y0 + y Вө вҲҘ2 ,
              2ОІ                     2                  2ОІ              2
        k=0

from which we deduce that О»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҶ’ 0 and yk+1 вҲ’ yk вҶ’ 0.
Also notice that by simply reorganizing (10) we have:
 1                ОІ
   вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ2 + вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + y Вө вҲҘ2
2ОІ                2
                   1               ОІ              1                ОІ
                 вүӨ вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ2 + вҲҘвҲ’yk + y Вө вҲҘ2 вҲ’    вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲҘ2
                  2ОІ               2             2ОІ                2
                   1               ОІ
                 вүӨ вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ2 + вҲҘвҲ’yk + y Вө вҲҘ2
                  2ОІ               2
                   1               ОІ
                 вүӨ вҲҘО»0 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ2 + вҲҘвҲ’y0 + y Вө вҲҘ2 ,
                  2ОІ               2
                                                                              (11)
where the second inequality follows because the norm is non-negative.


                                                    25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


From (11) we can see that вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ2 and вҲҘyk вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ2 are bounded for all k, as well as вҲҘО»k вҲҘ.
Recall that:

              О»k+1 вҲ’ О»k = ОІ(xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 ) = ОІ(xk+1 вҲ’ xВө ) + ОІ(вҲ’yk+1 + y Вө ) ,

where in the last equality, we add and subtract xВө = y Вө . Combining this with the fact that О»k+1 вҲ’
О»k вҶ’ 0 (see above), we deduce that xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҶ’ 0 and that xk+1 вҲ’ xВө is also bounded.
Using the convexity of fk (В·) and g(В·) for the LHS of Theorem B.8 we have:

                  LHS = fk (xk+1 ) вҲ’ fk (xВөk ) + g(yk+1 ) вҲ’ g(ykВө )
                         ЛҶ k (xk+1 ), xk+1 вҲ’ xВө вҹ© + вҹЁвҲҮg(y
                      вүӨ вҹЁвҲҮf                             ЛҶ                   Вө
                                                             k+1 ), yk+1 вҲ’ y вҹ© .
                                                      k                      k

Using (LB.5-2) with x вүЎ xВөk , y вүЎ ykВө we have:

         LHS вүӨ вҲ’вҹЁО»k+1 , xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҲ’xВөk + ykВө вҹ© + ОІвҹЁвҲ’yk+1 + yk , xk+1 вҲ’ xВөk вҹ© .
                                    | {z }
                                          =0, due to (LB.3-9)


Hence, it follows that:

          fk (xk+1 ) вҲ’ fk (xВөk ) + g(yk+1 ) вҲ’ g(ykВө )
                             вүӨ вҲ’ вҹЁО»k+1 , xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҹ© + ОІвҹЁвҲ’yk+1 + yk , xk+1 вҲ’ xВөk вҹ©
                             вүӨ вҲҘО»k+1 вҲҘ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҲҘ + ОІ вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ yk вҲҘ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ xВөk вҲҘ ,

where the last inequality follows from Cauchy-Schwarz.
Recall that C is compact and D is the diameter of C:

                                        D вүң sup вҲҘx вҲ’ yвҲҘ .
                                              x,yвҲҲC

Thus, we have:

              вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ ykВө вҲҘ = вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ + y Вө вҲ’ yk+1
                                                     Вө
                                                         вүӨ вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ + D,

which implies that вҲҘyk вҲ’ ykВө вҲҘ are bounded for all k. Since:

              О»k+1 вҲ’ О»k = ОІ(xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 ) = ОІ(xk+1 вҲ’ xВөk ) + ОІ(вҲ’yk+1 + ykВө ),

we deduce that xk+1 вҲ’ xВөk is also bounded. Thus, we have (TB.8-fk -UB).


                                                                               1
The following lemma states an important intermediate result that ensures that 2ОІ вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ2 +
ОІ              2
2 вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲҘ does not increase.

Lemma B.9 (non-increment of 2ОІ1
                                вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ2 + ОІ2 вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲҘ2 ). For the xk+1 , yk+1 , and
О»k+1 iterates of the ACVIвҖ”Algorithm 3вҖ”we have:

     1                ОІ                  1                ОІ
       вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ2 + вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲҘ2 вүӨ    вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»kвҲ’1 вҲҘ2 + вҲҘвҲ’yk + ykвҲ’1 вҲҘ2 .                 (LB.9)
    2ОІ                2                 2ОІ                2


Proof of Lemma B.9. (LB.5-2) gives:

                ЛҶ kвҲ’1 (xk ) ,xk вҲ’ xвҹ© + вҹЁвҲҮg
               вҹЁвҲҮf                      ЛҶ (yk ) , yk вҲ’ yвҹ©
                                                                                              (12)
                          = вҲ’ вҹЁО»k , xk вҲ’ yk вҲ’ x + yвҹ© + ОІвҹЁвҲ’yk + ykвҲ’1 , xk вҲ’ xвҹ©.

                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Letting (x, y, О») = (xk , yk , О»k ) in (LB.5-2) and (x, y, О») = (xk+1 , yk+1 , О»k+1 ) in (12), and
adding them together, and using (LB.3-3) yields:
      ЛҶ k (xk+1 ) вҲ’ вҲҮf
    вҹЁвҲҮf             ЛҶ kвҲ’1 (xk ) , xk+1 вҲ’ xk вҹ© + вҹЁвҲҮgЛҶ (yk+1 ) вҲ’ вҲҮg
                                                               ЛҶ (yk ) , yk+1 вҲ’ yk вҹ©
  = вҲ’ вҹЁО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k , xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҲ’ xk + yk вҹ© + ОІвҹЁвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲ’ (вҲ’yk + ykвҲ’1 ) , xk+1 вҲ’ xk вҹ©
       1
  = вҲ’ вҹЁО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k , О»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲ’ (О»k вҲ’ О»kвҲ’1 )вҹ©
       ОІ
    + вҹЁвҲ’yk+1 + yk + (yk вҲ’ ykвҲ’1 ) , О»k+1 вҲ’ О»k + ОІyk+1 вҲ’ (О»k вҲ’ О»kвҲ’1 + ОІyk )вҹ©
     1
         вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»kвҲ’1 вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲ’ (О»k вҲ’ О»kвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2

  =
    2ОІ
       ОІ
          вҲҘвҲ’yk + ykвҲ’1 вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲ’ (вҲ’yk + ykвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2

    +
       2
    + вҹЁвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲ’ (вҲ’yk + ykвҲ’1 ) , О»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲ’ (О»k вҲ’ О»kвҲ’1 )вҹ©
     1                                  ОІ
         вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»kвҲ’1 вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ2 +     вҲҘвҲ’yk + ykвҲ’1 вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲҘ2

  =
    2ОІ                                     2
        1                                ОІ
    вҲ’     вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲ’ (О»k вҲ’ О»kвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲ’ (вҲ’yk + ykвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2
       2ОІ                                2
    + вҹЁвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲ’ (вҲ’yk + ykвҲ’1 ) , О»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲ’ (О»k вҲ’ О»kвҲ’1 )вҹ©
     1                                  ОІ
         вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»kвҲ’1 вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ2 +     вҲҘвҲ’yk + ykвҲ’1 вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲҘ2 .

  вүӨ
    2ОІ                                     2
By the convexity of fk and fkвҲ’1 , we get:
                        ЛҶ k (xk+1 ) , xk+1 вҲ’ xk вҹ© вүҘfk (xk+1 ) вҲ’ fk (xk ) ,
                      вҹЁвҲҮf
                      ЛҶ kвҲ’1 (xk ) , xk+1 вҲ’ xk вҹ© вүҘfkвҲ’1 (xk ) вҲ’ fkвҲ’1 (xk+1 ) .
                    вҲ’вҹЁвҲҮf

Adding them together gives that:
   ЛҶ k (xk+1 ) вҲ’ вҲҮf
  вҹЁвҲҮf             ЛҶ kвҲ’1 (xk ) , xk+1 вҲ’ xk вҹ© вүҘfk (xk+1 ) вҲ’ fkвҲ’1 (xk+1 ) вҲ’ fk (xk ) + fkвҲ’1 (xk )
                                              =вҹЁF (xk+1 ) вҲ’ F (xk ), xk+1 вҲ’ xk вҹ© вүҘ 0 .
                                  ЛҶ (LB.9) follows.
Thus by the monotonicity of F and вҲҮg,



Lemma B.10. If F is monotone on C= , then for Algorithm 3, we have:
       fK (xK+1 ) + g (yK+1 ) вҲ’ fK (xВөK ) вҲ’ g (yK Вө
                                                    )
                                  вҲҡ
                         Вө
                                                                r
                                                                     вҲҶВө                  (LB.10-1)

                       вҲҶ                     1     Вө
                                                        p
                    вүӨ        + 2 вҲҶ + вҲҡ вҲҘО» вҲҘ + ОІD
                                       Вө                                 ,
                      K +1                    ОІ                     K +1
                                                      s
                                                            вҲҶВө
                        and     вҲҘxK+1 вҲ’ yK+1 вҲҘ вүӨ                   ,                     (LB.10-2)
                                                        ОІ (K + 1)
where вҲҶВө вүң ОІ1 вҲҘО»0 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ2 + ОІвҲҘy0 вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ2 .

Proof of Lemma B.10. Summing (10) over k = 0, 1, . . . , K and using the monotonicity of
 1             2   ОІ             2
2ОІ вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ + 2 вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲҘ from Lemma B.9, we have:
             1
               вҲҘО»K+1 вҲ’ О»K вҲҘ2 + ОІвҲҘвҲ’yK+1 + yK вҲҘ2
             ОІ
                                   K
                               1 X  1                    ОІ
                          вүӨ               вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ2 + вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲҘ2
                             K +1      2ОІ                2
                                  k=0

                               1    1        Вө 2            Вө 2
                          вүӨ           вҲҘО»0 вҲ’ О» вҲҘ + ОІвҲҘвҲ’y0 + y вҲҘ     .                           (13)
                             K +1 ОІ


                                                27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


From this, we deduce that:
                                                                          r
                                                                              ОІвҲҶВө
                        ОІвҲҘxK+1 вҲ’ yK+1 вҲҘ = вҲҘО»K+1 вҲ’ О»K вҲҘ вүӨ                           ,
                                                                              K +1
                                                        s
                                                               вҲҶВө
                                 вҲҘвҲ’yK+1 + yK вҲҘ вүӨ                      .
                                                            ОІ (K + 1)

On the other hand, (11) gives:
                         1                ОІ                 1
                           вҲҘО»K+1 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ2 + вҲҘвҲ’yK+1 + y Вө вҲҘ2 вүӨ вҲҶВө .
                        2ОІ                2                 2

Hence, we have:                                           p
                                    вҲҘО»K+1 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ вүӨ   ОІвҲҶВө ,                                    (14)
                                                    s
                                                      вҲҶВө
                                   вҲҘвҲ’yK+1 + y Вө вҲҘ вүӨ       .
                                                      ОІ

Furthermore, we have:
                                                                              s
                           Вө            K+1        Вө          Вө                   вҲҶВө
                  вҲҘyK+1 вҲ’ yK вҲҘвүӨ     y         вҲ’y        + y       вҲ’ yВөK   вүӨ          +D,
                                                                                  ОІ


                                         1
                     вҲҘxK+1 вҲ’ xВөK вҲҘ =                                Вө
                                           (О»K+1 вҲ’ О»K ) вҲ’ (вҲ’yK+1 + yK )
                                         ОІ
                                      1                         Вө
                                    вүӨ   вҲҘО»K+1 вҲ’ О»K вҲҘ + вҲҘyK+1 вҲ’ yK вҲҘ
                                      ОІ
                                      s            s
                                          вҲҶВө         вҲҶВө
                                    вүӨ            +       +D,
                                        ОІ(K + 1)      ОІ
and                                                                           p
                     вҲҘО»K+1 вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘО»Вө вҲҘ + вҲҘО»K+1 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘО»Вө вҲҘ +                     ОІвҲҶВө .
Then using (TB.8-fk -UB) in Lemma B.8, we have (LB.37-1).

Discussion. Lemma B.10 has an analogous form to Theorem 7 in (Yang et al., 2023), but here
we change the reference points from xВө and y Вө in (28) of (Yang et al., 2023) to xВөK and yK  Вө
                                                                                                we
newly introduce in our paper. We stress that this change, together with our observation that xвӢҶk is
the reference point of the gap function at xk+1 (see (16)), is crucial to weakening the assumptions
in (Yang et al., 2023). We can see this from the following proof sketch of Theorem 3.1:

      1. Lemma B.10 gives
                                                                           1
                        fK (xK+1 ) + g (yK+1 ) вҲ’ fK (xВөK ) вҲ’ g (yK
                                                                 Вө
                                                                   ) = O( вҲҡ ).
                                                                           K
                                  Вө
      2. Note that g(yK+1 ) вҲ’ g(yK  ) вҶ’ 0, xВөK вҶ’ xвӢҶK when Вө вҶ’ 0. Using the above inequality,
         we have that when Вө is small,
                                                                  1
                                   |fK (xK+1 ) вҲ’ fK (xвӢҶK )| = O( вҲҡ ).
                                                                  K
      3. With observation (16), we could write the gap function at xK+1 explicitly as
                                  G(xK+1 , C) = fK (xK+1 ) вҲ’ fK (xвӢҶK ).
         Combining the above two expressions, we reach our conclusion:
                                                            1
                                          G(xK+1 , C) = O( вҲҡ ).
                                                            K

                                                   28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In contrast, (Yang et al., 2023) gives the upper bound w.r.t. the gap function through two indirect
steps, each introducing some extra assumptions:
     1. Theorem 7 in (Yang et al., 2023) gives
                                                                             1
                          fK (xK+1 ) + g (yK+1 ) вҲ’ fK (xВө ) вҲ’ g (y Вө ) = O( вҲҡ ),
                                                                             K
        which leads to |F (xK )вҠә (xK+1 вҲ’ xвӢҶ )| = O( вҲҡ1K ) and |F (xвӢҶ )вҠә (xK+1 вҲ’ xвӢҶ )| = O( вҲҡ1K )
        (the first indirect bound) when Вө is small enough.
     2. Under either the Оҫ-monotonicity assumption in Thm. 2 or assumption (iii) in Thm. 3 of
        (Yang et al., 2023), they are able to bound the iterate distance using the above results as
        follows:
                                                              1
                                          вҲҘxK вҲ’ xвӢҶ вҲҘ = O( вҲҡ )
                                                               K
        (the second indirect bound).
     3. Finally, by assuming Lipschitzness of F , they derive from the above bound that
                                                              1
                                         G(xK+1 , C) = O( вҲҡ ).
                                                              K

B.1.3     P ROVING T HEOREM 3.1
We are now ready to prove Theorem 3.1. Here, we give a nonasymptotic convergence rate of Algo-
rithm 3.
Theorem B.11 (Restatement of Theorem 3.1). Given an continuous operator F : X вҶ’ Rn , assume
that:
     (i) F is monotone on C= , as per Def. 2.1;
    (ii) F is either strictly monotone on C or one of ПҶi is strictly convex.
        (t)   (t)   (t)
Let (xK , yK , О»K ) denote the last iterate of Algorithm 3. Given any fixed K вҲҲ N+ , run with
sufficiently small ВөвҲ’1 , then for all t вҲҲ [T ], we have:
                                       вҲҡ
                                                                     r
                          2вҲҶ                     1    вӢҶ
                                                         p                вҲҶ
            G(xK , C) вүӨ       + 2 2 вҲҶ + вҲҡ вҲҘО» вҲҘ + ОІD + 1 + M                         (na-Rate)
                           K                      ОІ                       K
and                                                      s
                                           K        K       вҲҶ
                                          x вҲ’y        вүӨ2      ,                          (15)
                                                           ОІK
where вҲҶ вүң ОІ1 вҲҘО»0 вҲ’ О»вӢҶ вҲҘ2 + ОІвҲҘy0 вҲ’ y вӢҶ вҲҘ2 and D вүң sup вҲҘx вҲ’ yвҲҘ, and M вүң sup вҲҘF (x)вҲҘ.
                                                        x,yвҲҲC                  xвҲҲC


Proof of Theorem B.11. Note that
                              (fk -Pr-2) вҮ” minвҹЁF (xk+1 ), xвҹ©
                                             xвҲҲC
                                          вҮ” maxвҹЁF (xk+1 ), xk+1 вҲ’ xвҹ©
                                             xвҲҲC
                                          вҮ” G(xk+1 , C) ,
from which we deduce
                            G(xk+1 , C) = вҹЁF (xk+1 ), xk+1 вҲ’ xвӢҶk вҹ© , вҲҖk .                     (16)

For any fixed K вҲҲ N, by Corollary 2.11 in (Chu, 1998) we know that
                            xВөK вҶ’ xвӢҶK ,
                                          Вө
                            g(yK+1 ) вҲ’ g(yK ) вҶ’ 0,
                                  1
                            вҲҶВө вҶ’ вҲҘО»0 вҲ’ О»вӢҶ вҲҘ2 + ОІвҲҘy0 вҲ’ y вӢҶ вҲҘ2 = вҲҶ .                            (17)
                                  ОІ


                                                   29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Thus, there exists ВөвҲ’1 > 0, s.t.вҲҖ0 < Вө < ВөвҲ’1 ,
                                                       r
                                                        вҲҶВө
                                      вҲҘxВөK вҲ’ xвӢҶK вҲҘ вүӨ        ,
                                                       K +1
                                                     r
                                              Вө         вҲҶВө
                               |g(yK+1 ) вҲ’ g(yK )| вүӨ        .
                                                       K +1

Combining with Lemma B.10, we have
 вҹЁF (xK+1 ), xK+1 вҲ’ xВөK вҹ©
              = fK (xK+1 ) вҲ’ fK (xВөK )
                            вҲҡ
                                              r
                 вҲҶВө                              вҲҶВө

                                      1    p               Вө
              вүӨ       + 2 вҲҶВө + вҲҡ вҲҘО»Вө вҲҘ + ОІD          + g (yK ) вҲ’ g (yK+1 ) (18)
                K +1                   ОІ        K +1
                            вҲҡ
                                                r
                 вҲҶВө                                 вҲҶВө

                                      1  Вө
                                           p
              вүӨ       + 2 вҲҶ + вҲҡ вҲҘО» вҲҘ + ОІD + 1
                               Вө                         .
                K +1                   ОІ           K +1

Using the above inequality, we have
         G(xK+1 , C) =вҹЁF (xK+1 ), xK+1 вҲ’ xвӢҶK вҹ©                                 (19)
                      =вҹЁF (xK+1 ), xK+1 вҲ’ xВөK вҹ© + вҹЁF (xK+1 ), xВөK вҲ’ xвӢҶK вҹ©      (20)
                      вүӨвҹЁF (xK+1 ), xK+1 вҲ’ xВөK вҹ© + вҲҘF (xK+1 )вҲҘ вҲҘxВөK вҲ’ xвӢҶK вҲҘ     (21)
                                вҲҡ
                                                           r
                         вҲҶВө                                   вҲҶВө

                                       1  Вө
                                              p
                      вүӨ      + 2 вҲҶВө + вҲҡ вҲҘО» вҲҘ + ОІD + 1 + M         .            (22)
                        K +1            ОІ                    K +1

Moreover, by (17), we can choose small enough ВөвҲ’1 so that
                                      вҲҡ
                                                                    r
                          2вҲҶ                  1    вӢҶ
                                                          p            вҲҶ
        G(xK+1 , C) вүӨ          +2 2 вҲҶ+       вҲҡ   вҲҘО» вҲҘ + ОІD + 1 + M         ,
                        K +1                   ОІ                      K +1
and                                                   s
                                                             вҲҶ
                              вҲҘxK+1 вҲ’ yK+1 вҲҘ вүӨ 2                   ,           (23)
                                                          ОІ(K + 1)
where (23) uses (LB.10-2) in Lemma B.10.


                                                 30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.2     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.2: L AST- ITERATE CONVERGENCE OF INEXACT ACVI FOR
        M ONOTONE VARIATIONAL I NEQUALITIES

B.2.1      U SEFUL LEMMAS FROM PREVIOUS WORKS
The following lemma is Lemma 1 from (Schmidt et al., 2011).
Lemma B.12 (Lemma 1 in (Schmidt et al., 2011)). Assume that the nonnegative sequence {uk }
satisfies the following recursion for all k вүҘ 1 :
                                                     k
                                                     X
                                        u2k вүӨ Sk +         О»i ui ,
                                                     i=1
with {Sk } an increasing sequence, S0 вүҘ u20 and О»i вүҘ 0 for all i. Then, for all k вүҘ 1, it follows:
                                   k
                                            пЈ«
                                                        k
                                                              !2 пЈ¶1/2
                                1X                   1 X
                           uk вүӨ       О»i + пЈӯSk +           О»i пЈё         .
                                2 i=1                2 i=1

Proof. We prove the result by induction. It is true for k = 0 (by assumption). We assume it is true
for k вҲ’ 1, and we denote by vkвҲ’1 = max{u1 , . . . , ukвҲ’1 }. From the recursion, we deduce:
                                                                  kвҲ’1
                                                       О»2k        X
                             (uk вҲ’ О»k /2)2 вүӨ Sk +          + vkвҲ’1     О»i ,                        (24)
                                                       4          i=1
leading to
                                                            kвҲ’1
                                                                       !1/2
                              О»k            О»2              X
                         uk вүӨ    +      Sk + k + vkвҲ’1 k вҲ’ 1     О»i            ,                   (25)
                              2              4              i=1
and thus                    пЈұ
                                                                 kвҲ’1
                                                                              !1/2 пЈј
                            пЈІ    О»k              О»2              X                 пЈҪ
                 uk вүӨ max vkвҲ’1 ,    +        Sk + k + vkвҲ’1 k вҲ’ 1     О»i                .          (26)
                         пЈі       2                4              i=1
                                                                                  пЈҫ

                Pk
                                  P       2  1/2
                                   k
     вӢҶ
Let vkвҲ’1 вүң 21       О»
                 i=1 i +   Sk +  1
                                 2    О»
                                   i=1 i         . Note that

                                                              kвҲ’1
                                                                         !1/2
                               О»k             О»2              X
                        vkвҲ’1 =    +       Sk + k + vkвҲ’1 k вҲ’ 1     О»i
                               2               4              i=1
                                   вӢҶ
                         вҮ” vkвҲ’1 = vkвҲ’1 .
                                                                                             вӢҶ
Since the two terms in the max are increasing functions of vkвҲ’1 , it follows that if vkвҲ’1 вүӨ vkвҲ’1 , then
       вӢҶ
vk вүӨ vkвҲ’1 . Also note that
                                                                 kвҲ’1
                                                                          !1/2
                                 О»k            О»2k               X
                         vkвҲ’1 вүҘ      + Sk +        + vkвҲ’1 k вҲ’ 1        О»i
                                 2              4                 i=1
                                   вӢҶ
                         вҮ” vkвҲ’1 вүҘ vkвҲ’1 .
                                      вӢҶ
From which we deduce that if vkвҲ’1 вүҘ vkвҲ’1 , then vk вүӨ vkвҲ’1 , and the induction hypotheses ensure
that the property is satisfied for k.

In the convergence rate analysis of inexact ACVI-Algorithm 1, we need the following definition
(Bertsekas et al., 2003):
Definition B.13 (Оө-subdifferential). Given a convex function ПҲ : Rn вҶ’ R and a positive scalar Оө, a
vector a вҲҲ Rn is called an Оө-subgradient of ПҲ at a point x вҲҲ domПҲ if
                           ПҲ(z) вүҘ ПҲ(x) + (z вҲ’ x)вҠә a вҲ’ Оө, вҲҖz вҲҲ Rn .                          (Оө-G)

The set of all Оө-subgradients of a convex function ПҲ at x вҲҲ domПҲ is called the Оө-subdifferential of
ПҲ at x, and is denoted by вҲӮОө ПҲ(x).


                                                  31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.2.2   I NTERMEDIATE RESULTS
We first give some lemmas that will be used in the proof of Theorem 3.2.
In the following proofs, we assume Оө0 = Пғ0 = 0. We need the following two lemmas to state a
lemma analogous to Lemma B.3 but for the inexact ACVI.
                                                                            q
Lemma B.14. In inexact ACVI-Algorithm 1, for each k, вҲғ rk+1 вҲҲ Rn , вҲҘrk+1 вҲҘ вүӨ 2Оөk+1
                                                                               ОІ , s.t.
                                       1
                        ОІ(xk+1 +         О»k вҲ’ yk+1 вҲ’ rk+1 ) вҲҲ вҲӮОөk+1 g(yk+1 ) .
                                       ОІ

Proof of Lemma B.14. We first recall some properties of Оө-subdifferentials (see, eg. (Bertsekas et al.,
2003), Section 4.3 for more details). x is an Оө-minimizer (see Def. 2.4) of a convex function ПҲ if
and only if 0 вҲҲ вҲӮОө ПҲ(x). Let ПҲ = ПҲ1 + ПҲ2 , where both ПҲ1 and ПҲ2 are convex, we have вҲӮПө ПҲ(x) вҠӮ
                                              2
вҲӮПө ПҲ1 (x) + вҲӮПө ПҲ2 (x). If ПҲ1 (x) = ОІ2 вҲҘx вҲ’ zвҲҘ , then
                                 (                               )
                                                           2
                                          n ОІ           y
                     вҲӮОө ПҲ1 (x) = y вҲҲ R          xвҲ’zвҲ’         вүӨОө
                                            2           ОІ

                                         n                      ОІ     2
                               = y вҲҲ R , y = ОІx вҲ’ ОІz + ОІr вҲҘrвҲҘ вүӨ Оө .
                                                                2

Let ПҲ2 = g and z = xk+1 + ОІ1 О»k , then yk+1 is an Оөk+1 -minimizer of ПҲ1 + ПҲ2 . Thus we have
0 вҲҲ вҲӮОөk+1 ПҲ(yk+1 ) вҠӮ вҲӮОөk+1 ПҲ1 (yk+1 ) + вҲӮОөk+1 ПҲ2 (yk+1 ). Hence, there is an rk+1 such that
                                                                                r
                   1                                                               2Оөk+1
        ОІ(xk+1 + О»k вҲ’ yk+1 вҲ’ rk+1 ) вҲҲ вҲӮОөk+1 g(yk+1 ) with вҲҘrk+1 вҲҘ вүӨ                      .
                   ОІ                                                                 ОІ


Lemma B.15. In inexact ACVI-Algorithm 1, for each k, вҲғ qk+1 вҲҲ Rn , вҲҘqk+1 вҲҘ вүӨ Пғk+1 , s.t.
                                       (                                )
                                                                      2
                                                   ОІ            1
               xk+1 + qk+1 = argmin fk (x) +           x вҲ’ yk + О»k         .                      (27)
                                    x              2            ОІ
where LОІ is the augmented Lagrangian of problem (fk -Pr).

Proof of Lemma B.15. By the definition of xk+1 (see line 8 of inexact ACVI-Algorithm 1 and
Def. 2.3) we have
                                       1                    1
                    xk+1 + qk+1 = вҲ’ Pc F (x) + Pc yk вҲ’ Pc О»k + dc
                                       ОІ                    ОІ
                                 =argmin LОІ (x, yk , О»k ) ,
                                               x
where LОІ is the augmented Lagrangian of the problem, which is given in AL (note that wk = xk+1 ).
(fk -Pr). And from the above equation (27) follows.

Similar to Lemma B.3, and using Lemma B.14 and Lemma B.15, we give the following lemma for
inexact ACVIвҖ“Algorithm 1.
Lemma B.16. For the problems (f -Pr), (fk -Pr) and inexact ACVI-Algorithm 1, we have
                   0 вҲҲ вҲӮfk (xk+1 + qk+1 ) + О»k + ОІ(xk+1 вҲ’ yk ) + ОІqk+1               (LB.16-1)
                   0 вҲҲ вҲӮОөk+1 g(yk+1 ) вҲ’ О»k вҲ’ ОІ(xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 ) + ОІrk+1 ,               (LB.16-2)
           О»k+1 вҲ’ О»k = ОІ(xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 ),                                                     (LB.16-3)
                вҲ’О»Вө вҲҲ вҲӮf (xВө ),                                                             (LB.16-4)
                  вҲ’О»Вөk вҲҲ вҲӮfk (xВөk ),                                                        (LB.16-5)
                   О»Вө = вҲҮg(y Вө ),                                                           (LB.16-6)
                    О»Вөk = вҲҮg(ykВө ),                                                         (LB.16-7)
                    xВө = y Вө ,                                                              (LB.16-8)
                    xВөk = ykВө ,                                                             (LB.16-9)


                                                   32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We define the following two maps (whose naming will be evident from the inclusions shown after):
          ЛҶ k (xk+1 + qk+1 ) вүң вҲ’О»k вҲ’ ОІ(xk+1 вҲ’ yk ) вҲ’ ОІqk+1 ,
          вҲҮf                                                          and                  ЛҶ k)
                                                                                    (noisy-вҲҮf
               ЛҶ Оө g(yk+1 ) вүң О»k + ОІ(xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 ) вҲ’ ОІrk+1 .
               вҲҮ                                                                            ЛҶ
                                                                                     (noisy-вҲҮg)
                  k+1


Then, from (LB.3-1) and (LB.3-2) it follows that:
         ЛҶ k (xk+1 + qk+1 ) вҲҲ вҲӮfk (xk+1 + qk+1 ) and вҲҮ
         вҲҮf                                          ЛҶ Оө g(yk+1 ) вҲҲ вҲӮОө g(yk+1 ) .           (28)
                                                        k+1           k+1



The following lemma is analogous to Lemma B.5 but refers to the noisy case.
Lemma B.17. For the iterates xk+1 , yk+1 , and О»k+1 of the inexact ACVIвҖ”Algorithm 1вҖ”we have:
        ЛҶ Оө g(yk+1 ), yk+1 вҲ’ yвҹ© = вҲ’вҹЁО»k+1 , y вҲ’ yk+1 вҹ© вҲ’ ОІвҹЁrk+1 , yk+1 вҲ’ yвҹ©,
       вҹЁвҲҮ                                                                             (LB.17-1)
           k+1

and
                  ЛҶ k (xk+1 + qk+1 ), xk+1 вҲ’ xвҹ© + вҹЁвҲҮ
                 вҹЁвҲҮf                               ЛҶ Оө g(yk+1 ), yk+1 вҲ’ yвҹ©
                                                      k+1

               = вҲ’ вҹЁО»k+1 , xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҲ’ x + yвҹ© + ОІвҹЁвҲ’yk+1 + yk , xk+1 вҲ’ xвҹ©            (LB.17-2)
                 вҲ’ ОІвҹЁqk+1 , xk+1 вҲ’ xвҹ© вҲ’ ОІвҹЁrk+1 , yk+1 вҲ’ yвҹ© .


                                            ЛҶ k ) and (noisy-вҲҮg)
Proof of Lemma B.17. From (LB.16-3), (noisy-вҲҮf               ЛҶ we have:
 ЛҶ k (xk+1 + qk+1 ) + ОІqk+1 , xk+1 вҲ’ xвҹ© = вҲ’ вҹЁО»k + ОІ(xk+1 вҲ’ yk ), xk+1 вҲ’ xвҹ©
вҹЁвҲҮf
                                        = вҲ’ вҹЁО»k+1 , xk+1 вҲ’ xвҹ© + ОІвҹЁвҲ’yk+1 + yk , xk+1 вҲ’ xвҹ©,
and
                   ЛҶ Оө g(yk+1 ) + ОІrk+1 , yk+1 вҲ’ yвҹ© = вҲ’вҹЁО»k+1 , y вҲ’ yk+1 вҹ© .
                  вҹЁвҲҮ  k+1


Adding these together yields:
        ЛҶ k (xk+1 + qk+1 ) + ОІqk+1 , xk+1 вҲ’ xвҹ© + вҹЁвҲҮ
       вҹЁвҲҮf                                        ЛҶ Оө g(yk+1 ) + ОІrk+1 , yk+1 вҲ’ yвҹ©
                                                     k+1

                          = вҲ’ вҹЁО»k+1 , xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҲ’ x + yвҹ©
                            + ОІвҹЁвҲ’yk+1 + yk , xk+1 вҲ’ xвҹ© .

Rearranging the above two equations, we obtain (LB.17-1) and (LB.17-2).



The following lemma is analogous to Lemma B.6 but refers to the noisy case.
Lemma B.18. For the xk+1 , yk+1 , and О»k+1 iterates of the inexact ACVIвҖ”Algorithm 1вҖ”we have:
   ЛҶ k (xk+1 + qk+1 ), xk+1 вҲ’ xВө вҹ© + вҹЁвҲҮ
  вҹЁвҲҮf                                 ЛҶ Оө g(yk+1 ), yk+1 вҲ’ y Вө вҹ© + вҹЁО»Вө , xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҹ©
                                         k+1

      1         Вө 2     1                   ОІ                 ОІ
   вүӨ     вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О» вҲҘ вҲ’      вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О» вҲҘ + вҲҘy Вө вҲ’ yk вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘy Вө вҲ’ yk+1 вҲҘ2
                                     Вө 2
     2ОІ                2ОІ                    2                2
         1                 ОІ
     вҲ’     вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘyk вҲ’ yk+1 вҲҘ2
        2ОІ                 2
     вҲ’ ОІвҹЁrk+1 вҲ’ rk , yk+1 вҲ’ yk вҹ© вҲ’ ОІвҹЁrk+1 , yk+1 вҲ’ y Вө вҹ© + Оөk + Оөk+1 вҲ’ ОІвҹЁqk+1 , xk+1 вҲ’ xВө вҹ© ,
and
   ЛҶ k (xk+1 + qk+1 ), xk+1 вҲ’ xВө вҹ© + вҹЁвҲҮ
  вҹЁвҲҮf                                 ЛҶ Оө g(yk+1 ), yk+1 вҲ’ y Вө вҹ© + вҹЁО»Вө , xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҹ©
                                 k       k+1                    k      k
      1         Вө 2     1            Вө 2    ОІ Вө               ОІ   Вө
   вүӨ     вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ вҲ’     вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ + вҲҘyk вҲ’ yk вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘyk вҲ’ yk+1 вҲҘ2
     2ОІ                2ОІ                    2                2
         1                 ОІ
     вҲ’     вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘyk вҲ’ yk+1 вҲҘ2
        2ОІ                 2
     вҲ’ ОІвҹЁrk+1 вҲ’ rk , yk+1 вҲ’ yk вҹ© вҲ’ ОІвҹЁrk+1 , yk+1 вҲ’ ykВө вҹ© + Оөk + Оөk+1 вҲ’ ОІвҹЁqk+1 , xk+1 вҲ’ xВөk вҹ© .

                                               33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof of Lemma B.18. For the left-hand side of the first part of Lemma B.18:
       ЛҶ k (xk+1 + qk+1 ), xk+1 вҲ’ xВө вҹ© + вҹЁвҲҮ
LHS = вҹЁвҲҮf                                 ЛҶ Оө g(yk+1 ), yk+1 вҲ’ y Вө вҹ© + вҹЁО»Вө , xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҹ© ,
                                   k         k+1                k        k

we let (x, y, О») = (xВө , y Вө , О»Вө ) in (LB.17-2), and using the result of that lemma we get that:
         LHS = вҲ’ вҹЁО»k+1 , xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҲ’ xВө + y Вө вҹ© + ОІвҹЁвҲ’yk+1 + yk , xk+1 вҲ’ xВө вҹ©
               вҲ’ ОІвҹЁqk+1 , xk+1 вҲ’ xВө вҹ© вҲ’ ОІвҹЁrk+1 , yk+1 вҲ’ y Вө вҹ© + вҹЁО»Вө , xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҹ© ,

and since xВө = y Вө (LB.3-8):
     LHS = вҲ’вҹЁО»k+1 , xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҹ© + ОІвҹЁвҲ’yk+1 + yk , xk+1 вҲ’ xВө вҹ© + вҹЁО»Вө , xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҹ©
           вҲ’ ОІвҹЁqk+1 , xk+1 вҲ’ xВө вҹ© вҲ’ ОІвҹЁrk+1 , yk+1 вҲ’ y Вө вҹ©
         = вҲ’вҹЁО»k+1 вҲ’ О»Вө , xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҹ© + ОІвҹЁвҲ’yk+1 + yk , xk+1 вҲ’ xВө вҹ©
           вҲ’ ОІвҹЁqk+1 , xk+1 вҲ’ xВө вҹ© вҲ’ ОІвҹЁrk+1 , yk+1 вҲ’ y Вө вҹ© ,
where in the last equality, we combined the first and third terms together. Using (LB.16-3) that
1
ОІ (О»k+1 вҲ’ О»k ) = xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 yields (for the second term above, we add and subtract yk+1 in its
second argument, and use xВө = y Вө ):
             1
  LHS = вҲ’      вҹЁО»k+1 вҲ’ О»Вө , О»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҹ© + вҹЁвҲ’yk+1 + yk , О»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҹ©
             ОІ                                                                        (29)
                                       Вө                     Вө                   Вө
           вҲ’ ОІвҹЁвҲ’yk+1 + yk , вҲ’yk+1 + y вҹ© вҲ’ ОІвҹЁqk+1 , xk+1 вҲ’ x вҹ© вҲ’ ОІвҹЁrk+1 , yk+1 вҲ’ y вҹ© .

                                                                                                    2
Using the 3-point identity, that for any vectors a, b, c it holds вҹЁb вҲ’ a, b вҲ’ cвҹ© = 21 (вҲҘa вҲ’ bвҲҘ +
       2            2
вҲҘb вҲ’ cвҲҘ вҲ’ вҲҘa вҲ’ cвҲҘ ), for the first term above, we get that:
                                        1
         вҹЁО»k+1 вҲ’ О»Вө , О»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҹ© =       вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ + вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ вҲ’ вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ ,

                                        2
and similarly,
                                       1
     вҹЁвҲ’yk+1 + yk , вҲ’yk+1 + y Вө вҹ© =       вҲҘвҲ’yk + y Вө вҲҘ вҲ’ вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + y Вө вҲҘ вҲ’ вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲҘ ,

                                       2
and by plugging these into (29) we get:
             1                 1                   1
   LHS =        вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ2 вҲ’    вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ2 вҲ’     вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ2
            2ОІ                2ОІ                  2ОІ
               ОІ                 ОІ                   ОІ
            + вҲҘвҲ’yk + y Вө вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + y Вө вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲҘ2
               2                 2                   2
            + вҹЁвҲ’yk+1 + yk , О»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҹ© вҲ’ ОІвҹЁqk+1 , xk+1 вҲ’ xВө вҹ© вҲ’ ОІвҹЁrk+1 , yk+1 вҲ’ y Вө вҹ© .            (30)

                                                ЛҶ Оө g(yk+1 ), yk+1 вҲ’ yвҹ© + вҹЁО»k+1 , вҲ’yk+1 + yвҹ© =
On the other hand, (LB.17-1) which states that вҹЁвҲҮ  k+1
вҲ’ОІвҹЁrk+1 , yk+1 вҲ’ yвҹ©, also asserts:
                       ЛҶ Оө g(yk ), yk вҲ’ yвҹ© + вҹЁО»k , вҲ’yk + yвҹ© = вҲ’ОІвҹЁrk , yk вҲ’ yвҹ© .
                      вҹЁвҲҮ                                                                            (31)
                          k



Letting y = yk in (LB.17-1), and y = yk+1 in (31), and adding them together yields:
              ЛҶ Оө g(yk+1 ) вҲ’ вҲҮ
             вҹЁвҲҮ              ЛҶ Оө g(yk ), yk+1 вҲ’ yk вҹ© + вҹЁО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k , вҲ’yk+1 + yk вҹ©                    (32)
                 k+1            k

                 = вҲ’ОІвҹЁrk+1 вҲ’ rk , yk+1 вҲ’ yk вҹ© .                                                     (33)

By the definition of Пө-subdifferential as per Def.B.13 we have:
                                                ЛҶ Оө g(yk ), yk+1 вҲ’ yk вҹ© , and
                      Оөk + g(yk+1 ) вүҘ g(yk ) + вҹЁвҲҮ  k

                      Оөk+1 + g(yk ) вүҘ g(yk+1 ) + вҹЁвҲҮЛҶ Оө g(yk+1 ), yk вҲ’ yk+1 вҹ© .
                                                       k+1


                                                  34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Adding together the above two inequalities, we obtain:
                     ЛҶ Оө g(yk+1 ) вҲ’ вҲҮ
                    вҹЁвҲҮ              ЛҶ Оө g(yk ), yk+1 вҲ’ yk вҹ© вүҘ вҲ’Оөk+1 вҲ’ Оөk .                  (34)
                        k+1            k



Combining (32) and (34), we deduce:
             вҹЁО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k , вҲ’yk+1 + yk вҹ© вүӨ вҲ’ОІвҹЁrk+1 вҲ’ rk , yk+1 вҲ’ yk вҹ© + Оөk+1 + Оөk .           (35)

Lastly, plugging it into (30) gives the first inequality of Lemma B.18.
The second inequality of Lemma B.18 follows similarly.



Lemma B.19. For the xk+1 , yk+1 , and О»k+1 iterates of the inexact ACVIвҖ”Algorithm 1вҖ”we have:
   fk (xk+1 + qk+1 ) + g(yk+1 ) вҲ’ fk (xВө ) вҲ’ g(y Вө ) + вҹЁО»Вө , xk+1 + qk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҹ©
                        1                   1
                     вүӨ     вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ2 вҲ’      вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ2
                       2ОІ                  2ОІ
                          ОІ                   ОІ
                       + вҲҘвҲ’yk + y Вө вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + y Вө вҲҘ2
                          2                   2
                           1                    ОІ
                       вҲ’     вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲҘ2
                          2ОІ                    2
                           1                    ОІ
                       вҲ’     вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘyk вҲ’ yk+1 вҲҘ2
                          2ОІ                    2
                       вҲ’ ОІвҹЁrk+1 вҲ’ rk , yk+1 вҲ’ yk вҹ© вҲ’ ОІвҹЁrk+1 , yk+1 вҲ’ y Вө вҹ©
                       + Оөk + 2Оөk+1 вҲ’ вҹЁqk+1 , О»k вҲ’ О»Вө + ОІ(xk+1 вҲ’ yk ) + ОІ(xk+1 вҲ’ xВө )вҹ© .
                                                                                  (LB.19)


Proof of Lemma B.19. From the convexity of fk (x) and g(y) and Eq. (28) which asserts that
ЛҶ k (xk+1 + qk+1 ) вҲҲ вҲӮfk (xk+1 + qk+1 ) and вҲҮ
вҲҮf                                          ЛҶ Оө g(yk+1 ) вҲҲ вҲӮОө g(yk+1 ), it follows for the
                                               k+1            k+1
LHS of Lemma B.19 that:
   fk (xk+1 + qk+1 ) + g(yk+1 ) вҲ’ fk (xВө ) вҲ’ g(y Вө ) + вҹЁО»Вө , xk+1 + qk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҹ©
                 вүӨвҹЁвҲҮfЛҶ k (xk+1 + qk+1 ), xk+1 + qk+1 вҲ’ xВө вҹ© + вҹЁвҲҮ   ЛҶ Оө g(yk+1 ), yk+1 вҲ’ y Вө вҹ©
                                                                          k+1

                      + Оөk+1 + вҹЁО»Вө , xk+1 + qk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҹ© .

                                                                      ЛҶ k ), Lemma B.19 follows,
Finally, by plugging in the first part of Lemma B.18 and using (noisy-вҲҮf
that is:
f (xk+1 + qk+1 ) + g(yk+1 ) вҲ’ f (xВө ) вҲ’ g(y Вө ) + вҹЁО»Вө , xk+1 + qk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҹ©
                    1                   1                    ОІ               ОІ
                 вүӨ     вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ2 вҲ’       вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ2 + вҲҘвҲ’yk + y Вө вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + y Вө вҲҘ2
                   2ОІ                  2ОІ                    2               2
                       1                    ОІ
                   вҲ’     вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲҘ2 вҲ’ ОІвҹЁrk+1 вҲ’ rk , yk+1 вҲ’ yk вҹ©
                      2ОІ                    2
                                         Вө
                   вҲ’ ОІвҹЁrk+1 , yk+1 вҲ’ y вҹ© + Оөk + 2Оөk+1
                   вҲ’ ОІвҹЁqk+1 , xk+1 вҲ’ xВө вҹ© вҲ’ вҹЁqk+1 , О»k вҲ’ О»Вө + ОІ(xk+1 вҲ’ yk ) + ОІqk+1 вҹ©
                    1                   1                    ОІ               ОІ
                 вүӨ     вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ2 вҲ’       вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ2 + вҲҘвҲ’yk + y Вө вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + y Вө вҲҘ2
                   2ОІ                  2ОІ                    2               2
                       1                    ОІ
                   вҲ’     вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲҘ2 вҲ’ ОІвҹЁrk+1 вҲ’ rk , yk+1 вҲ’ yk вҹ©
                      2ОІ                    2
                   вҲ’ ОІвҹЁrk+1 , yk+1 вҲ’ y Вө вҹ© + Оөk + 2Оөk+1
                   вҲ’ вҹЁqk+1 , О»k вҲ’ О»Вө + ОІ(xk+1 вҲ’ yk ) + ОІ(xk+1 вҲ’ xВө )вҹ© .



                                                 35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The following theorem upper bounds the analogous quantity but for fk (В·) (instead of f ), and further
asserts that the difference between the xk+1 and yk+1 iterates of inexact ACVI (Algorithm 1) tends
to 0 asymptotically.
                                                                                         PвҲһ
Theorem
вҲҡ          B.20 (Asymptotic convergence of (xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 ) of I-ACVI). Assume that i=1 (Пғi +
  Оөi ) < +вҲһ, then for the xk+1 , yk+1 , and О»k+1 iterates of the inexact ACVIвҖ”Algorithm 1вҖ”we
have:
       fk (xk+1 + qk+1 ) вҲ’ fk (xВөk ) + g(yk+1 ) вҲ’ g(ykВө )
                           вүӨ вҲҘО»k+1 вҲҘ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҲҘ + ОІ вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ yk вҲҘ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ xВөk вҲҘ
                             + ОІПғk+1 вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ xВөk вҲҘ + 2Оөk+1 ОІ вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ ykВө вҲҘ + Оөk+1 вҶ’ 0 ,
                                                     p

                                                                                   (TB.20-fk -UB)
and
                                 xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҶ’ 0 ,          as k вҶ’ вҲһ .

Proof of Lemma B.20. Recall from (LB.2-f ) of Lemma B.2 that by setting x вүЎ xk+1 + qk+1 , y вүЎ
yk+1 it asserts that:
       f (xk+1 + qk+1 ) вҲ’ f (xВө ) + g(yk+1 ) вҲ’ g(y Вө ) + вҹЁО»Вө , xk+1 + qk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҹ© вүҘ 0 .
Further, notice that the LHS of the above inequality overlaps with that of (LB.19). This implies that
the RHS of (LB.19) has to be non-negative. Hence, we have that:
                   1                   ОІ
                      вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ2 + вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲҘ2
                  2ОІ                   2
                    1                 1
                вүӨ      вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ2 вҲ’     вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ2
                   2ОІ                2ОІ
                      ОІ                 ОІ
                  + вҲҘвҲ’yk + y Вө вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + y Вө вҲҘ2
                      2                 2
                  вҲ’ ОІвҹЁrk+1 вҲ’ rk , yk+1 вҲ’ yk вҹ© вҲ’ ОІвҹЁrk+1 , yk+1 вҲ’ y Вө вҹ©
                  + Оөk + 2Оөk+1 вҲ’ вҹЁqk+1 , О»k вҲ’ О»Вө + ОІ(xk+1 вҲ’ yk ) + ОІ(xk+1 вҲ’ xВө )вҹ© .
                      q
                         2Оөk+1
Recall that вҲҘrk+1 вҲҘ вүӨ      ОІ   and вҲҘqk+1 вҲҘ вүӨ Пғk+1 (see Lemma B.14 and Lemma B.15), by
Cauchy-Schwarz inequality we have:
                 1                   ОІ
                    вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ2 + вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲҘ2
                2ОІ                   2
                  1                 1
              вүӨ      вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ2 вҲ’     вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ2
                 2ОІ                2ОІ
                    ОІ                 ОІ                                                         (36)
                + вҲҘвҲ’yk + y Вө вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + y Вө вҲҘ2
                    2                 2
                   p     вҲҡ         вҲҡ                 p
                + 2ОІ( Оөk+1 + Оөk ) вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ yk вҲҘ + 2ОІОөk+1 вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ
                + Оөk + 2Оөk+1 + Пғk+1 (вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ + ОІ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ yk вҲҘ + ОІ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ xВө вҲҘ) .
Summing over k = 0, . . . , вҲһ, we have:
          вҲһ
          X   1                        ОІ
                     вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ2 +     вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲҘ2
                2ОІ                     2
          k=0
           1              ОІ
      вүӨ      вҲҘО»0 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ2 + вҲҘвҲ’y0 + y Вө вҲҘ2
          2ОІ              2
                  вҲһ                                                     вҲһ                       (37)
             p X       вҲҡ      вҲҡ                   вҲҡ              Вө
                                                                        X
          + 2ОІ        ( Оөk+1 + Оөk ) вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ yk вҲҘ + Оөk+1 вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ y вҲҘ + 3   Оөk
                     k=0                                                            k=0
              вҲһ
              X
                    Пғk+1 вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ + ОІ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ yk вҲҘ + ОІ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ xВө вҲҘ .

          +
              k=0


                                                  36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Also notice that by simply reorganizing (36) we have:
 1                ОІ
   вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ2 + вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + y Вө вҲҘ2
2ОІ                2
                   1               ОІ                 1                  ОІ
                 вүӨ вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ2 + вҲҘвҲ’yk + y Вө вҲҘ2 вҲ’       вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲҘ2
                  2ОІ               2                2ОІ                  2
                     p    вҲҡ        вҲҡ                   p
                  + 2ОІ( Оөk+1 + Оөk ) вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ yk вҲҘ + 2ОІОөk+1 вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ
                  + Оөk + 2Оөk+1 + Пғk+1 (вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ + ОІ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ yk вҲҘ + ОІ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ xВө вҲҘ)
                   1               ОІ
                 вүӨ вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ2 + вҲҘвҲ’yk + y Вө вҲҘ2
                  2ОІ               2
                     p    вҲҡ        вҲҡ                   p
                  + 2ОІ( Оөk+1 + Оөk ) вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ yk вҲҘ + 2ОІОөk+1 вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ
                  + Оөk + 2Оөk+1 + Пғk+1 (вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ + ОІ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ yk вҲҘ + ОІ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ xВө вҲҘ)
                   1               ОІ
                 вүӨ вҲҘО»0 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ2 + вҲҘвҲ’y0 + y Вө вҲҘ2
                  2ОІ               2
                          k                                    k
                     p X     вҲҡ        вҲҡ                  p X      вҲҡ
                  + 2ОІ      ( Оөi+1 + Оөi ) вҲҘyi+1 вҲ’ yi вҲҘ + 2ОІ         Оөi+1 вҲҘyi+1 вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ
                                      i=0                                      i=0
                               k
                               X              k
                                              X
                         +           Оөi + 2         Оөi+1
                               i=0            i=0
                               k
                               X
                         +           Пғi+1 (вҲҘО»i вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ + ОІ вҲҘxi+1 вҲ’ yi вҲҘ + ОІ вҲҘxi+1 вҲ’ xВө вҲҘ) ,
                               i=0
                                                                                                      (38)
where the second inequality follows because the norm is non-negative.
From the above inequality we deduce:
       1                                  2
          вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ + ОІ вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ
      4ОІ
       1             2   ОІ               2
    вүӨ    вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ + вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ
      2ОІ                 2
       1               ОІ
    вүӨ вҲҘО»0 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ2 + вҲҘвҲ’y0 + y Вө вҲҘ2
      2ОІ               2                                                                              (39)
              k                                 k
         p XвҲҡ             вҲҡ                 p X   вҲҡ
      + 2ОІ      ( Оөi+1 + Оөi ) вҲҘyi+1 вҲ’ yi вҲҘ + 2ОІ     Оөi+1 вҲҘyi+1 вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ
                 i=0                                             i=0
          k
          X              k
                         X              k
                                        X
      +         Оөi + 2         Оөi+1 +         Пғi+1 (вҲҘО»i вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ + ОІ вҲҘxi+1 вҲ’ yi вҲҘ + ОІ вҲҘxi+1 вҲ’ xВө вҲҘ) ,
          i=0            i=0            i=0

where the first inequality is the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality.
Using (LB.16-3) and (LB.16-8), we have:
                  вҲҘxi+1 вҲ’ xВө вҲҘ = вҲҘyi+1 вҲ’ y Вө + xi+1 вҲ’ yi+1 вҲҘ
                                                1
                               вүӨ вҲҘyi+1 вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ + вҲҘО»i+1 вҲ’ О»i вҲҘ
                                                ОІ                                                     (40)
                                                1              1
                               вүӨ вҲҘyi+1 вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ + вҲҘО»i+1 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ + вҲҘО»i вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ ,
                                                ОІ              ОІ


          вҲҘxi+1 вҲ’ yi вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘxi+1 вҲ’ xВө вҲҘ + вҲҘyi вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ
                                                                 1               1                    (41)
                           вүӨ вҲҘyi вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ + вҲҘyi+1 вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ +         вҲҘО»i+1 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ + вҲҘО»i вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ ,
                                                                 ОІ               ОІ

                                                           37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                       вҲҘyi+1 вҲ’ yi вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘyi+1 вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ + вҲҘyi вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ .                     (42)

Plugging these into (39), we obtain:

     1                                 2
       вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ + ОІ вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ
    4ОІ
                                      k
     1           2 ОІ           2
                                 p X      вҲҡ      вҲҡ
       вҲҘО»0 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ + вҲҘy0 вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ + 2ОІ     ( Оөi+1 + Оөi ) вҲҘyi+1 вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ + вҲҘyi вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ

вүӨ
    2ОІ             2                 i=0
                 k                                  k              k
        p        X вҲҡ                                X              X
    +       2ОІ            Оөi+1 вҲҘyi+1 вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ +            Оөi + 2         Оөi+1
                 i=0                                i=0            i=0
        k
        X                                                                          1
    +         Пғi+1        вҲҘО»i вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ + ОІ вҲҘyi вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ + вҲҘyi+1 вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ +               вҲҘО»i+1 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ
        i=0
                                                                                   ОІ
                                                                                                    !
             1                              1              1
            + вҲҘО»i вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ + ОІ вҲҘyi+1 вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ + вҲҘО»i+1 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ + вҲҘО»i вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ

             ОІ                              ОІ              ОІ
                                   k          k
     1           2 ОІ           2
                                  X          X
вүӨ      вҲҘО»0 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ + вҲҘy0 вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ +     Оөi + 2     Оөi+1
    2ОІ             2              i=0        i=0
        k  p                                   k
        X     вҲҡ      вҲҡ                         X
    +       2ОІ Оөi+1 + Оөi + ОІПғi+1 вҲҘyi вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ +   3Пғi+1 вҲҘО»i вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ
        i=0                                                                 i=0
        k  p                                                                      k
        X                вҲҡ      вҲҡ                            X
    +                2ОІ 2 Оөi+1 + Оөi + 2ОІПғi+1 вҲҘyi+1 вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ +   2Пғi+1 вҲҘО»i+1 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ
        i=0                                                                       i=0
                                                     k             k
     1           2 ОІ           2
                                                     X             X
=      вҲҘО»0 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ + вҲҘy0 вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ +       Оөi + 2     Оөi+1
    2ОІ             2                i=0        i=0
       p вҲҡ
         2ОІ Оө1 + ОІПғ1 вҲҘy0 вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ + 3Пғ1 вҲҘО»0 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ

    +
        k
        X p               вҲҡ            вҲҡ
                                        Оөi + ОІПғi+1 вҲҘyi вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ

    +             2ОІ          Оөi+1 +
        i=1
        k+1
        X        p       вҲҡ    вҲҡ
                     2ОІ 2 Оөi + ОөiвҲ’1 + 2ОІПғi вҲҘyi вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ

    +
        i=1
        k
        X                                k+1
                                         X
    +         3Пғi+1 вҲҘО»i вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ +                2Пғi вҲҘО»i вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ
        i=1                               i=1

                                  p вҲҡ                                           k+1
     1           2 ОІ           2
                                                                                X
       вҲҘО»0 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ + вҲҘy0 вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ +  2ОІ Оө1 + ОІПғ1 вҲҘy0 вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ + 3Пғ1 вҲҘО»0 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ + 3

вүӨ                                                                                   Оөi
    2ОІ             2                                                            i=1
        k+1
        X        p        вҲҡ           вҲҡ    вҲҡ
                              Оөi+1 + 3 Оөi + ОөiвҲ’1 + ОІ(2Пғi + Пғi+1 ) вҲҘyi вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ

    +                2ОІ
        i=1
        k+1
        X
    +         (2Пғi + 3Пғi+1 ) вҲҘО»i вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ
        i=1

                                     p вҲҡ                                            k+1
     1            2   ОІ          2
                                                                                    X
        вҲҘО»0 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ + вҲҘy0 вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ +     2ОІ Оө1 + ОІПғ1 вҲҘy0 вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ + 3Пғ1 вҲҘО»0 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ + 3

вүӨ                                                                                       Оөi
    2ОІ                2                                                             i=1
       k+1  r
       X      2 вҲҡ          вҲҡ    вҲҡ
                   Оөi+1 + 3 Оөi + ОөiвҲ’1 + (2Пғi + 3Пғi+1 ) ОІ вҲҘyi вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ + вҲҘО»i вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ ,

    +
       i=1
              ОІ


                                                               38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


From which we deduce:
                                                2
      вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ + ОІ вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ
                    2                      2
                                                     p     вҲҡ
  вүӨ2 вҲҘО»0 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ + 2ОІ 2 вҲҘy0 вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ + 4ОІ                  2ОІ Оө1 + ОІПғ1 вҲҘy0 вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ


                                     k+1
                                     X
     + 12ОІПғ1 вҲҘО»0 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ + 12ОІ              Оөi
                                     i=1
             k+1   r
             X          2 вҲҡ         вҲҡ    вҲҡ
                            Оөi+1 + 3 Оөi + ОөiвҲ’1 + (2Пғi + 3Пғi+1 ) ОІ вҲҘyi вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ + вҲҘО»i вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ .

     + 4ОІ
             i=1
                        ОІ

                                                    q вҲҡ
                                                      2         вҲҡ    вҲҡ
Now we set ui вүң ОІ вҲҘyi вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ + вҲҘО»i вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ, О»i вүң 4ОІ   ОІ Оөi+1 + 3 Оөi + ОөiвҲ’1 + (2Пғi +
                                  2                 2     вҲҡ вҲҡ
3Пғi+1 ) and Sk+1 вүң 2 вҲҘО»0 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ + 2ОІ 2 вҲҘy0 вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ + 4ОІ 2ОІ Оө1 + ОІПғ1 вҲҘy0 вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ +
                       Pk+1
12ОІПғ1 вҲҘО»0 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ + 12ОІ i=1 Оөi and Lemma B.12 to get:

                                      k+1
                                                    пЈ«
                                                                       k+1
                                                                                !2 пЈ¶1/2
                                     1X                              1 X
                            uk+1 вүӨ         О»i + пЈӯSk+1 +                    О»i     пЈё         ,         (43)
                                     2 i=1                           2 i=1
                                     |                {z                                }
                                                              Ak+1


where we set the RHS of (43) to be Ak+1 .
               PвҲһ         вҲҡ
Note that when i=1 (Пғi + Оөi ) < +вҲһ, we have AВө вүң lim Ak < +вҲһ, and
                                                                     kвҶ’+вҲһ

                                                             1 Вө
                                                вҲҘyk вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ вүӨ  A ,                                    (44)
                                                             ОІ
                                                вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ вүӨ AВө .                                     (45)

Using Eq. (37) we could further get:
                                                                3 Вө
                                               вҲҘxk вҲ’ xВө вҲҘ вүӨ       A .                                 (46)
                                                                ОІ

Combining (40),(41) and (42) with (37) and using the above inequalities, we have:
         вҲһ
         X   1                        ОІ
                    вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ2 +     вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲҘ2
               2ОІ                     2
         k=0
          1              ОІ
     вүӨ      вҲҘО»0 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ2 + вҲҘвҲ’y0 + y Вө вҲҘ2
         2ОІ              2
                 вҲһ                                      вҲһ
            p X       вҲҡ      вҲҡ      2    вҲҡ      1       X
         + 2ОІ        ( Оөk+1 + Оөk ) В· AВө + Оөk+1 В· AВө + 3   Оөk
                                    ОІ           ОІ
                   k=0                                                           k=0
             вҲһ
             X       4 Вө       3
         +       Пғk+1 AВө + ОІ В·
                       A + ОІ В· AВө
                     ОІ         ОІ
         k=0
                                  r     вҲһ        вҲһ          вҲһ
       1      Вө 2 ОІ        Вө 2      2 ВөXвҲҡ        X          X
     вүӨ вҲҘО»0 вҲ’ О» вҲҘ + вҲҘвҲ’y0 + y вҲҘ + 5     A   Оөk + 3   Оөk + 8AВө   Пғk ,                                    (47)
      2ОІ          2                 ОІ
                                                                 k=1              k=1           k=1

from which we can see that О»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҶ’ 0 and yk+1 вҲ’ yk вҶ’ 0.
Recall that:
                                     О»k+1 вҲ’ О»k = ОІ(xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 ) ,
from which we deduce xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҶ’ 0.


                                                         39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Using the convexity of fk (В·) and g(В·) for the LHS of Theorem B.20 we have:
        LHS = fk (xk+1 + qk+1 ) вҲ’ fk (xВөk ) + g(yk+1 ) вҲ’ g(ykВө )
               ЛҶ k (xk+1 + qk+1 ), xk+1 вҲ’ xВө вҹ© + вҹЁвҲҮ
            вүӨ вҹЁвҲҮf                                    ЛҶ Оө g(yk+1 ), yk+1 вҲ’ y Вө вҹ© + Оөk+1
                                                k         k+1                    k

Using (LB.17-2) with x вүЎ xВөk , y вүЎ ykВө we have:
          LHS вүӨ вҲ’ вҹЁО»k+1 , xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҲ’xВөk + ykВө вҹ© + ОІвҹЁвҲ’yk+1 + yk , xk+1 вҲ’ xВөk вҹ©
                                      | {z }
                                         =0, due to (LB.3-9)

                  вҲ’ ОІвҹЁqk+1 , xk+1 вҲ’ xk вҹ© вҲ’ ОІвҹЁrk+1 , yk+1 вҲ’ ykВө вҹ© + Оөk+1 .
                                     Вө


                                                  .

Hence, it follows that:
          fk (xk+1 + qk+1 ) вҲ’ fk (xВөk ) + g(yk+1 ) вҲ’ g(ykВө )
                          вүӨ вҲ’ вҹЁО»k+1 , xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҹ© + ОІвҹЁвҲ’yk+1 + yk , xk+1 вҲ’ xВөk вҹ©
                             вҲ’ ОІвҹЁqk+1 , xk+1 вҲ’ xВөk вҹ© вҲ’ ОІвҹЁrk+1 , yk+1 вҲ’ ykВө вҹ© + Оөk+1
                          вүӨ вҲҘО»k+1 вҲҘ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҲҘ + ОІ вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ yk вҲҘ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ xВөk вҲҘ
                            + ОІПғk+1 вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ xВөk вҲҘ + 2Оөk+1 ОІ вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ ykВө вҲҘ + Оөk+1 ,
                                                    p

where the last inequality follows from Cauchy-Schwarz.
Recall that C is compact and D is the diameter of C:
                                       D вүң sup вҲҘx вҲ’ yвҲҘ .
                                            x,yвҲҲC

Combining with (42), we have:
                                                                      1 Вө
                                                         Вө
                  вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ ykВө вҲҘ = вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ + y Вө вҲ’ yk+1 вүӨ          A +D,             (48)
                                                                      ОІ

which implies that вҲҘyk вҲ’ ykВө вҲҘ are bounded for all k. Similarly, using (40), we deduce:
                                                                 3 Вө
                  вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ xВөk вҲҘ = вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ xВө вҲҘ + xВө вҲ’ xВөk+1 вүӨ      A +D,              (49)
                                                                 ОІ
                                                             PвҲһ        вҲҡ
which implies that xk+1 вҲ’ xВөk is also bounded. Note that when i=1 (Пғi + Оөi ) < +вҲһ, we have
lim Пғk = lim Оөk = 0. Thus, we have (TB.20-fk -UB).
kвҶ’вҲһ        kвҶ’вҲһ

Lemma B.21. Assume that F is L-Lipschitz. For the xk+1 , yk+1 , and О»k+1 iterates of the ACVIвҖ”
Algorithm 3вҖ”we have:
     1                  ОІ
       вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ2 + вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲҘ2
    2ОІ                  2
                      1                 ОІ
                  вүӨ вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»kвҲ’1 вҲҘ2 + вҲҘвҲ’yk + ykвҲ’1 вҲҘ2
                     2ОІ                 2

                     + (Пғk+1 + Пғk ) ОІ вҲҘyk вҲ’ ykвҲ’1 вҲҘ + (2ОІ + L) вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ yk вҲҘ

                                          L                     L
                                   + 2+       вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ +      + 1 вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»kвҲ’1 вҲҘ
                                          ОІ                     ОІ
                        p   вҲҡ       вҲҡ
                     + 2ОІ( Оөk + Оөk+1 ) вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ yk вҲҘ + Оөk + Оөk+1 .
                                                                                (LB.21)

Proof of Lemma B.21. (LB.17-2) gives:
    ЛҶ kвҲ’1 (xk + qk ), xk вҲ’ xвҹ© + вҹЁвҲҮ
   вҹЁвҲҮf                           ЛҶ Оө g(yk ), yk вҲ’ yвҹ©
                                    k

  = вҲ’ вҹЁО»k , xk вҲ’ yk вҲ’ x + yвҹ© + ОІвҹЁвҲ’yk + ykвҲ’1 , xk вҲ’ xвҹ© вҲ’ ОІвҹЁqk , xk вҲ’ xвҹ© вҲ’ ОІвҹЁrk , yk вҲ’ yвҹ© .
                                                                                       (50)

                                                40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Letting (x, y, О») = (xk , yk , О»k ) in (LB.17-2) and (x, y, О») = (xk+1 , yk+1 , О»k+1 ) in (50), and
adding them together, and using (LB.16-3), we have
 ЛҶ k (xk+1 + qk+1 ) вҲ’ вҲҮf
вҹЁвҲҮf                     ЛҶ kвҲ’1 (xk + qk ) , xk+1 вҲ’ xk вҹ© + вҹЁвҲҮ  ЛҶ Оө g (yk+1 ) вҲ’ вҲҮЛҶ Оө g (yk ) , yk+1 вҲ’ yk вҹ©
                                                                k+1                k

   = вҲ’ вҹЁО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k , xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҲ’ xk + yk вҹ© + ОІвҹЁвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲ’ (вҲ’yk + ykвҲ’1 ) , xk+1 вҲ’ xk вҹ©
     вҲ’ ОІвҹЁqk+1 вҲ’ qk , xk+1 вҲ’ xk вҹ© вҲ’ ОІвҹЁrk+1 вҲ’ rk , yk+1 вҲ’ yk вҹ©
        1
   = вҲ’ вҹЁО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k , О»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲ’ (О»k вҲ’ О»kвҲ’1 )вҹ©
        ОІ
     + вҹЁвҲ’yk+1 + yk + (yk вҲ’ ykвҲ’1 ) , О»k+1 вҲ’ О»k + ОІyk+1 вҲ’ (О»k вҲ’ О»kвҲ’1 + ОІyk )вҹ©
     вҲ’ ОІвҹЁqk+1 вҲ’ qk , xk+1 вҲ’ xk вҹ© вҲ’ ОІвҹЁrk+1 вҲ’ rk , yk+1 вҲ’ yk вҹ©                        (51)
      1
          вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»kвҲ’1 вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲ’ (О»k вҲ’ О»kвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2

   =
     2ОІ
        ОІ
           вҲҘвҲ’yk + ykвҲ’1 вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲ’ (вҲ’yk + ykвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2

     +
        2
     + вҹЁвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲ’ (вҲ’yk + ykвҲ’1 ) , О»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲ’ (О»k вҲ’ О»kвҲ’1 )вҹ©
     вҲ’ ОІвҹЁqk+1 вҲ’ qk , xk+1 вҲ’ xk вҹ© вҲ’ ОІвҹЁrk+1 вҲ’ rk , yk+1 вҲ’ yk вҹ©
      1                                  ОІ
          вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»kвҲ’1 вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ2 +      вҲҘвҲ’yk + ykвҲ’1 вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲҘ2

   =
     2ОІ                                     2
         1                                ОІ
     вҲ’     вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲ’ (О»k вҲ’ О»kвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲ’ (вҲ’yk + ykвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2
        2ОІ                                2
     + вҹЁвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲ’ (вҲ’yk + ykвҲ’1 ) , О»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲ’ (О»k вҲ’ О»kвҲ’1 )вҹ©
     вҲ’ ОІвҹЁqk+1 вҲ’ qk , xk+1 вҲ’ xk вҹ© вҲ’ ОІвҹЁrk+1 вҲ’ rk , yk+1 вҲ’ yk вҹ©
      1                                  ОІ
          вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»kвҲ’1 вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ2 +      вҲҘвҲ’yk + ykвҲ’1 вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲҘ2

   вүӨ
     2ОІ                                     2
                                    p     вҲҡ       вҲҡ
     + ОІ(Пғk+1 + Пғk ) вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ xk вҲҘ + 2ОІ( Оөk + Оөk+1 ) вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ yk вҲҘ .                  (52)

Using the monotonicity of fk and fkвҲ’1 , we deduce:
     ЛҶ k (xk+1 + qk+1 ) , xk + qk вҲ’ (xk+1 + qk+1 )вҹ© + fk (xk+1 + qk+1 ) вүӨ fk (xk + qk ) ,
    вҹЁвҲҮf
    ЛҶ kвҲ’1 (xk + qk ) , xk+1 + qk+1 вҲ’ (xk + qk )вҹ© + fkвҲ’1 (xk + qk ) вүӨ fkвҲ’1 (xk+1 + qk+1 ) .
   вҹЁвҲҮf
Adding together the above two inequalites and rearranging the terms, we have:
       ЛҶ k (xk+1 + qk+1 ) вҲ’ вҲҮf
     вҹЁвҲҮf                      ЛҶ kвҲ’1 (xk + qk ) , xk + qk вҲ’ (xk+1 + qk+1 )вҹ©
       + fk (xk+1 + qk+1 ) вҲ’ fkвҲ’1 (xk+1 + qk+1 ) + fkвҲ’1 (xk + qk ) вҲ’ fk (xk + qk ) вүӨ 0 ,
which gives:
    ЛҶ k (xk+1 + qk+1 ) вҲ’ вҲҮf
   вҹЁвҲҮf                   ЛҶ kвҲ’1 (xk + qk ) , xk+1 вҲ’ xk вҹ©
   ЛҶ k (xk+1 + qk+1 ) вҲ’ вҲҮf
 вүҘвҹЁвҲҮf                    ЛҶ kвҲ’1 (xk + qk ) , qk вҲ’ qk+1 вҹ©
   + fk (xk+1 + qk+1 ) вҲ’ fkвҲ’1 (xk+1 + qk+1 ) + fkвҲ’1 (xk + qk ) вҲ’ fk (xk + qk )
   ЛҶ k (xk+1 + qk+1 ) вҲ’ вҲҮf
 =вҹЁвҲҮf                    ЛҶ kвҲ’1 (xk + qk ) , qk вҲ’ qk+1 вҹ©
   + вҹЁF (xk+1 ) вҲ’ F (xk ), xk+1 + qk+1 вҲ’ xk вҲ’ qk вҹ©
 вүҘвҹЁвҲ’О»k вҲ’ ОІ(xk+1 вҲ’ yk ) вҲ’ ОІqk+1 вҲ’ (вҲ’О»kвҲ’1 вҲ’ ОІ(xk вҲ’ ykвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ ОІqk ) , qk вҲ’ qk+1 вҹ©
   + вҹЁF (xk+1 ) вҲ’ F (xk ), xk+1 + qk+1 вҲ’ xk вҲ’ qk вҹ©
 вүҘвҹЁО»kвҲ’1 вҲ’ О»k вҲ’ ОІ(xk+1 вҲ’ yk ) + ОІ(xk вҲ’ ykвҲ’1 ), qk вҲ’ qk+1 вҹ©
   + вҹЁF (xk+1 ) вҲ’ F (xk ), xk+1 + qk+1 вҲ’ xk вҲ’ qk вҹ©
 вүҘ вҲ’ (Пғk+1 + Пғk ) (вҲҘО»kвҲ’1 вҲ’ О»k вҲ’ ОІ(xk+1 вҲ’ yk ) + ОІ(xk вҲ’ ykвҲ’1 )вҲҘ + вҲҘF (xk+1 ) вҲ’ F (xk )вҲҘ) ,
                                                                                      (53)
where the second inequality uses (noisy-вҲҮfЛҶ k ), the penultimate inequality uses the nonnegativity of
вҹЁqk вҲ’ qk+1 , qk вҲ’ qk+1 вҹ©, and the last inequality follows from the monotonicity of F , the Cauchy-
Schwarz inequality and the fact that вҲҘqk вҲҘ вүӨ Пғk .


                                                 41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Note that by (LB.16-3) we have:

         О»kвҲ’1 вҲ’ О»k вҲ’ ОІ(xk+1 вҲ’ yk ) + ОІ(xk вҲ’ ykвҲ’1 )
                               =ОІ(yk вҲ’ xk вҲ’ (xk+1 вҲ’ yk ) + (xk вҲ’ ykвҲ’1 ))
                               =ОІ(2yk вҲ’ xk+1 вҲ’ ykвҲ’1 )
                               =ОІ((yk вҲ’ ykвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ (yk+1 вҲ’ yk ) вҲ’ (xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 ))
                               =ОІ((yk вҲ’ ykвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ (yk+1 вҲ’ yk )) вҲ’ (О»k+1 вҲ’ О»k ) ,                  (54)


                                                      1                       1
xk+1 вҲ’xk = xk+1 вҲ’yk+1 +yk+1 вҲ’yk +yk вҲ’xk =               (О»k+1 вҲ’О»k )+yk+1 вҲ’yk + (О»k вҲ’О»kвҲ’1 ) .
                                                      ОІ                       ОІ
                                                                                      (55)
Using (53),(54), (55) and the L-smoothness property of F , we get:

      ЛҶ k (xk+1 + qk+1 ) вҲ’ вҲҮf
     вҹЁвҲҮf                     ЛҶ kвҲ’1 (xk + qk ) , xk+1 вҲ’ xk вҹ©
    вүҘ вҲ’ (Пғk+1 + Пғk ) (ОІ вҲҘyk вҲ’ ykвҲ’1 вҲҘ + ОІ вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ yk вҲҘ + вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ + L вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ xk вҲҘ)

    вүҘ вҲ’ (Пғk+1 + Пғk ) ОІ вҲҘyk вҲ’ ykвҲ’1 вҲҘ + (ОІ + L) вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ yk вҲҘ

              L                   L
      + 1+        вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ + вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»kвҲ’1 вҲҘ .
              ОІ                   ОІ


Combining the above inequality with (34) and (52), and using (44) and (46), it follows that:

      1                ОІ
        вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ2 + вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲҘ2
     2ОІ                 2
      1                ОІ
    вүӨ вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»kвҲ’1 вҲҘ2 + вҲҘвҲ’yk + ykвҲ’1 вҲҘ2 + ОІ(Пғk+1 + Пғk ) вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ xk вҲҘ
     2ОІ                 2
        p   вҲҡ       вҲҡ
     + 2ОІ( Оөk + Оөk+1 ) вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ yk вҲҘ

                                                                L
     + (Пғk+1 + Пғk ) ОІ вҲҘyk вҲ’ ykвҲ’1 вҲҘ + (ОІ + L) вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ yk вҲҘ + 1 +     вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ
                                                                ОІ
                                    !
                     L
                   + вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»kвҲ’1 вҲҘ
                     ОІ
     + Оөk + Оөk+1
      1              ОІ
    вүӨ вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»kвҲ’1 вҲҘ2 + вҲҘвҲ’yk + ykвҲ’1 вҲҘ2
     2ОІ              2

                                                                   L
       + (Пғk+1 + Пғk ) ОІ вҲҘyk вҲ’ ykвҲ’1 вҲҘ + (2ОІ + L) вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ yk вҲҘ + 2 +                вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ
                                                                   ОІ
                                             !
                         L
                     +     + 1 вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»kвҲ’1 вҲҘ
                         ОІ
         p    вҲҡ       вҲҡ
       + 2ОІ( Оөk + Оөk+1 ) вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ yk вҲҘ + Оөk + Оөk+1 .


                                                42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                 PK+1               вҲҡ
Lemma B.22. If limKвҶ’+вҲһ вҲҡ1K        k=1    k(Пғk +         Оөk ) < +вҲһ, then we have:
                                 вҲһ
                                 X            вҲҡ
                                       Пғk +       Оөk < +вҲһ ,                        (56)
                                 k=1
                                         вҲһ
                                         X
                                               kОөk < +вҲһ .                          (57)
                                         k=1

                                              вҲҡ                 1
                                       ПғK +       Оөk вүӨ O       вҲҡ         .         (58)
                                                                 K
                                PK+1        вҲҡ
Proof. Let TK вүң limKвҶ’+вҲһ вҲҡ1K k=1 k(Пғk + Оөk ). If limKвҶ’+вҲһ TK < +вҲһ, then by CauchyвҖҷs
convergence test, вҲҖp вҲҲ N+ , TK+p вҲ’ TK вҶ’ 0, K вҶ’ +вҲһ.
Note that
                        K+p+1                           K+1
                   1     X         вҲҡ          1     1   X        вҲҡ
TK+p вҲ’ TK = вҲҡ                 k(Пғ + Оөk ) + вҲҡ      вҲ’вҲҡ        k(Пғ + Оөk )
                  K + p k=K+2                K +p    K k=1
                        K+p+1                                      K+1
                   1     X         вҲҡ                  p            X        вҲҡ
             =вҲҡ               k(Пғ + Оөk ) вҲ’ вҲҡ     вҲҡ    вҲҡ        вҲҡ       k(Пғ + Оөk ) ,
                  K + p k=K+2                K +p K     K + p + K k=1
where the second term
                           K+1
              p            X        вҲҡ
   вҲҡ     вҲҡ    вҲҡ        вҲҡ       k(Пғ + Оөk )
     K +p K     K + p + K k=1
                                                                                   (59)
                                               K+1
                                       1 X         вҲҡ
                                     вүӨвҲҡ       k(Пғ + Оөk ) вҶ’ 0, K вҶ’ +вҲһ, вҲҖp вҲҲ N+ .
                                        K k=1

Thus for any p вҲҲ N+ , we have
                                  K+p+1
                             1     X         вҲҡ
                        вҲҡ               k(Пғ + Оөk ) вҶ’ 0, K вҶ’ +вҲһ .                   (60)
                            K + p k=K+2

From which we deduce that for any p вҲҲ N+ ,
       K+p+1                вҲҡ                K+p+1
        X         вҲҡ           K +p K +2 X             вҲҡ
             (Пғ + Оөk ) вүӨ             В·вҲҡ           (Пғ + Оөk )
                             K +2       K + p K+2
        K+2
                             вҲҡ                                                     (61)
                                        K+p+1
                           K +p     1    X         вҲҡ
                         вүӨ      В·вҲҡ            k(Пғ + Оөk ) вҶ’ 0 , вҲҖK вҶ’ +вҲһ .
                           K +2    K +p                 K+2

Again by CauchyвҖҷs convergence test, we have
                                     вҲһ
                                    X       вҲҡ
                                        Пғk + Оөk < +вҲһ ,
                                       k=1
which is (56).
                                PвҲһ
Note that limKвҶ’вҲһ TK = T0 +       k=0 Tk+1 вҲ’ Tk . And
                                              вҲҡ            вҲҡ
                        Tk+1 вҲ’ Tk = O             K(Пғk +       Оөk ) вүҘ O(kОөk ) .

Thus by the comparison test, we have
                                         вҲһ
                                         X
                                               kОөk < +вҲһ ,
                                         k=1


                                                   43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                     вҲҡ                 1
                                            ПғK +         Оөk вүӨ O       вҲҡ         ,
                                                                        K
which gives (57), (58).
                                                                PK+1        вҲҡ
Lemma B.23. Assume that F is monotone on C= , and limKвҶ’+вҲһ вҲҡ1K k=1 k(Пғk + Оөk ) < +вҲһ,
then for the inexact ACVIвҖ”Alg. 1, we have:
       fK (xK+1 + qK+1 ) + g (yK+1 ) вҲ’ fK (xВөK ) вҲ’ g (yK
                                                       Вө
                                                         )
                               Вө
                                                              Вө
                             E                         p     A       вҲҡ
     вүӨ (вҲҘО»Вө вҲҘ + 4A + ОІD) вҲҡ + (3AВө + ОІD)Пғk+1 + 2ОІ                +D     Оөk+1 + Оөk+1 ,
                           ОІ K                                ОІ
                                                                               (LB.23-1)
                                                          EВө
                              and     вҲҘxK+1 вҲ’ yK+1 вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҡ ,                     (LB.23-2)
                                                         ОІ K
where AВө is defined in Theorem B.20.

Proof of Lemma B.23. First, we define: вҲҶВө вүң ОІ1 вҲҘО»0 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ2 + ОІвҲҘy0 вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ2 .
Summing (36) over k = 0, 1, . . . , K, we have:
       K
      X      1                 2     ОІ          2
               вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ + вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲҘ
      i=0
            2ОІ                       2
          1              ОІ
     вүӨ      вҲҘО»0 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ2 + вҲҘвҲ’y0 + y Вө вҲҘ2
         2ОІ              2
            K                                  K
           Xp      вҲҡ       вҲҡ                   X p
         +      2ОІ( Оөk+1 + Оөk ) вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ yk вҲҘ +     2ОІОөk+1 вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ
             i=0                                                  i=0
             K
             X              K
                            X              K
                                           X
         +         Оөk + 2         Оөk+1 +         Пғk+1 (вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ + ОІ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ yk вҲҘ + ОІ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ xВө вҲҘ)
             k=0            k=0            k=0
        1                 ОІ
     вүӨ    вҲҘО»0 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ2 + вҲҘвҲ’y0 + y Вө вҲҘ2
       2ОІ                 2
           K  r                         K r
          X 2          вҲҡ         вҲҡ     X      2 ВөвҲҡ
       +2          AВө ( Оөk+1 + Оөk ) +           A Оөk+1
                 ОІ                            ОІ
          k=0                          k=0
          K          K          K
         X          X           X                4        3
       +     Оөk + 2     Оөk+1 +     Пғk+1 A + ОІ В· AВө + ОІ В· AВө
                                                 ОІ        ОІ
         k=0        k=0        k=0
              r        K+1            K+1        K+1
                 2 ВөXвҲҡ                X          X
     вүӨ вҲҶВө + 5      A         Оөk + 8AВө     Пғi + 3     Оөk ,                                              (62)
                 ОІ
                              k=1                   k=1           k=1

where the penultimate inequality follows from (41), (44), (45) and (46), and AВө is defined in Theo-
rem B.20.
Recall that Lemma B.21 gives:
        1                 ОІ
          вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ2 + вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲҘ2
       2ОІ                  2
        1                 ОІ
    вүӨ вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»kвҲ’1 вҲҘ2 + вҲҘвҲ’yk + ykвҲ’1 вҲҘ2
       2ОІ                  2

                                                                   L
       + (Пғk+1 + Пғk ) ОІ вҲҘyk вҲ’ ykвҲ’1 вҲҘ + (2ОІ + L) вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ yk вҲҘ + 2 +     вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ
                                                                   ОІ
                                             !
                         L
                     +     + 1 вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»kвҲ’1 вҲҘ
                         ОІ
         p    вҲҡ       вҲҡ
       + 2ОІ( Оөk + Оөk+1 ) вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ yk вҲҘ + Оөk + Оөk+1 .

                                                           44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Let:

                                                                  L
  Оҙk+1 вүң(Пғk+1 + Пғk ) ОІ вҲҘyk вҲ’ ykвҲ’1 вҲҘ + (2ОІ + L) вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ yk вҲҘ + 2 +                                   вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ
                                                                  ОІ
                                               !
                                                                                                                    (Оҙ)

                          L
                      +     + 1 вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»kвҲ’1 вҲҘ
                          ОІ
           p    вҲҡ      вҲҡ
         + 2ОІ( Оөk + Оөk+1 ) вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ yk вҲҘ + Оөk + Оөk+1 .

Then the above inequality could be rewritten as:

                          1                ОІ
                            вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ2 + вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲҘ2
                         2ОІ                2
                          1                ОІ
                        вүӨ вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»kвҲ’1 вҲҘ2 + вҲҘвҲ’yk + ykвҲ’1 вҲҘ2 + Оҙk+1 ,
                         2ОІ                2

which gives:

                           1                ОІ
                             вҲҘО»K+1 вҲ’ О»K вҲҘ2 + вҲҘвҲ’yK+1 + yK вҲҘ2
                          2ОІ                2
                                                                                    K
                           1                ОІ                 X
                      вүӨ      вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»kвҲ’1 вҲҘ2 + вҲҘвҲ’yk + ykвҲ’1 вҲҘ2 +   Оҙi+1 .                                             (63)
                          2ОІ                2
                                                                                    i=k

Combining (63) with (62), we obtain:

                     1                  ОІ
               K       вҲҘО»K+1 вҲ’ О»K вҲҘ2 + вҲҘвҲ’yK+1 + yK вҲҘ2
                    2ОІ                  2
                 K
               X 1                                       KвҲ’1  K
                                        ОІ                 X X
             вүӨ           вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ2 + вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲҘ2 +       Оҙj+1
                i=0
                      2ОІ                2                 i=0                               j=k+1
                           r         K+1                  K+1            K+1          K
                               2     X      вҲҡ             X              X            X
                 вүӨвҲҶВө + 5         A              Оөk + 8A         Пғi + 3         Оөk +         kОҙk+1 .                (64)
                               ОІ
                                     k=1                  k=1            k=1          k=1


We define:

                                                              L
                                      ak+1 вүң (Пғk+1 + Пғk ) 1 +                   ,                                   (a)
                                                              ОІ

                                                 r
                                             L     2 вҲҡ       вҲҡ
                     bk+1 вүң (Пғk+1 + Пғk ) 2 +    +    ( Оөk+1 + Оөk ) ,                                                (b)
                                             ОІ     ОІ

                               uвҖІk+1 вүң вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ + ОІ вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ yk вҲҘ .                                             (uвҖІ )

Note that:

                                   L
Оҙk+1 вүӨОөk + Оөk+1 + (Пғk+1 + Пғk ) 1 +     (вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»k+1 вҲҘ + ОІ вҲҘyk вҲ’ ykвҲ’1 вҲҘ)
                                   ОІ |               {z              }
                  |        {z        }               uвҖІ                    k
                                     ak+1
                               r
                           L     2 вҲҡ       вҲҡ
        + (Пғk+1 + Пғk ) 2 +     +   ( Оөk+1 + Оөk ) (вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ + ОІ вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ yk вҲҘ) ,
                           ОІ     ОІ                |            {z              }
         |                    {z                }             uвҖІ                                    k+1
                                        bk+1



                                                          45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


from which we deduce that:
XK          K
            X                                     K
                                                  X
    kОҙk+1 вүӨ    (kak+1 uвҖІk + (k + 1)bk+1 uвҖІk+1 ) +   k(Оөk + Оөk+1 )                                                             (65)
k=1            k=1                                            k=1
               K+1
               X                            K+1
                                            X
           вүӨ         (ak+1 + bk )kuвҖІk + 2         kОөk                                                                         (66)
               k=1                          k=1
               K+1                                                                            r
               X                        L                            L                            2 вҲҡ       вҲҡ
           =           (Пғk+1 + Пғk ) 1 +           + (ПғkвҲ’1 + Пғk ) 2 +                      +         ( ОөkвҲ’1 + Оөk ) kuвҖІk
                                        ОІ                            ОІ                            ОІ
               k=1 |                                        {z                                                   }
                                                                ck
                       K+1
                       X
                 +2           kОөk ,                                                                                           (67)
                        k=1
where we define
                                                          r
                               L                      L     2 вҲҡ       вҲҡ
         ck вүң (Пғk+1 + Пғk ) 1 +     + (ПғkвҲ’1 + Пғk ) 2 +    +    ( ОөkвҲ’1 + Оөk ) .                                                  (c)
                               ОІ                      ОІ     ОІ
Note that by Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, we have:
                   K вҖІ2       K                                  2
                     u    =      (вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ + ОІ вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ yk вҲҘ)
                   4ОІ k+1     4ОІ
                              K
                                  вҲҘО»K+1 вҲ’ О»K вҲҘ2 + ОІ 2 вҲҘвҲ’yK+1 + yK вҲҘ2 .

                          вүӨ
                              2ОІ
Combining this inequality with (64), (67), and letting:
                                  r         K+1              K+1        K+1
                             Вө        2 ВөXвҲҡ                  X          X
                 Bk+1 вүң вҲҶ + 5           A           Оөk + 8AВө     Пғi + 3     Оөk ,                                              (B)
                                      ОІ
                                                  k=1                       k=1               k=1
gives:                                                              !
                                                     K+1                          K+1
                                4ОІ                   X                      4ОІ X
                         uвҖІ2
                          k+1 вүӨ           Bk+1 + 2            kОөk       +        kck uвҖІk .
                                      K                                     K
                                                        k=1                       k=1

Using Lemma B.12, we obtain:
                                                                                                                !2 пЈ¶ 12
              пЈ«                 пЈ«                                                                                         пЈ¶
                     K+1                                       K+1
                                                                              !
           1     2ОІ  X                                         X                                   2ОІ
  uвҖІk+1 вүӨ вҲҡ пЈӯ вҲҡ           kck + пЈӯ4ОІ               Bk+1 + 2              kОөk       +       вҲҡ                          пЈё.
              пЈ¬                                                                                                    пЈё пЈ·
                                                                                                  PK+1
           K      K k=1                                        k=1                            K     k=1   kck
              |                                                 {z                                                        }
                                                               Ek+1
                                                                                                                              (68)
                                                  PK+1                  вҲҡ
Using the assumption that limKвҶ’+вҲһ вҲҡ1K k=1 k(Пғk + Оөk ) < +вҲһ and (56) in Lamma B.22,
we have Bk+1 is bounded; using (57), we know that Ek+1 in the RHS of (68) is bounded.
Let E Вө = limkвҶ’вҲһ Ek , then by (68) we have
                                                               EВө
                              ОІвҲҘxK+1 вҲ’ yK+1 вҲҘ = вҲҘО»K+1 вҲ’ О»K вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҡ ,                                                            (69)
                                                                K
                                                                EВө
                                               вҲҘвҲ’yK+1 + yK вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҡ .                                                            (70)
                                                               ОІ K
On the other hand, (44), (45) and (46) gives:
                                                                    3 Вө
                         вҲҘxk вҲ’ xВөk вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘxk вҲ’ xВө вҲҘ + вҲҘxВө вҲ’ xВөk вҲҘ вүӨ    A +D,
                                                                   ОІ
                                                                   1
                         вҲҘyk вҲ’ ykВө вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘyk вҲ’ y Вө вҲҘ + вҲҘy Вө вҲ’ ykВө вҲҘ вүӨ AВө + D ,
                                                                   ОІ
                           вҲҘО»k+1 вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»Вө вҲҘ + вҲҘО»Вө вҲҘ вүӨ AВө + вҲҘО»Вө вҲҘ .


                                                        46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Plugging these into (TB.20-fk -UB) yields (LB.23-1).



B.2.3       A NALOGOUS INTERMEDIATE RESULTS FOR THE EXTENDED LOG BARRIER
Recall from В§ 3.2 that we defined the following barrier functions,
                                              в„ҳ1 (z, Вө) вүң вҲ’Вө log(вҲ’z)                                            (в„ҳ1 )
                                                                              c
                                                                    z вүӨ вҲ’eвҲ’ Вө

                                                   вҲ’Вө log(вҲ’z) ,
                                    в„ҳ2 (z, Вө) вүң       c                                                         (в„ҳ2 )
                                                   Вөe Вө z + Вө + c , otherwise
where c in (в„ҳ2 ) is a fixed constant. For convenience, we also define herein:
                                                                   m
                                                                   X
                                                     (t)

                                                gМғ         (y) вүң         в„ҳ2 ПҶi (y), Вөt .                       (gМғ (t) )
                                                                   i=1


In the previous subsections, we focused on the standard barrier function used for IP methods (в„ҳ1 ).
In this subsection, we first show that when we use barrier map (в„ҳ2 ) in Alg. 1, where constant c in
                            (t)
(в„ҳ2 ) is properly chosen, yk+1 вҖ”the solution to the minimization problem in line 9 of Alg. 1 is the
same when we use standard barrier map (в„ҳ1 ). Thus, all the above results hold if we substitute g (t)
by gМғ (t) .
Proposition B.24 (Equivalent solutions of the y-subproblems with в„ҳ       1 and with в„ҳ2 ). For  any
                                                                       P  m
fixed t вҲҲ {0, . . . , T вҲ’ 1} and k вҲҲ {0, . . . , K вҲ’ 1}, let П„i вүң miny j=1,jМё=i в„ҳ2 ПҶj (y), Вөt +
                              2
ОІ            (t)        (t)                                                                (t)
2   y вҲ’ xk+1 вҲ’ ОІ1 О»k              , П„ вүҘ вҲ’ min1вүӨiвүӨm {П„i }, and ctk вүң ПҲkt (yk ) + П„ . Further, define:
                                         m                                      2
                                         X                   ОІ       (t)  1 (t)
                          ПҲkt (y) вүң           в„ҳ1 ПҶi (y), Вөt +   y вҲ’ xk+1 вҲ’ О»k     ,                               (ПҲ)
                                          i=1
                                                              2           ОІ

and
                                         m                                      2
                                         X                   ОІ       (t)  1 (t)
                          ПҲМғkt (y) вүң          в„ҳ2 ПҶi (y), Вөt +   y вҲ’ xk+1 вҲ’ О»k     ,                               (ПҲМғ)
                                          i=1
                                                              2           ОІ
where we let c = ctk in (в„ҳ2 ). Then, it holds that:
                                    (t)
                                   yk+1 = argmin ПҲМғkt (y) = argmin ПҲkt (y; ctk ) .                               (71)
                                                            y                       y


Proof of Prop. B.24: Equivalent solutions of the y-subproblems with в„ҳ1 and with в„ҳ2 . When c =
                                                       t
ctk in (в„ҳ2 ), вҲҖy вҲҲ Rn , if вҲғi вҲҲ [m], s.t. ПҶi (y) > вҲ’eвҲ’ck /Вө , then we have
                                                                                    (t)
                                          в„ҳ2 (ПҶi (y), Вөt ) > ctk = ПҲkt (yk ) + П„ .                               (72)
Note that
                                                 в„ҳ2 (x, Вөt ) вүӨ в„ҳ1 (x, Вөt ), вҲҖx ,                                 (73)
thus, we have:
                                                       ПҲМғkt (y вҖІ ) вүӨ ПҲkt (y вҖІ ), вҲҖy вҖІ .                          (74)
      (t)
Let yМғk+1 = argmin ПҲМғkt (y). If П„ вүҘ вҲ’ min1вүӨiвүӨm {П„i }, then (72) and (74) give:
                    y
                                  m                                                              2
                                  X                                   ОІ      (t)  1 (t)
                   ПҲМғkt (y) =            в„ҳ2 (ПҶi (y); ctk ) +            y вҲ’ xk+1 вҲ’ О»k
                                   i=1
                                                                      2           ОІ
                                          (t)                                 (t)          (t)       (t)
                              >ПҲkt (yk ) + П„ + П„i вүҘ ПҲkt (yk ) вүҘ ПҲМғkt (yk ) вүҘ ПҲМғkt (yМғk+1 ) ,                     (75)
                    (t)                                            (t)                                     t
which indicates yМғk+1 , the minimum of ПҲМғkt (yk ), must be in the set S вүң {x|ПҶ(x) вүӨ вҲ’eвҲ’ck /Вө e}.
                                                                (t)           (t)
Note that ПҲМғkt (В·) вүЎ ПҲkt (В·) on S. Therefore, yМғk+1 = yk+1 .


                                                                         47
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The next Proposition shows the smoothness of the objective in line 9 of Alg. 1 when we use the
extended log barrier term (в„ҳ2 ).
Proposition B.25 (Smoothness of (в„ҳ2 )). Suppose for all i вҲҲ [m], we have вҲҘвҲҮПҶi (y)вҲҘ вүӨ
Mi , вҲҖy вҲҲ Rn , and ПҶi is Li -smooth in Rn , then ПҲМғkt (В·) is LМғВөctt -smooth, where LМғВөctt =
                                                                 k                     k
Pm   ct /Вөt              2ctk /Вөt

  i=1  Вө t e k Li + Вөt e          M i   + ОІ .


Proof of Prop. B.25: Smoothness of (в„ҳ2 ). Note that for any x, c вҲҲ R and Вө > 0, we have 0 вүӨ
в„ҳвҖІ2 (x, Вө) вүӨ Вөec/Вө and 0 вүӨ в„ҳвҖІвҖІ2 (x, Вө) вүӨ Вөe2c/Вө . Thus, we have:

    ||вҲҮПҲМғkt (y) вҲ’ вҲҮПҲМғkt (x)||
             = вҲҘв„ҳвҖІ2 (ПҶi (y), Вө)вҲҮПҶi (y) вҲ’ в„ҳвҖІ2 (ПҶi (x), Вө)вҲҮПҶi (x)вҲҘ
             = вҲҘв„ҳвҖІ2 (ПҶi (y), Вө)(вҲҮПҶi (y) вҲ’ вҲҮПҶi (x)) + (в„ҳвҖІ2 (ПҶi (y), Вө) вҲ’ в„ҳвҖІ2 (ПҶi (x), Вө))вҲҮПҶi (x)вҲҘ
             вүӨВөec/Вө вҲҘвҲҮПҶi (y) вҲ’ вҲҮПҶi (x)вҲҘ + Mi |в„ҳвҖІ2 (ПҶi (y), Вө) вҲ’ в„ҳвҖІ2 (ПҶi (x), Вө)|

             вүӨ Вөec/Вө Li + Вөe2c/Вө Mi вҲҘy вҲ’ xвҲҘ , вҲҖx, y вҲҲ Rn ,

from which we can easily see that the proposition is true.

Remark B.26. We note the following remarks regarding the above result.

     (i) When t is large, П„i defined in Prop. B.24 > 0 or is very close to 0. Therefore, in order to
         let П„ satisfy П„ вүҘ вҲ’ min1вүӨiвүӨm {П„i }, it suffices to set it to a small positive number.
               (t)
    (ii) ПҲkt (yk ) is bounded and thus ctk is bounded. Suppose ctk is upper bounded by cвӢҶ , i.e.,
         ctk вүӨ cвӢҶ , вҲҖk, t. Then вҲҖt вҲҲ {0, . . . , T вҲ’ 1}, ПҲМғkt (В·) is LМғВөcвӢҶt -smooth, and ОІ-strongly convex
         and the subproblem in line 9 could be solved by commonly used first-order methods such
         as gradient descent at a linear rate.
    (iii) Alternatively, instead of updating ctk for each k, t as it is suggested in line 9 of Alg. 1, for
          any t, we could fix ctk to be ПҲkt (y вҖІ ) + П„ , where y вҖІ is an arbitrary interior point of CвүӨ ; see
          Appendix C for detailed implementation.

B.2.4    P ROVING T HEOREM 3.2
We are now ready to prove Theorem 3.2. Here we give a nonasymptotic convergence rate of Algo-
rithm 1.
Theorem B.27 (Restatement of Theorem 3.2). Given an continuous operator F : X вҶ’ Rn , assume
that:

     (i) F is monotone on C= , as per Def. 2.1;
    (ii) F is L-Lipschitz on X ;
    (iii) F is either strictly monotone on C or one of ПҶi is strictly convex.
                                 (t)   (t)   (t)
For any fixed K вҲҲ N+ , let (xK , yK , О»K ) denote the last iterate of Algorithm 1. Let в„ҳ be в„ҳ1 or
в„ҳ2 with c = ctk (see Prop. B.24 for the definition of ctk ). Run with sufficiently small ВөвҲ’1 . Further,
suppose:
                                          K+1
                                       1 X                вҲҡ
                               lim вҲҡ            k(Пғk + Оөk ) < +вҲһ .
                             KвҶ’+вҲһ      K k=1

We define:
                                r
                                    2 вҲҡ         вҲҡ    вҲҡ
                     О»i вүң 4ОІ            Оөi+1 + 3 Оөi + ОөiвҲ’1 + (2Пғi + 3Пғi+1 ) ,
                                    ОІ

                                                    48
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             вӢҶ                 2                      2
                                                                  p вҲҡ
                 вүң 2 вҲҘО»0 вҲ’ О»вӢҶ вҲҘ + 2ОІ 2 вҲҘy0 вҲ’ y вӢҶ вҲҘ + 4ОІ            2ОІ Оө1 + ОІПғ1 вҲҘy0 вҲ’ y вӢҶ вҲҘ

            Sk+1
                                                k+1
                                                X
                   + 12ОІПғ1 вҲҘО»0 вҲ’ О»вӢҶ вҲҘ + 12ОІ           Оөi ,
                                                i=1


                                 k+1
                                          пЈ«
                                                                  k+1
                                                                           !2 пЈ¶1/2
                               1 X                            1X
                       AвӢҶk+1 вүң              вӢҶ
                                     О»i + пЈӯSk+1 +                   О»i       пЈё        ,
                               2 i=1                          2 i=1

and

                                    A вүң lim AвӢҶk < +вҲһ .
                                          kвҶ’+вҲһ

We define
                                                        r
                             L                      L     2 вҲҡ       вҲҡ
       ck вүң (Пғk+1 + Пғk ) 1 +     + (ПғkвҲ’1 + Пғk ) 2 +    +    ( ОөkвҲ’1 + Оөk ) ,
                             ОІ                      ОІ     ОІ

                                   1
                              вҲҶвүң     вҲҘО»0 вҲ’ О»вӢҶ вҲҘ2 + ОІвҲҘy0 вҲ’ y вӢҶ вҲҘ2 ,
                                   ОІ
                                   r      K+1                  K+1              K+1
                      вӢҶ                2 XвҲҡ         X        X
                     Bk+1 вүңвҲҶ+5           A  Оөk + 8A   Пғi + 3   Оөk ,
                                       ОІ
                                          k=1                     k=1           k=1


                 K+1
                           пЈ«
                                                      K+1
                                                                   !                              !2 пЈ¶ 12
        вӢҶ    2ОІ  X
                                         вӢҶ
                                                      X                              2ОІ
       Ek+1 вүңвҲҡ       kck + пЈӯ4ОІ          Bk+1 +2              kОөk       +    вҲҡ       PK+1             пЈё ,
               K k=1                                  k=1                       K     k=1   kck

and
                                         E = lim EkвӢҶ .
                                                kвҶ’вҲһ

Then, we have:
                                                         E
            G(xK+1 , C) вүӨ (2 вҲҘО»вӢҶ вҲҘ + 5A + ОІD + 1 + M ) вҲҡ + (4A + ОІD + M )Пғk+1
                                                       ОІ K

                             p       2A      вҲҡ
                          + 2ОІ          +D     Оөk+1 + Оөk+1
                                      ОІ

                               1
                        =O вҲҡ          .
                                K
and
                                                              2E
                                   вҲҘxK+1 вҲ’ yK+1 вҲҘ вүӨ           вҲҡ ,
                                                             ОІ K
where вҲҶ вүң ОІ1 вҲҘО»0 вҲ’ О»вӢҶ вҲҘ2 + ОІвҲҘy0 вҲ’ y вӢҶ вҲҘ2 and D вүң sup вҲҘx вҲ’ yвҲҘ, and M вүң sup вҲҘF (x)вҲҘ.
                                                          x,yвҲҲC                             xвҲҲC


Proof of Theorem B.27. Note that
                             (fk -Pr-2) вҮ” minвҹЁF (xk+1 ), xвҹ©
                                          xвҲҲC
                                       вҮ” maxвҹЁF (xk+1 ), xk+1 вҲ’ xвҹ©
                                          xвҲҲC
                                       вҮ” G(xk+1 , C) ,


                                                49
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


from which we deduce
                          G(xk+1 , C) = вҹЁF (xk+1 ), xk+1 вҲ’ xвӢҶk вҹ© , вҲҖk .                    (76)

For any K вҲҲ N, by (Chu, 1998) we know that:
                         xВөK вҶ’ xвӢҶK ,
                                        Вө
                          g(yK+1 ) вҲ’ g(yK ) вҶ’ 0,
                                1
                          вҲҶВө вҶ’ вҲҘО»0 вҲ’ О»вӢҶ вҲҘ2 + ОІвҲҘy0 вҲ’ y вӢҶ вҲҘ2 = вҲҶ ,                           (77)
                                ОІ
                          AВө вҶ’ A ,                                                         (78)
                          EВө вҶ’ E .                                                         (79)

Thus, there exists ВөвҲ’1 > 0, s.t.вҲҖ0 < Вө < ВөвҲ’1 ,
                                                      EВө
                                        вҲҘxВөK вҲ’ xвӢҶK вҲҘ вүӨвҲҡ ,
                                                     ОІ K
                                               Вө      EВө
                                |g(yK+1 ) вҲ’ g(yK )| вүӨ вҲҡ .
                                                     ОІ K
Combining with Lemma B.23, we have that:
        вҹЁF (xK+1 ), xK+1 вҲ’ xВөK вҹ©
                         =вҹЁF (xK+1 ), xK+1 + qK+1 вҲ’ xВөK вҹ© вҲ’ вҹЁF (xK+1 ), qK+1 вҹ©
                         =fK (xK+1 + qK+1 ) вҲ’ fK (xВөK ) вҲ’ вҹЁF (xK+1 ), qK+1 вҹ©
                                                EВө
                         вүӨ (вҲҘО»Вө вҲҘ + 4AВө + ОІD) вҲҡ + (3AВө + ОІD)Пғk+1
                                               ОІ K
                                     Вө
                             p       A       вҲҡ
                           + 2ОІ         +D      Оөk+1 + Оөk+1
                                     ОІ
                                                       Вө
                           + вҲҘqK+1 вҲҘ вҲҘF (xK+1 )вҲҘ + g (yK ) вҲ’ g (yK+1 )
                                                      Вө
                                                    E
                         вүӨ (вҲҘО»Вө вҲҘ + 4AВө + ОІD + 1) вҲҡ + (3AВө + ОІD + M )Пғk+1
                                                   ОІ K
                                     Вө
                             p       A       вҲҡ
                           + 2ОІ         +D      Оөk+1 + Оөk+1 .
                                     ОІ
Using the above inequality, we have
        G(xK+1 , C) =вҹЁF (xK+1 ), xK+1 вҲ’ xвӢҶK вҹ©
                     =вҹЁF (xK+1 ), xK+1 вҲ’ xВөK вҹ© + вҹЁF (xK+1 ), xВөK вҲ’ xвӢҶK вҹ©
                     вүӨвҹЁF (xK+1 ), xK+1 вҲ’ xВөK вҹ© + вҲҘF (xK+1 )вҲҘ вҲҘxВөK вҲ’ xвӢҶK вҲҘ
                                                      EВө
                     вүӨ (вҲҘО»Вө вҲҘ + 4AВө + ОІD + 1 + M ) вҲҡ + (3AВө + ОІD + M )Пғk+1
                                                     ОІ K
                                 Вө
                         p       A       вҲҡ
                       + 2ОІ         +D      Оөk+1 + Оөk+1 .
                                 ОІ
Moreover, by (77), we can choose small enough ВөвҲ’1 so that
                                                         E
         G(xK+1 , C) вүӨ (2 вҲҘО»вӢҶ вҲҘ + 5A + ОІD + 1 + M ) вҲҡ + (4A + ОІD + M )Пғk+1                  (80)
                                                       ОІ K

                           p      2A        вҲҡ
                        + 2ОІ         +D       Оөk+1 + Оөk+1 .                                 (81)
                                   ОІ
and
                                                        2E
                                  вҲҘxK+1 вҲ’ yK+1 вҲҘ вүӨ вҲҡ ,                                      (82)
                                                      ОІ K
where (82) uses (LB.23-2) in Lemma B.23. By (64), (80), (82) and Prop. B.24, we draw the conclu-
sion.


                                                 50
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.3   D ISCUSSION ON T HEOREMS 3.1 AND 3.2 AND P RACTICAL I MPLICATIONS

We adopt the same way of stating our theorems 3.1 and 3.2 as in the main part of (Yang et al., 2023)
(see remark 2 therein) for clarity, easier comparison with one-loop algorithms, and because these
are without loss of generality provided that K, T are selected appropriately, as Yang et al. (2023)
showed. In particular, we require knowing a sufficiently вҲҡ small ВөвҲ’1 which depends on the selected
K. Note that we cannot prove a faster rate than O(1/ K)вҲҡfor the inner loop for our algorithm; so
even if we further adjust ВөвҲ’1 , the rate would still be O(1/ K). Given the statements in our paper,
the same convergence rate of O( вҲҡ1K ) is implied for cases when we do not know a sufficiently small
ВөвҲ’1 by the argument in App. B.4 of (Yang et al., 2023). For completeness, herein, we focus on
clarifying why this is the case.
Remark B.28. Notice that only when we require a sufficiently small ВөвҲ’1 (as we do in our statements)
can we use any T, K вҲҲ N+ . For versions of the theorems that do not require a sufficiently small
ВөвҲ’1 , K, T must be appropriately selected.
We obtain explicitly how ВөвҲ’1 depends on the given K by re-writing an equivalent re-formulation of
App. B.4 in (Yang et al., 2023, Remark 5). In particular, for any fixed ВөвҲ’1 > 0, K вҲҲ N+ and any
                                                    (T )             вҲҡ
T вүҘ O(log K), for Algorithms 1 and 3 we have G(xK , C) = O(1/ K).
As an example, since ВөвҲ’1 could be an arbitrary positive number, without loss of generality, we could
                                                                              (T )            вҲҡ
let ВөвҲ’1 = 1; then the above implies that when ВөT = O(Оҙ log K ), we have G(xK , C) = O(1/ K).
This implies that for our Theorems 3.1 and 3.2, setting ВөвҲ’1 = O(Оҙ log K ) is enough.
Interpretation. Here, we provide an intuitive explanation for the above statement. For any T вҲҲ N ,
the inner loop of ACVI is solving (KKT-2), where Вө = ВөT . Note that (KKT-2) is a modified
problem of the original VI problem, approaching the original problem when Вө вҶ’ 0. Thus, when
ВөвҲ’1 is large, larger T is needed in order to let (KKT-2) be a good enough approximation of the
original problem.
Practical implications. Suppose you need Пө-accurate solution. Then K is selected to satisfy K вүҘ
 1
Пө2 , and then T вүҘ log(K) = 2 log(1/Пө). Notice that the overall complexity to reach Пө precision is
still O(1/Пө2 ) up to a log factor.

B.4   A LGORITHMS FOR SOLVING THE SUBPROBLEMS IN A LG . 1

As in (Schmidt et al., 2011), Theorem 3.2 provides sufficient conditions on the errors so that the
order of the rate is maintained. In other words, one can think of running a single step of a gradient-
based method for the sub-problems. Thus, the inner loop has a complexity of the order of one (or
a constant number of) gradient computations. Below, we discuss the algorithms that satisfy the
assumptions of Theorem 3.2 so as the shown convergence rate holds.
                                                                 (t)          (t)
Choosing the Ax method. Let G(x) вүң x + ОІ1 Pc F (x) вҲ’ Pc yk + ОІ1 Pc О»k вҲ’ dc , then from the
proof of Thm. 1 in Yang et al. (2023) we know that G is strongly monotone on C= . Moreover, when
F is L-Lipschitz continuous, G is also Lipschitz continuous. Many common VI methods have a
linear rate on the x subproblem, thus satisfying the condition we give (Tseng, 1995; Gidel et al.,
2019a; Mokhtari et al., 2019). Hence, for Ax , we could use the first-order methods for VIs listed
in App. A.5 to find the unique solution of the VI problem defined by the tuple (C= , G), at a linear
convergence rate. To solve a VI defined by (C= , G), we need to compute the projection О C= , which
is straightforward by noticing that О C= (x) = Pc x + dc , вҲҖx.
Choosing the Ay method. If using в„ҳ to be в„ҳ1 , the objective of the y subproblem is strongly
convex but non-smooth. Thus, to our knowledge, there is no known method to achieve a linear rate
for general constraints without additional assumptions. However, one could satisfy the condition
we give by using methods for Ay to exploit the constraint structure further. For example, if the
constraints are linear, it is straightforward to derive the update rule for the y subproblem, which
satisfies the conditions of the theorem.
On the other hand, as discussed in Remark B.26, when choosing в„ҳ to be в„ҳ2 , the objective of the
subproblem in line 9 of Alg. 1 is smooth and strongly convex and thus could be solved by commonly
used unconstrained first-order solvers such as gradient descent at a linear rate.


                                                 51
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Discussion. The above facts allude to the advantages of ACVI, as the sub-problems are вҖңeasierвҖқ than
the original problem. To summarize, (i) if F is monotone, the x subproblem is strongly monotone;
and (ii) the y subproblem is regular minimization which is significantly less challenging to solve in
practice, and also it is strongly convex.


                                                 52
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.5     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.1: C ONVERGENCE OF P-ACVI

B.5.1    S ETTING AND NOTATIONS
We define the following maps from Rn to Rn :


                              f (x) вүң F (xвӢҶ )вҠә x + 1(Cx = d) ,                                         (fk )
                             fk (x) вүң F (xk+1 ) x + 1(Cx = d) ,
                                                  вҠә
                                                                          and                           (f )
                               g(y) вүң 1(ПҶ(y) вүӨ 0) ,                                                     (g)
where xвӢҶ is a solution of (KKT). Let y вӢҶ = xвӢҶ . Then (xвӢҶ , y вӢҶ ) is an optimal solution of (f -Pr). Let
us denote with (xвӢҶk , ykвӢҶ , О»вӢҶk ) the KKT point of (fk -Pr). Note that in this case, the problem (fk -Pr) is
equivalent to (fk -Pr-2).

B.5.2    I NTERMEDIATE RESULTS
In P-ACVI-Algorithm 2, by the definition of yk+1 (line 7 of Algorithm 2), ykвӢҶ and y вӢҶ we immedi-
ately know that
                               g(yk+1 ) = g(ykвӢҶ ) = g(y вӢҶ ) = 0.                            (83)

The intermediate results for the proofs of Theorem 3.1 still hold in this case only with a little mod-
ification, and the proofs of them are very close to the previous ones. To avoid redundancy, we omit
these proofs.
Proposition B.29 (Relation between fk and f ). If F is monotone, then вҲҖk вҲҲ N, we have that:
                               fk (xk+1 ) вҲ’ fk (xвӢҶ ) вүҘ f (xk+1 ) вҲ’ f (xвӢҶ ).


Lemma B.30. For all x and y, we have
                         f (x) + g(y) вҲ’ f (xвӢҶ ) вҲ’ g(y вӢҶ ) + вҹЁО»вӢҶ , x вҲ’ yвҹ© вүҘ 0,                   (LB.30-f )
and:
                        fk (x) + g(y) вҲ’ fk (xвӢҶk ) вҲ’ g(ykвӢҶ ) + вҹЁО»вӢҶk , x вҲ’ yвҹ© вүҘ 0 .              (LB.30-fk )


The following lemma lists some simple but useful facts that we will use in the following proofs.
Lemma B.31. For the problems (f -Pr), (fk -Pr) and Algorithm 2, we have
                                  0 вҲҲ вҲӮfk (xk+1 ) + О»k + ОІ(xk+1 вҲ’ yk )                           (LB.31-1)
                                  0 вҲҲ вҲӮg(yk+1 ) вҲ’ О»k вҲ’ ОІ(xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 ),                          (LB.31-2)
                          О»k+1 вҲ’ О»k = ОІ(xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 ),                                           (LB.31-3)
                               вҲ’О»вӢҶ вҲҲ вҲӮf (xвӢҶ ),                                                   (LB.31-4)
                               вҲ’О»вӢҶk вҲҲ вҲӮfk (xвӢҶk ),                                                (LB.31-5)
                                 О»вӢҶ вҲҲ вҲӮg(y вӢҶ ),                                                  (LB.31-6)
                                 О»вӢҶk вҲҲ вҲӮg(ykвӢҶ ),                                                 (LB.31-7)
                                 xвӢҶ = y вӢҶ ,                                                      (LB.31-8)
                                 xвӢҶk = ykвӢҶ ,                                                     (LB.31-9)

                                  ЛҶ k (xk+1 ) and вҲҮg(y
Like in App.B.1.2, we also define вҲҮf              ЛҶ              ЛҶ          ЛҶ
                                                       k+1 ) by (вҲҮfk ) and (вҲҮg), resp.

Then, from (LB.31-1) and (LB.31-2) it follows that:
                       ЛҶ k (xk+1 ) вҲҲ вҲӮfk (xk+1 ) and вҲҮg(y
                       вҲҮf                            ЛҶ   k+1 ) вҲҲ вҲӮg(yk+1 ) .                           (84)


                                                      53
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma B.32. For the iterates xk+1 , yk+1 , and О»k+1 of the P-ACVIвҖ”Algorithm 2вҖ”we have:
                           ЛҶ
                          вҹЁвҲҮg(y k+1 ), yk+1 вҲ’ yвҹ© = вҲ’вҹЁО»k+1 , y вҲ’ yk+1 вҹ©,                         (85)
and
    ЛҶ k (xk+1 ), xk+1 вҲ’ xвҹ© + вҹЁвҲҮg(y
   вҹЁвҲҮf                        ЛҶ    k+1 ), yk+1 вҲ’ yвҹ© = вҲ’ вҹЁО»k+1 , xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҲ’ x + yвҹ©
                                                                                                (86)
                                                      + ОІвҹЁвҲ’yk+1 + yk , xk+1 вҲ’ xвҹ©.

Lemma B.33. For the xk+1 , yk+1 , and О»k+1 iterates of the P-ACVIвҖ”Algorithm 2вҖ”we have:
             ЛҶ k (xk+1 ), xk+1 вҲ’ xвӢҶ вҹ© + вҹЁвҲҮg(y
            вҹЁвҲҮf                          ЛҶ                  вӢҶ      вӢҶ
                                             k+1 ), yk+1 вҲ’ y вҹ© + вҹЁО» , xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҹ©
                1                 1                  ОІ               ОІ
             вүӨ     вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»вӢҶ вҲҘ2 вҲ’    вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»вӢҶ вҲҘ2 + вҲҘy вӢҶ вҲ’ yk вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘy вӢҶ вҲ’ yk+1 вҲҘ2
               2ОІ                2ОІ                   2              2
                   1                  ОІ
               вҲ’     вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘyk вҲ’ yk+1 вҲҘ2 ,
                  2ОІ                  2
and
             ЛҶ k (xk+1 ), xk+1 вҲ’ xвӢҶk вҹ© + вҹЁвҲҮg(y
            вҹЁвҲҮf                           ЛҶ                  вӢҶ       вӢҶ
                                              k+1 ), yk+1 вҲ’ yk вҹ© + вҹЁО»k , xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҹ©
                1                  1                   ОІ                ОІ
             вүӨ     вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»вӢҶk вҲҘ2 вҲ’    вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»вӢҶk вҲҘ2 + вҲҘykвӢҶ вҲ’ yk вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘykвӢҶ вҲ’ yk+1 вҲҘ2
               2ОІ                 2ОІ                   2                2
                   1              2    ОІ             2
               вҲ’     вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ вҲ’ вҲҘyk вҲ’ yk+1 вҲҘ .
                  2ОІ                   2



Lemma B.34. For the xk+1 , yk+1 , and О»k+1 iterates of the P-ACVIвҖ”Algorithm 2вҖ”we have:
 f (xk+1 ) + g(yk+1 ) вҲ’ f (xвӢҶ ) вҲ’ g(y вӢҶ ) + вҹЁО»вӢҶ , xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҹ©
                                вүӨ fk (xk+1 ) + g(yk+1 ) вҲ’ fk (xвӢҶ ) вҲ’ g(y вӢҶ ) + вҹЁО»вӢҶ , xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҹ©
                                   1                   1
                                вүӨ     вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»вӢҶ вҲҘ2 вҲ’      вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»вӢҶ вҲҘ2
                                  2ОІ                  2ОІ
                                     ОІ                   ОІ
                                  + вҲҘвҲ’yk + y вӢҶ вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + y вӢҶ вҲҘ2
                                     2                   2
                                      1                    ОІ
                                  вҲ’      вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲҘ2                     (LB.34)
                                     2ОІ                    2


The following theorem upper bounds the analogous quantity but for fk (В·) (instead of f ), and further
asserts that the difference between the xk+1 and yk+1 iterates of P-ACVI (Algorithm 2) tends to 0
asymptotically.
Theorem B.35 (Asymptotic convergence of (xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 ) of P-ACVI). For the xk+1 , yk+1 , and
О»k+1 iterates of the P-ACVIвҖ”Algorithm 2вҖ”we have:
        fk (xk+1 ) вҲ’ fk (xвӢҶk ) вүӨ вҲҘО»k+1 вҲҘ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҲҘ + ОІ вҲҘyk+1 вҲ’ yk вҲҘ вҲҘxk+1 вҲ’ xвӢҶk вҲҘ вҶ’ 0 ,
                                                                                  (TB.35-fk -UB)
and
                               xk+1 вҲ’ yk+1 вҶ’ 0 ,         as k вҶ’ вҲһ .


Lemma B.36. For the xk+1 , yk+1 , and О»k+1 iterates of the P-ACVIвҖ”Algorithm 2вҖ”we have:
       1                ОІ                  1                ОІ
         вҲҘО»k+1 вҲ’ О»k вҲҘ2 + вҲҘвҲ’yk+1 + yk вҲҘ2 вүӨ    вҲҘО»k вҲ’ О»kвҲ’1 вҲҘ2 + вҲҘвҲ’yk + ykвҲ’1 вҲҘ2 .               (LB.36)
      2ОІ                2                 2ОІ                2


                                                 54
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma B.37. If F is monotone on C= , then for Algorithm 2, we have:
                                          вҲҡ
                                                                     r
                      вӢҶ       вҲҶ                   1     вӢҶ
                                                              p         вҲҶ
   fK (xK+1 ) вҲ’ fK (xK ) вүӨ          + 2 вҲҶ + вҲҡ вҲҘО» вҲҘ + ОІD                     ,           (LB.37-1)
                            K +1                   ОІ                   K +1
                                                      s
                                                             вҲҶ
                        and     вҲҘxK+1 вҲ’ yK+1 вҲҘ вүӨ                   ,                    (LB.37-2)
                                                        ОІ (K + 1)
where вҲҶ вүң ОІ1 вҲҘО»0 вҲ’ О»вӢҶ вҲҘ2 + ОІвҲҘy0 вҲ’ y вӢҶ вҲҘ2 .

B.5.3   P ROVING T HEOREM . 4.1
We are now ready to prove Theorem 4.1. Here we give a nonasymptotic convergence rate of P-
ACVI-Algorithm 2.
Theorem B.38 (Restatement of Theorem 4.1). Given an continuous operator F : X вҶ’ Rn , assume
F is monotone on C= , as per Def. 2.1. Let (xK , yK , О»K ) denote the last iterate of Algorithm 3.
Then вҲҖK вҲҲ N+ , we have
                                    вҲҡ
                                                               r
                           вҲҶ                1     вӢҶ
                                                        p          вҲҶ
              G(xK , C) вүӨ     + 2 вҲҶ + вҲҡ вҲҘО» вҲҘ + ОІD                                      (na-lf-Rate)
                           K                 ОІ                     K
and                                                        s
                                        K         K             вҲҶ
                                      x вҲ’y             вүӨ          ,                           (87)
                                                               ОІK
where вҲҶ вүң ОІ1 вҲҘО»0 вҲ’ О»вӢҶ вҲҘ2 + ОІвҲҘy0 вҲ’ y вӢҶ вҲҘ2 and D вүң sup вҲҘx вҲ’ yвҲҘ, and M вүң sup вҲҘF (x)вҲҘ.
                                                           x,yвҲҲC               xвҲҲC


Proof of Theorem 4.1. Note that
                             (fk -Pr-2) вҮ” minвҹЁF (xk+1 ), xвҹ©
                                            xвҲҲC
                                       вҮ” maxвҹЁF (xk+1 ), xk+1 вҲ’ xвҹ©
                                            xвҲҲC
                                       вҮ” G(xk+1 , C) ,
from which we deduce
             G(xk+1 , C) = вҹЁF (xk+1 ), xk+1 вҲ’ xвӢҶk вҹ© = fK (xK+1 ) вҲ’ fK (xвӢҶK ) , вҲҖk .           (88)

Combining with Lemma B.37, we obtain (na-lf-Rate) and (87).


                                                  55
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
In this section, we provide the details on the implementation of the results presented in В§ 5 in the
main part, as well as those of the additional results presented in App. D. In addition, we provide the
source code through the following link: https://github.com/Chavdarova/I-ACVI.

C.1   I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS FOR THE 2D-BG GAME

Recall that we defined the 2D bilinear game as:
                    min max x1 x2        where в–і ={x вҲҲ R| вҲ’ 0.4 вүӨ x вүӨ 2.4}.                 (2D-BG)
                    x1 вҲҲв–і x2 вҲҲв–і


To avoid confusion in the notation, in the remainder of this section, we rename the players in
(2D-BG) as p1 and p2 :

                      min max p1 p2     where в–і ={p вҲҲ R| вҲ’ 0.4 вүӨ p вүӨ 2.4}
                     p1 вҲҲв–і p2 вҲҲв–і

In the following, we list the I-ACVI and P-ACVI implementations.

I-ACVI. For I-ACVI (Algorithm 1), we use the following Python code and the PyTorch li-
brary (Paszke et al., 2017). We set ОІ = 0.5, Вө = 3, K = 20, в„“ = 20, Оҙ = 0.5 and use a
learning rate of 0.1. The following implementation uses the standard log-barrier (в„ҳ1 ).

Listing 1: Implementation of the I-ACVI algorithm (using (в„ҳ1 )) on the 2D constrained bilinear
game.
 1 import torch
 2 lr = 0.1     # learning rate
 3 beta = 0.5 # ACVI beta parameter
 4 mu = 3       # ACVI mu parameter
 5 K = 20       # ACVI K parameter
 6 l = 20       # I-ACVI l parameter
 7 delta = 0.5 # ACVI delta parameter: exponential decay of mu
 8
 9 p1_x = torch.nn.Parameter(torch.tensor(2.0))
10 p1_y = torch.nn.Parameter(torch.tensor(2.0))
11 p1_l = torch.nn.Parameter(torch.tensor(0.0))
12
13 p2_x = torch.nn.Parameter(torch.tensor(2.0))
14 p2_y = torch.nn.Parameter(torch.tensor(2.0))
15 p2_l = torch.nn.Parameter(torch.tensor(0.0))
16
17 while mu > 0.0001:
18
19   for itr in range(K):
20
21     for _ in range(l): # solve x problem (line 8 of algorithm)
22        loss_p1 = 1/beta * p1_x * p2_x + 0.5 * (p1_x - p1_y + p1_l/beta).pow(2)
23        p1_x.grad = None
24        loss_p1.backward()
25        with torch.no_grad():
26          p1_x -= lr * p1_x.grad
27
28        loss_p2 = -1/beta * p1_x * p2_x + 0.5 * (p2_x - p2_y + p2_l/beta).pow(2)
29        p2_x.grad = None
30        loss_p2.backward()
31        with torch.no_grad():
32          p2_x -= lr * p2_x.grad
33
34     for _ in range(l): # solve y problem (line 9 of algorithm)
35        phi_1 = p1_y + 0.4 # -0.4 < p1_y # define all the inequality constraints
36        phi_2 = 2.4 - p1_y # p1_y < 2.4
37        phi_3 = p2_y + 0.4 # -0.4 < p2_y
38        phi_4 = 2.4 - p2_y # p1_y < 2.4
39        log_term = -mu * (phi_1.log() + phi_2.log() + phi_3.log() + phi_4.log())
40        loss = log_term + beta/2 * (p1_y - p1_x - p1_l/beta).pow(2)
41                         + beta/2 * (p2_y - p2_x - p2_l/beta).pow(2)
42        p1_y.grad, p2_y.grad = None, None
43        loss.backward()
44        with torch.no_grad():



                                                  56
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


45         p1_y -= lr * p1_y.grad
46         p2_y -= lr * p2_y.grad
47
48     # update the lambdas (line 10 of algorithm)
49     with torch.no_grad():
50       p1_l += beta * (p1_x - p1_y)
51       p2_l += beta * (p2_x - p2_y)
52
53   mu *= delta # decay mu



For completeness, we provide the source code below when using the (в„ҳ2 ) barrier map instead of
(в„ҳ1 ).

Listing 2: Implementation of the I-ACVI algorithm (using (в„ҳ2 )) on the 2D constrained bilinear
game.
 1 import torch
 2 lr = 0.1     # learning rate
 3 beta = 0.5 # ACVI beta parameter
 4 mu = 3       # ACVI mu parameter
 5 K = 20       # ACVI K parameter
 6 l = 20       # I-ACVI l parameter
 7 delta = 0.5 # ACVI delta parameter: exponential decay of mu
 8 c = torch.tensor([1.0]) # c parameter of the extended barrier
 9
10 p1_x = torch.nn.Parameter(torch.tensor(2.0))
11 p1_y = torch.nn.Parameter(torch.tensor(2.0))
12 p1_l = torch.nn.Parameter(torch.tensor(0.0))
13
14 p2_x = torch.nn.Parameter(torch.tensor(2.0))
15 p2_y = torch.nn.Parameter(torch.tensor(2.0))
16 p2_l = torch.nn.Parameter(torch.tensor(0.0))
17
18 while mu > 0.0001:
19
20   for itr in range(K):
21
22     for _ in range(l): # solve x problem (line 8 of algorithm)
23        loss_p1 = 1/beta * p1_x * p2_x + 0.5 * (p1_x - p1_y + p1_l/beta).pow(2)
24        p1_x.grad = None
25        loss_p1.backward()
26        with torch.no_grad():
27          p1_x -= lr * p1_x.grad
28
29        loss_p2 = -1/beta * p1_x * p2_x + 0.5 * (p2_x - p2_y + p2_l/beta).pow(2)
30        p2_x.grad = None
31        loss_p2.backward()
32        with torch.no_grad():
33          p2_x -= lr * p2_x.grad
34
35     for _ in range(l): # solve y problem (line 9 of algorithm)
36        phi_1 = p1_y + 0.4 # -0.4 < p1_y # define all the inequality constraints
37        phi_2 = 2.4 - p1_y # p1_y < 2.4
38        phi_3 = p2_y + 0.4 # -0.4 < p2_y
39        phi_4 = 2.4 - p2_y # p1_y < 2.4
40        log_terms = [phi_1, phi_2, phi_3, phi_4]
41        clip_condition = [-phi <= -torch.exp(-c/mu) for phi in log_terms]
42        new_log_terms = [-mu*torch.log(phi) if condition else
43                         -mu*torch.exp(c/mu)*phi+mu+c for
44                         phi, condition in zip(log_terms, clip_condition)]
45        loss = sum(new_log_terms) + beta/2 * (p1_y - p1_x - p1_l/beta).pow(2)
46                                   + beta/2 * (p2_y - p2_x - p2_l/beta).pow(2)
47
48        p1_y.grad, p2_y.grad = None, None
49        loss.backward()
50        with torch.no_grad():
51          p1_y -= lr * p1_y.grad
52          p2_y -= lr * p2_y.grad
53
54     # update the lambdas (line 10 of algorithm)
55     with torch.no_grad():
56        p1_l += beta * (p1_x - p1_y)
57        p2_l += beta * (p2_x - p2_y)
58
59   mu *= delta # decay mu


                                               57
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


PI-ACVI. For PI-ACVI, we use the following Python code implementing Algorithm 2 using the
Pytorch library. We set ОІ = 0.5, K = 20, в„“ = 20, and use a learning rate of 0.1.

      Listing 3: Implementation of the PI-ACVI algorithm on the 2D constrained bilinear game.
 1 import torch
 2
 3 lr = 0.1    # learning rate
 4 beta = 0.5 # ACVI beta parameter
 5 K = 20      # ACVI K parameter
 6 l = 20      # I-ACVI l parameter
 7
 8 p1_x = torch.nn.Parameter(torch.tensor(2.0))
 9 p1_y = torch.nn.Parameter(torch.tensor(2.0))
10 p1_l = torch.nn.Parameter(torch.tensor(0.0))
11
12 p2_x = torch.nn.Parameter(torch.tensor(2.0))
13 p2_y = torch.nn.Parameter(torch.tensor(2.0))
14 p2_l = torch.nn.Parameter(torch.tensor(0.0))
15
16 for itr in range(K):
17
18   # solve x problem (line 6 of algorithm)
19   for _ in range(l):
20     loss_p1 = 1/beta * p1_x * p2_x + 0.5 * (p1_x - p1_y + p1_l/beta).pow(2)
21     p1_x.grad = None
22     loss_p1.backward()
23     with torch.no_grad():
24        p1_x -= lr * p1_x.grad
25
26     loss_p2 = -1/beta * p1_x * p2_x + 0.5 * (p2_x - p2_y + p2_l/beta).pow(2)
27     p2_x.grad = None
28     loss_p2.backward()
29     with torch.no_grad():
30        p2_x -= lr * p2_x.grad
31
32   # solve y problem using projection (line 7 of algorithm)
33   with torch.no_grad():
34     p1_y.data = p1_x + p1_l/beta
35     p1_y.data = p1_y.clip(-0.4, 2.4)
36
37     p2_y.data = p2_x + p2_l/beta
38     p2_y.data = p2_y.clip(-0.4, 2.4)
39
40   # update the lambdas (line 8 of algorithm)
41   with torch.no_grad():
42     p1_l += beta * (p1_x - p1_y)
43     p2_l += beta * (p2_x - p2_y)


C.2    I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS FOR THE HBG GAME
                                                                   1
Solution and relative error. The solution of (HBG) is xвӢҶ = 500       e, with e вҲҲ R1000 . As a metric
                                                                                 вӢҶ
of the experiments on this problem, we use the relative error: Оөr (xk ) = вҲҘxвҲҘx
                                                                            k вҲ’x вҲҘ
                                                                               вӢҶвҲҘ  .

Experiments of Fig.4.a showing CPU time to reach a fixed relative error. The target relative
error is 0.02. We set the step size of GDA, EG, and OGDA to 0.3 and use k = 5 and Оұ = 0.5 for
LA-GDA. For I-ACVI, we set ОІ = 0.5, ВөвҲ’1 = 10вҲ’6 , Оҙ = 0.8, О»0 = 0, K = 10, в„“ = 10 and the
step size is 0.05.

Experiments of Fig.4.b showing the number of iterations to reach a fixed relative error. Hy-
perparameters are the same as for Fig.4.a. We vary the rotation вҖңstrengthвҖқ (1 вҲ’ О·), with О· вҲҲ (0, 1).

Experiments of Fig.4.c showing the impact of K0 . For this experiment, we depict, for various
pairs (K0 , K+ ), how many iterations are required to reach a relative error smaller than 10вҲ’4 . We
set ОІ = 0.5, Вө = 1e вҲ’ 6, Оҙ = 0.8, T = 5000 and 0.05 as learning rate. We experiment with K0 вҲҲ
{5, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100, 110, 120, 130} and K+ вҲҲ {1, 5, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70}.
The following Python code snippet shows an implementation of I-ACVI (Algorithm 1) on the (HBG)
game:


                                                  58
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               Listing 4: Implementation of the I-ACVI algorithm on the HBG game.
 1 import numpy as np
 2 import time
 3
 4 eps = .02 # target relative error
 5 dim = 500 # dim(x1) == dim(x2) == dim
 6 x_opt = np.ones((2*dim,1))/dim # solution
 7
 8 # I-ACVI parameters
 9 beta, mu, delta, K, l, T, lr = 0.5, 1e-6, .8, 10, 10, 100, 0.05
10
11 # Building HBG matrices
12 eta = 0.05
13 A1 = np.concatenate((eta*np.identity(dim), (1-eta)*np.identity(dim)), axis=1)
14 A2 = np.concatenate((-(1-eta)*np.identity(dim), eta*np.identity(dim)), axis=1)
15 A = np.concatenate((A1, A2), axis=0)
16
17 # Build projection matrix Pc
18 temp1 = np.concatenate((np.ones((1,dim)), np.zeros((1,dim))), axis=1)
19 temp2 = np.concatenate((np.zeros((1,dim)), np.ones((1,dim))), axis=1)
20 C = np.concatenate((temp1,temp2), axis=0)
21 d = np.ones((2,1))
22 temp = np.linalg.inv(np.dot(C, C.T))
23 temp = np.dot(C.T, temp)
24 dc = np.dot(temp, d)
25 Pc = np.identity(2*dim) - np.dot(temp,C)
26
27 # Initialize players
28 init = np.random.rand(2*dim, 1)
29 init[:dim] = init[:dim] / np.sum(init[:dim]) # ensuring it is part of the simplex
30 init[dim:] = init[dim:] / np.sum(init[dim:])
31 z_x = np.copy(init)
32 z_y = np.copy(init)
33 z_lmd = np.zeros(init.shape)
34
35 finished, cnt, t0 = False, 0, time.time()
36
37 for _ in range(T):
38   mu *= delta
39   for _ in range(K):
40     cnt += 1
41     # Solve approximately the X problem (line 8 of algorithm)
42     for _ in range(l):
43       g = z_x + 1/beta * np.dot(Pc, np.dot(A,z_x)) - np.dot(Pc, z_y) + 1/beta * np.dot(Pc,
       z_lmd) - dc
44      z_x -= lr * g
45
46     if np.linalg.norm(z_x-x_opt)/np.linalg.norm(x_opt) <= eps:
47       finished = True
48       print(f"Reached a relative error of {eps} after {cnt} iterations in
        {time.time()-t0:.2f} sec.")
49       break
50
51     # Solve approximately the Y problem (line 9 of algorithm)
52     for _ in range(l):
53       assert all(z_y > 0) # ensuring the log terms are positive
54       g = - mu * 1/z_y + beta*(z_y - z_x - z_lmd/beta)
55       z_y -= lr * g
56
57     # Update lambdas (line 10 of algorithm)
58     z_lmd += beta*(z_x-z_y)
59
60   if finished:
61     break


C.3    I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS FOR THE C-GAN GAME

For the experiments on the MNIST dataset, we use the source code of Chavdarova et al. (2021)
for the baselines, and we build on it to implement PI-ACVI (Algorithm 2). For completeness, we
provide an overview of the implementation.
Models. We used the DCGAN architectures (Radford et al., 2016), listed in Table 2, and the pa-
rameters of the models are initialized using PyTorch default initialization. For experiments on this


                                                 59
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Generator                                         Discriminator
              Input: z вҲҲ R128 вҲј N (0, I)                             Input: x вҲҲ R1Г—28Г—28
   transposed conv. (ker: 3Г—3, 128 вҶ’ 512; stride: 1)      conv. (ker: 4Г—4, 1 вҶ’ 64; stride: 2; pad:1)
                 Batch Normalization                          LeakyReLU (negative slope: 0.2)
                         ReLU
                                                         conv. (ker: 4Г—4, 64 вҶ’ 128; stride: 2; pad:1)
   transposed conv. (ker: 4Г—4, 512 вҶ’ 256, stride: 2)
                                                                      Batch Normalization
                 Batch Normalization
                                                              LeakyReLU (negative slope: 0.2)
                         ReLU
   transposed conv. (ker: 4Г—4, 256 вҶ’ 128, stride: 2)    conv. (ker: 4Г—4, 128 вҶ’ 256; stride: 2; pad:1)
                 Batch Normalization                                  Batch Normalization
                         ReLU                                 LeakyReLU     (negative slope: 0.2)
transposed conv. (ker: 4Г—4, 128 вҶ’ 1, stride: 2, pad: 1)      conv. (ker: 3Г—3, 256 вҶ’ 1; stride: 1)
                       T anh(В·)                                           Sigmoid(В·)


Table 2: DCGAN architectures (Radford et al., 2016) used for experiments on MNIST. With вҖңconv.вҖқ
we denote a convolutional layer and вҖңtransposed convвҖқ a transposed convolution layer (Radford
et al., 2016). We use ker and pad to denote kernel and padding for the (transposed) convolution
layers, respectively. With hГ—w, we denote the kernel size. With cin вҶ’ yout we denote the number
of channels of the input and output, for (transposed) convolution layers. The models use Batch
Normalization (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015) layers.


dataset, we used the non-saturating GAN loss as proposed in (Goodfellow et al., 2014):

                      LD = E log D(xМғd ) + E log 1 вҲ’ D G(zМғ)                                      (L-D)
                             xМғd вҲјpd              zМғвҲјpz

                      LG = E log D G(zМғ) ,                                                        (L-G)
                                zМғвҲјpz

where G(В·), D(В·) denote the generator and discriminator, resp., and pd and pz denote the data and
the latent distributions (the latter predefined as normal distribution).
Details on the PI-ACVI implementation. When implementing PI-ACVI on MNIST, we set ОІ =
0.5, and K = 5000, we use в„“+ = 20 and в„“0 вҲҲ {100, 500}. We consider only inequality constraints
(and there are no equality constraints), therefore, the matrices Pc and dc are identity and zero,
respectively. As inequality constraints, we use 100 randomly generated linear inequalities for the
Generator and 100 for the Discriminator.
Projection details. Suppose the linear inequality constraints for the Generator are AОё вүӨ b, where
Оё вҲҲ Rn is the vector of all parameters of the Generator, A = (aвҠә1 , . . . , aвҠә100 )вҠә вҲҲ R100Г—n , b =
(b1 , . . . , b100 ) вҲҲ R100 . We use the greedy projection algorithm described in (Beck, 2017). A greedy
projection algorithm is essentially a projected gradient method;
                                                               вҲҡ        it is easy to implement in high-
dimension problems and has a convergence rate of O(1/ K). See Chapter 8.2.3 in (Beck, 2017)
for more details. Since the dimension n is very large, at each step of the projection, one could only
project Оё to one hyperplane aвҠәi x = bi for some i вҲҲ I(Оё), where
                                         I(Оё) вүң {j|aвҠәj Оё > bj }.

For every j вҲҲ {1, 2, . . . , 100}, let
                                         Sj вүң {x|aвҠәj x вүӨ bj }.

The greedy projection method chooses i so that i вҲҲ arg max{dist(Оё, Si )}. Note that as long as Оё is
not in the constraint set CвүӨ = {x|Ax вүӨ b}, i would be in I(Оё). Algorithm 4 gives the details of
the greedy projection method we use for the baseline, written for the Generator only for simplicity;
the same projection method is used for the Discriminator as well.
Metrics. We describe the metrics for the MNIST experiments. We use the two standard GAN
metrics, Inception Score (IS, Salimans et al., 2016) and FreМҒchet Inception Distance (FID, Heusel
et al., 2017). Both FID and IS rely on a pre-trained classifier and take a finite set of mМғ samples from
the generator to compute these. Since MNIST has greyscale images, we used a classifier trained on
this dataset and used mМғ = 5000.


                                                   60
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 4 Greedy projection method for the baseline.
                            вҠә          вҠә
 1: Input: Оё вҲҲ Rn , A = (a1 , . . . , a100 )вҠә вҲҲ R100Г—n , b = (b1 , . . . , b100 ) вҲҲ R100 , Оө > 0
 2: while True do
 3:   I(Оё) вүң {j|aвҠәj Оё > bj }
                                 |aвҠә
                                   j ОёвҲ’bj |
 4:    if I(Оё) = вҲ… or max                   < Оө then
                           jвҲҲI(Оё) вҲҘaj вҲҘ
 5:      break
 6:    end if
                         |aвҠә ОёвҲ’bj |
 7:    choose i вҲҲ arg max jвҲҘaj вҲҘ
                 jвҲҲI(Оё)
              |aвҠә
                i ОёвҲ’bi |
 8:    Оё вҶҗ Оё вҲ’ вҲҘa вҲҘ2 ai
                   i
 9: end while
10: Return: Оё


Metrics: IS. Given a sample from the generator xМғg вҲј pg вҖ”where pg denotes the data distribution of
the generatorвҖ”IS uses the softmax output of the pre-trained network p(yМғ|xМғg ) which represents the
                                                                            C
                             R ci , i вҲҲ 1 . . . C, i.e., p(yМғ|xМғg ) вҲҲ [0, 1] . It then computes the marginal
probability that xМғg is of class
class distribution p(yМғ) = xМғ p(yМғ|xМғg )pg (xМғg ). IS measures the KullbackвҖ“Leibler divergence DKL
between the predicted conditional label distribution p(yМғ|xМғg ) and the marginal class distribution
p(yМғ). More precisely, it is computed as follows:
                                                                  mМғ XC
                             h                      i         1 X                        p(yc |xМғi )
 IS(G) = exp           E      DKL p(yМғ|xМғg )||p(yМғ)    = exp             p(yc |xМғi ) log               . (IS)
                     xМғg вҲјpg                                  mМғ i=1 c=1                  p(yc )

It aims at estimating (i) if the samples look realistic i.e., p(yМғ|xМғg ) should have low entropy, and (ii) if
the samples are diverse (from different ImageNet classes), i.e., p(yМғ) should have high entropy. As
these are combined using the KullbackвҖ“Leibler divergence, the higher the score is, the better the
performance.
Metrics: FID. Contrary to IS, FID compares the synthetic samples xМғg вҲј pg with those of the
training dataset xМғd вҲј pd in a feature space. The samples are embedded using the first several layers
of a pretrained classifier. It assumes pg and pd are multivariate normal distributions and estimates
the means mg and md and covariances Cg and Cd , respectively, for pg and pd in that feature space.
Finally, FID is computed as:
                                                                                              1
    DFID (pd , pg ) вүҲ D2 (md , Cd ), (mg , Cg ) = вҲҘmd вҲ’ mg вҲҘ22 + T r Cd + Cg вҲ’ 2(Cd Cg ) 2 ,


                                                                                               (FID)
where D2 denotes the FreМҒchet Distance. Note that as this metric is a distance, the lower it is, the
better the performance.
Hardware. We used the Colab platform (https://colab.research.google.com/) and
Nvidia T4 GPUs.


                                                       61
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS AND A NALYSES
In this section, we provide complementary experiments associated with the three games introduced
in the main paper: (2D-BG), (HBG), and (C-GAN). We also provide an additional study of the
robustness of I-ACVI to bad conditioning by introducing a version of the (HBG) game, see В§ D.3
for more details.

D.1   A DDITIONAL RESULTS FOR I-ACVI ON THE 2D-BG GAME

For completeness, in Fig. 5 we show the trajectories for the x iteratesвҖ”complementary to the y-
iteratesвҖҷ trajectories depicted in Fig. 1 of the main part.


         (a) ACVI          (b) I-ACVI K = 20, в„“ = 2    (c) I-ACVI K = 10, в„“ = 2   (d) I-ACVI K = 5, в„“ = 2

Figure 5: Complementary illustrations to those in Fig. 1 of the main part: depicting here the
trajectories of the x iterates. We compare the convergence of ACVI and I-ACVI with different
parameters on the (2D-BG) problem while also depicting the central path (shown in yellow). Each
subsequent bullet on the trajectory depicts the (exact or approximate) solution at the end of the inner
loop (when k вүЎ K вҲ’ 1). The Nash equilibrium (NE) of the game is represented by a yellow star,
and the constraint set is the interior of the red square.


Comparison between (в„ҳ1 ) and (в„ҳ2 ). In Fig. 6 and Fig. 7 we show the trajectories of respectively
the y and x iterates as we increase the learning rate. Increasing the learning rate increases the
chance of crossing the standard log barrier, which makes the (в„ҳ1 ) undefined for such input, as the
log function is not defined on the entire space. In contrast, the newly proposed barrier (в„ҳ2 ) is defined
everywhere; thus, the y iterates crossing the boundary of the constrained set does not make the (в„ҳ2 )
unstable and allows for convergence to the solution.

D.2   A DDITIONAL RESULTS FOR PI-ACVI ON THE 2D-BG GAME

In this section, we provide complementary visualization to Fig. 2 in the main paper. We (i) compare
with other methods in Fig. 8,9 and (ii) show PI-ACVI trajectories for various hyperparameters in
Fig. 10.

PI-ACVI vs. baselines. In Fig. 8 and 9, we can observe the behavior of projected gradient descent
ascent, projected extragradient, projected lookahead, projected proximal point, mirror descent, and
mirror prox on the simple 2D constrained bilinear game (2D-BG), we use the same learning rate of
0.2 for all methods except for mirror prox which is using a learning rate of 0.4. In Fig. 10 we show
trajectories for PI-ACVI for в„“ вҲҲ {1, 4, 10, 100}, ОІ = 0.5, K = 150 and a learning rate 0.2.

D.3   A DDITIONAL RESULTS ON THE HBG GAME

In this section, we (i) provide complementary experiments to Fig. 4 from the main paper, as well as
(ii) analyze the robustness of I-ACVI against bad conditioning.

CPU time to reach a given relative error. In Fig. 11 we extend the x-axis of Fig. 4.a from the
main paper for I-ACVI. Unlike baselines, I-ACVI remains fast even when the target relative error is
very small. This is due to the fact that I-ACVI uses cheaper approximate steps for lines 8 and 9 of
Algorithm 1.


                                                      62
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       (e) lr = 0.3              (f) lr = 0.4             (g) lr = 0.5              (h) lr = 0.6

Figure 6: I-ACVI trjectories for the y iterates for different choices of learning rates lr. Top
row: Trajectories for the I-ACVI implementation using the standard barrier function (в„ҳ1 ). As the
learning rate increases, the y iterates cross the log barrier, breaking the convergence. Bottom row:
Trajectories for the I-ACVI implementation using the new smooth barrier function defined over
the entire domain (в„ҳ2 ). The extended barrier function we proposed is defined everywhere; thus,
even if the iterates cross the standard barrier, the method converges, allowing for the use of larger
step sizes. We can reduce the constant c to improve the stability; we used c = {10, 1, 0.2, 0} and
Оі = {0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6} for the learning rate.


       (e) lr = 0.3              (f) lr = 0.4             (g) lr = 0.5              (h) lr = 0.6

Figure 7: Complementary to Fig. 6, I-ACVI trjectories for the x iterates for different choices of
learning rates lr. Top row: Trajectories for the I-ACVI implementation using the standard barrier
function (в„ҳ1 ). As the learning rate increases, the y iterates (see Fig. 6) are crossing the log barrier,
which breaks the optimization. Bottom row: Trajectories for the I-ACVI implementation using the
new smooth barrier function defined over the entire domain (в„ҳ2 ). The iterates are allowed to cross
the standard log barrier, which allows the y iterates to recover from large steps. We can reduce the
constant c to improve the stability, we used c = {10, 1, 0.2, 0}, and Оі = {0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6} for the
learning rate.



                                                   63
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       (a) P-GDA                 (b) P-EG                 (c) P-LA                 (d) P-PP

Figure 8: Comparison of Projected Gradient Descent Ascent (P-GDA), extragradient (P-EG)
(Korpelevich, 1976), Lookahead (P-LA) (Chavdarova et al., 2021) and Proximal-Point (P-PP)
on the (2D-BG) game. For P-PP, we solve the inner proximal problem through multiple steps of
GDA and use warm-start (the last PP solution is used as a starting point of the next proximal prob-
lem). All those methods progress slowly when hitting the constraint. Those trajectories can be
contrasted with PI-ACVI in Fig. 10.


                      (a) Mirror-Descent                      (b) Mirror-Prox

Figure 9: Comparison of Mirror-Descent (MD) and Mirror-Prox (MP) on the (2D-BG) game.
Mirror-descent cycles around the solution without converging. Mirror-prox is converging to the
solution. Both methods have been implemented using simultaneous updates and with a Bregman
divergence DОЁ (x, y) with ОЁ(x) = вҲ’ x+0.4      x+0.4         x+0.4         x+0.4
                                     2.8 log( 2.8 ) вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ 2.8 ) log(1 вҲ’ 2.8 ).


        (e) в„“ = 1                (f) в„“ = 4               (g) в„“ = 10               (h) в„“ = 100

Figure 10: PI-ACVI (Algorithm 2) for different choices of в„“. Top row: Trajectories for the x
iterates. Bottom row: Trajectories for the y iterates. For в„“ = 1, the trajectory for the y iterates is
similar to the one of P-GDA (see Fig. 8), as we increase в„“ we observe how relatively few iterations
are required for convergence compared to baselines.


                                                 64
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                        400
                                                    GDA
                                                    EG
                                        300         OGDA


                         CPU time (s)
                                                    LA4-GDA
                                                    ACVI
                                        200         I-ACVI


                                        100


                                          0
                                                     10вҲ’5         10вҲ’2
                                                      relative error

Figure 11: Comparison between I-ACVI and other baselines used in В§ 5 of the main part. CPU
time (in seconds; y-axis) to reach a given relative error (x-axis); while the rotational intensity is
fixed to О· = 0.05 in (HBG) for all methods. I-ACVI is much faster to converge than other methods,
including ACVI.



                                 1
                                 5
                                                                           10.0
                                10
                                20                                         7.5
                        K+


                                30
                                40
                                50                                         5.0
                                60
                                70
                                                                           2.5
                                         5 10       50         100   130
                                                         K0


Figure 12: Impact of K0 : joint impact of the number of inner-loop iterations K0 at t = 0, and
different choices of inner-loop iterations for K+ at any t > 0, on the CPU-time needed to reach a
fixed relative error of 10вҲ’4 . A large enough K0 can compensate for a small K+ .


Impact of K0 . In Fig. 12 we show, for each (K0 , K+ ) the CPU time required to reach a relative
error of 10вҲ’4 . Those times are highly correlated with the number of iterations shown in Fig. 4.c of
the main paper.


Comparison with mirror-descent and mirror-prox. In Fig. 13 extend the experiments of Fig. 4.b
of the main paper to include the mirror-descent (MD) and mirror-prox (MP) methods described in
App. A.5.


Impact of conditioning. We modify the (HBG) game to study the impact of conditioning. Hence,
we propose the following version:

                                                min max xвҠә1 Dx2 ,                          (HBG-v2)
                                                x1 вҲҲв–іx2 вҲҲв–і

              в–і={xi вҲҲ R500 |xi вүҘ 0, and , eвҠә xi = 1}, and D = diag(Оұ1 , . . . , Оұ500 ) .


                                                          65
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                        50                                                     GDA
                                                                                               EG
                                                                                               OGDA
                                        40                                                     LA4-GDA


                 number of iterations
                                                                                               ACVI
                                                                                               I-ACVI
                                        30                                                     Mirror-Descent
                                                                                               Mirror-Prox

                                        20


                                        10


                                             0.0     0.2      0.4                0.6          0.8         1.0
                                                                         О·


Figure 13: Number of iterations to reach a relative error of 0.02 for varying values of the rotational
intensity О· (x-axis). We fixed the maximum number of iterations to 50. For mirror-descent and
mirror-prox, we used the KL-divergence as DОЁ (x, y) and use large step sizes of respectively Оі =
500 and Оі = 280. When the rotational intensity is strong (small О·), mirror-descent fails to converge
within the 50 iterations budget. However, when О· is large, mirror descent converges much faster
than GDA, EG, OGDA, and LA4-GDA. Mirror-prox is better than mirror-descent at handling strong
rotational intensities but is slowed down when the game is mostly potential. In comparison, ACVI
converges after a small number of steps regardless of О·.


The solution of this game depends on the {Оұi }500
                                              i=1 :

                                                                          1/Оұ1
                                                                               пЈ¶ пЈ«
                                                                  1     пЈ¬ 1/Оұ2 пЈ·
                                                   xвӢҶ1 = xвӢҶ2 = P500     пЈ¬ . пЈ·
                                                               i=1  1/Оұ пЈӯ .. пЈё
                                                                             i
                                                                                     1/Оұ500

We define the conditioning Оә as the ratio between the largest and smallest Оұi : Оә вүң ОұОұmax        min
                                                                                                     .
In our experiments we select Оұi linearly interpolated between 1 and Оұmax (e.g. using the
np.linspace(1,a max,500) NumPy function). We set Оұmin = 1 and vary Оұmax вҲҲ
{1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10}. We compare projected extragradient (P-EG) with I-ACVI. For P-EG,
we obtained better results when using smaller learning rates Оі for larger Оұmax : Оі = 0.3 Г— 0.9Оұmax .
For I-ACVI we set ОІ = 0.5, Вө = 10вҲ’5 , Оҙ = 0.5, Оі = 0.003, K = 100 and T = 200. We vary
в„“ depending on Оұmax : в„“ = 20 for Оұmax вҲҲ {1, 2, 3}, в„“ = 50 for Оұmax вҲҲ {4, 5, 6}, and в„“ = 100
for Оұmax вҲҲ {7, 8, 9, 10}. We compare the CPU times required to reach a relative error of 0.02 in
Fig. 14. We observe that I-ACVI is more robust to bad conditioning than P-EG. As Оә вҶ’ 0, P-EG
fails to converge in an appropriate time despite reducing the learning rate. For I-ACVI, keeping
the same learning rate and only increasing в„“ is enough to compensate for smaller Оә values. One
can speculate that I-ACVI is more robust thanks to (i) the y-problem (line 9 in Algorithm 1) not
depending on F (x), hence being relatively robust to the problem itself, and (ii) the x-problem (line
8 in Algorithm 1) being вҖңregularizedвҖқ by yk and О»k .

D.4   A DDITIONAL RESULTS ON THE C-GAN GAME

This section shows complementary results to our constrained GAN MNIST experiments. In Fig. 15,
we further show the impact of в„“0 on the convergence speed by training different PI-ACVI models
with в„“0 вҲҲ {20, 50, 100, 200, 400, 600, 800, 1000}, all other hyperparameters being equal вҖ” setting
в„“+ = 10. We compare in Fig. 16 the obtained curves for в„“0 = 400 with projected-GDA (P-GDA),
and verify that вҖ” similarly to Fig. 3 of the main paper for which в„“+ = 20 вҖ” PI-ACVI is here as
well outperforming significantly P-GDA. This shows that PI-ACVI is relatively unaffected by в„“+ as
opposed to в„“0 .



                                                                    66
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                               400
                                                                                                        P-EG
                                                                                                        I-ACVI
                                                               300


                                                CPU time (s)
                                                               200


                                                               100


                                                                 0
                                                                            0.25     0.50          0.75     1.00
                                                                                        Оә


Figure 14: Experiment on conditioning: CPU time to reach a relative error of 0.02 on the
(HBG-v2) game, for different conditioning values Оә. While P-EG struggles to converge when the
conditioning is bad (small Оә), I-ACVI, on the other hand, can cope relatively well.


                                                                PI-ACVI `0 = 20
       102                                                      PI-ACVI `0 = 50                8
                                                                PI-ACVI `0 = 100
                                                                PI-ACVI `0 = 200                                                                 PI-ACVI `0 = 20
                                                                                               6
       101                                                      PI-ACVI `0 = 400                                                                 PI-ACVI `0 = 50
FID


                                                                PI-ACVI `0 = 600                                                                 PI-ACVI `0 = 100
                                                                                          IS


                                                                PI-ACVI `0 = 800                                                                 PI-ACVI `0 = 200
                                                                                               4
                                                                PI-ACVI `0 = 1000                                                                PI-ACVI `0 = 400
       100                                                                                                                                       PI-ACVI `0 = 600
                                                                                               2                                                 PI-ACVI `0 = 800
                                                                                                                                                 PI-ACVI `0 = 1000
      10вҲ’1
             0    250        500        750      1000                1250     1500                  0        250      500        750      1000      1250      1500
                                   Time (seconds)                                                                           Time (seconds)

                       (a) FID on (C-GAN)                                                                          (b) IS on (C-GAN)

Figure 15: Effect of в„“0 on FID and IS: On the MNIST datasets, comparison of various runs of
PI-ACVI for different в„“0 . All other hyperparameters are equal: в„“+ = 10, ОІ = 0.5, see В§ C for more
details. (a) and (b): we observe the importance of в„“0 , despite в„“+ = 10 being relatively small we
still converge fast to a solution вҖ” in terms of both FID (вҶ“) and IS (вҶ‘) вҖ” given в„“0 large enough. All
curves are obtained by averaging over two seeds.



                                                P-GDA
                                                                                               8
                                                PI-ACVI `0 = 400

                       101
                                                                                               6
                 FID


                                                                                          IS


                                                                                               4
                       100
                                                                                                                      P-GDA
                                                                                               2                      PI-ACVI `0 = 400

                             0           500     1000                       1500                    0         500     1000               1500
                                        Time (seconds)                                                       Time (seconds)

                             (a) FID on (C-GAN)                                                           (b) IS on (C-GAN)

Figure 16: PI-ACVI vs. P-GDA on (C-GAN) MNIST: On the MNIST datasets, comparison of
P-GDA and PI-ACVI. For PI-ACVI, we set в„“0 = 400 and в„“+ = 10. (a) and (b): in both FID (вҶ“)
and IS (вҶ‘), PI-ACVI converges faster than P-GDA. The difference with Fig. 3 from the main paper
is that we use в„“+ = 10 instead of в„“+ = 20. This shows that PI-ACVI is relatively robust to different
values of в„“+ .


                                                                                     67
