Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S IMPLIFYING T RANSFORMER B LOCKS
 Bobby He & Thomas Hofmann∗
 Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich


                                             A BSTRACT
            A simple design recipe for deep Transformers is to compose identical building
            blocks. But standard transformer blocks are far from simple, interweaving atten-
            tion and MLP sub-blocks with skip connections & normalisation layers in precise
            arrangements. This complexity leads to brittle architectures, where seemingly mi-
            nor changes can significantly reduce training speed, or render models untrainable.
            In this work, we ask if the standard transformer block can be simplified? Com-
            bining signal propagation theory and empirical observations, we motivate modi-
            fications that allow many block components to be removed with no loss of train-
            ing speed, including skip connections, projection or value parameters, sequen-
            tial sub-blocks and normalisation layers. In experiments on both autoregressive
            decoder-only and BERT encoder-only models, our simplified transformers emu-
            late the per-update convergence speed and performance of standard transformers,
            while enjoying 16% faster training throughput, & using 15% fewer parameters.


1       I NTRODUCTION
The transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017) is arguably the workhorse behind many recent
successes in deep learning. A simple way to construct a deep transformer architecture is by stacking
multiple identical transformer “blocks” one after another in sequence. Each block, however, is more
complicated and consists of many different components, which need to be combined in specific
arrangements in order to achieve good performance. Surprisingly, the base transformer block has
changed very little since its inception, despite attracting the interest of many researchers.
In this work, we study whether the standard transformer block can be simplified. More specifically,
we probe the necessity of several block components, including skip connections, projection/value
matrices, sequential sub-blocks and normalisation layers. For each considered component, we ask
if it can be removed without loss of training speed (both in terms of per-update step & runtime), and
what architectural modifications need to be made to the transformer block in order to do so.
We believe the problem of simplifying transformer blocks without compromising training speed is
an interesting research question for several reasons. First, modern neural network (NN) architectures
have complex designs with many components, and it is not clear the roles played by these different
components in NN training dynamics, nor how they interact with each other. This is particularly
pertinent given the existing gap between theory and practice in deep learning, where theorists work-
ing to understand the mechanisms of deep learning often only consider simplified architectures due
to convenience, not necessarily reflective of modern architectures used in practice. Simplifying the
NN architectures used in practice can help towards bridging this divide.
On a related theoretical note, our work highlights both strengths and current limitations of signal
propagation: a theory that has proven influential due to its ability to motivate practical design choices
in deep NN architectures. Signal propagation (Poole et al., 2016; Schoenholz et al., 2017; Hayou
et al., 2019) studies the evolution of geometric information in an NN at initialisation, captured
through inner products of layerwise representations across inputs, and has inspired many impressive
results in training deep NNs (Xiao et al., 2018; Brock et al., 2021; Martens et al., 2021; Zaidi et al.,
2023). However, the current theory only considers a model at initialisation, and often considers
only the initial forward pass. As such, signal propagation at present is unable to shed light on many
intricacies of deep NN training dynamics, for example the benefits of skip connections for training
speed. Though signal propagation is crucial in motivating our modifications, we would not have
arrived at our simplified transformer blocks from theory alone, and relied also on empirical insights.
    ∗
        Correspondence to: bobby.he@inf.ethz.ch.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          Pre-LN                       Ours
                                                           Hx
                                    MLP Out
                                                               Shaped Attention            MLP Out
                                     NonLin                                                NonLin

                                     MLP In                      Q          K              MLP In

                                      Norm



                                                       Parallel
                                      Proj
                                                                     Proj
                           Hx
                                                      Hx
                                Attention                                                  MLP Out
                                                           Attention
                                                                                           NonLin

                                Q       K     V            Q          K         V          MLP In


                                      Norm                                          Norm


Figure 1: Comparison between different Transformer blocks. (Left) The standard Pre-LN block. (Top Right)
Our most simplified block. (Bottom Right) The parallel block (Zhao et al., 2019; Wang & Komatsuzaki, 2021).
Like the parallel block, our block eschews the need for sequential sub-blocks, but we additionally remove all
skip connections and normalisation layers, as well as value and projection parameters. Here, ⊗ denotes a matrix
multiplication, and ⊕ denotes a (potentially weighted) sum.

Finally, on the practical side, given the cost of training and deploying large transformer models
nowadays, any efficiency gains in the training and inference pipelines for the transformer architec-
ture represent significant potential savings. Simplifying the transformer block by removing non-
essential components both reduces the parameter count and increases throughput in our models. In
particular, we show that it is possible to remove skip connections, value parameters, projection pa-
rameters and sequential sub-blocks, all while matching the standard transformer in terms of training
speed and downstream task performance. As a result, we reduce parameter count by up to 16% and
observe throughput increases of 16% at both train and inference time.
Our starting point to simplify Transformer blocks is He et al. (2023), who show that respecting
signal propagation principles allows one to train deep Transformers without skip connections or
normalisation layers, but at significantly reduced convergence speeds per parameter update. We first
show that regulating the updates to values and projection parameters (Sec. 4.1), or in fact removing
them entirely (Sec. 4.2), improves the performance of skipless attention sub-blocks, and recovers the
lost per-update training speed reported by He et al. (2023). This removes half of the parameters and
matrix-multiplications in the attention sub-block. In Sec. 4.3, we show our simplifications combine
profitably with parallel sub-blocks (Zhao et al., 2019; Wang & Komatsuzaki, 2021), allowing us to
remove all remaining skip connections and sequential sub-blocks without compromising per-update
training speed, whilst further boosting the throughput increase to be 16%, in our implementation.
Finally, in Sec. 5, we show that our simplified blocks improve when scaled to larger depths, work
well in both encoder-only and decoder-only architectures, and that our findings also hold when
scaling training length. We conclude with a discussion of limitations and future work in Sec. 6.

2    R ELATED W ORK
Simplifying deep NNs by removing block components has received a lot of attention, both in trans-
formers and other architectures. In these works, signal propagation theory often acts as inspiration.
For a pair of inputs x, x′ , mapped to a pair of representation/activations vectors xl , x′l ∈
Rd at layer l, signal propagation theory studies the evolution of activation inner products
1 ⊤ ′ 1 ⊤           1 ′⊤ ′
d xl xl , d xl xl , d xl xl at initialisation, which can be tracked with their large d limits (Lee et al.,
2018; Matthews et al., 2018; Yang, 2019). Several pathologies afflicting poorly designed deep NNs
can be identified as a result (Schoenholz et al., 2017; Hayou et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2019; Dong
et al., 2021; Martens et al., 2021). For example, the activation norms d1 x⊤
                                                                           l xl may blow up or vanish,
or the cross products d1 x⊤    ′                                                          ′
                            l xl may converge to a value independent of the inputs x, x at large l, in
which case deeper layers of the model are unable to identify different inputs. Avoiding such degen-
eracies is important to allow for good training dynamics and generalisation in deep NNs (Balduzzi
et al., 2017; Xiao et al., 2018; 2020; Hayou et al., 2021; Martens et al., 2021; Noci et al., 2022).


                                                      2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


It has been shown that judicious use of weight initialisations and architectural tools, like skip connec-
tions and normalisation layers, can improve signal propagation degeneracies and the trainability of
deep NNs. Such considerations have motivated principled modifications with simpler architectures.
De & Smith (2020) show that an implicit mechanism of Pre-LN skip connections is to downweight
the residual branch relative to the skip branch, leading to better signal propagation. They also show
that explicitly downweighting the residual branch allows normalisation layers to be removed with-
out affecting performance. The idea of downweighting residuals for improved signal propagation
& trainability has been studied extensively in the literature (Zhang et al., 2018; Hanin & Rolnick,
2018; Tarnowski et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2019; Arpit et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2020; Bachlechner
et al., 2021; Touvron et al., 2021; Hayou et al., 2021; Hayou & Yang, 2023; Martens et al., 2021;
Davis et al., 2021; Noci et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022a; Huang et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2022b).
For skip connections (He et al., 2016), it has been shown that transforming non-linear activation
functions in MLPs and CNNs to be more linear according to a given deep architecture can enable
good signal propagation even without skip connections (Martens et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022; Li
et al., 2022). He et al. (2023) apply similar considerations to the self-attention mechanism, where
the key insight is that attention matrices need to be more identity-like in order to prevent signal
degradation in skipless transformers. However, these works find that skipless architectures suffer
from significant losses in training speed compared to their residual counterparts, when using stan-
dard optimisers like SGD or Adam. Such differences were not observed with stronger optimisers
like K-FAC (Martens & Grosse, 2015) on CNNs, and this inability to explain training phenom-
ena highlights a current limitation of signal propagation theory. Ding et al. (2021; 2023) design
a CNN, RepVGG, that can be trained like a residual architecture for fast per-update convergence,
but reparameterised to be skipless at test time for significantly higher inference throughput. This
reparameterisation is related to our considerations of value and projection parameters in Sec. 4.
Many works have considered simplifications or improvements specific to the transformer. Most
relevant to our work is the parallel block (Zhao et al., 2019; Wang & Komatsuzaki, 2021) (pictured
Fig. 1, bottom right), which computes the MLP and attention sub-blocks in parallel for efficiency
gains, with minimal performance loss. Trockman & Kolter (2023) observe that the product of value
and projection parameters often has a large identity component in trained transformers, and design
an initialisation mimicking this to improve performance in standard transformers on small datasets.
We find these matrices can be fixed to the identity without loss of performance, which removes
them from our simplified architecture. Other works have considered reducing the frequency of MLP
sub-blocks (Sridhar et al., 2022; Pires et al., 2023) or efficient replacements to softmax attention
(Katharopoulos et al., 2020; Schlag et al., 2021; Choromanski et al., 2021). Sukhbaatar et al. (2019)
remove the MLP by integrating it into the attention sub-block, augmented with persistent memory.

3    P RELIMINARIES
A deep transformer architecture of depth L is formed by sequentially stacking L transformer blocks.
The most common block is Pre-LN, depicted in Fig. 1 (left), which we treat as a baseline for com-
paring training speed, both in terms of per-update and runtime. It differs from the original Post-LN
block only in the position of the normalisation layers relative to the skip connections, but is more
popular as the Post-LN block suffers from poor training stability and signal propagation in deep
layers (Xiong et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2020; Noci et al., 2022; He et al., 2023).
Transformer blocks take representations of sequences as inputs. For an input sequence representa-
tion Xin ∈ RT ×d , with T tokens and dimension d, the Pre-LN block outputs Xout , where:
    Xout = αFF X̂ + βFF MLP(Norm(X̂)),         where X̂ = αSA Xin + βSA MHA(Norm(Xin )).             (1)

with scalar gain weights αFF , βFF , αSA , βSA fixed to 1 by default. Here, “MHA” stands for Multi-
Head Attention (detailed below), and “Norm” denotes a normalisation layer (Ba et al., 2016; Zhang
& Sennrich, 2019). In words, we see that the Pre-LN transformer block consists of two sequential
sub-blocks (one attention and one MLP), with normalisation layers and residual connections for both
sub-blocks, and crucially the normalisation layers are placed within the residual branch. The MLP
is usually single hidden-layer, with hidden dimension that is some multiple of d (e.g. 4 (Vaswani
et al., 2017) or 8/3 (Touvron et al., 2023)), and acts on each token in the sequence independently.
The MHA sub-block allows tokens to share information between one another using self-attention.
For input sequence X, the self-attention mechanism outputs:


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                    V                                       1  Q K⊤ ⊤
          Attn(X) = A(X)XW ,              where A(X) = Softmax             √ XW W X + M ,                      (2)
                                                                            dk
where WQ , WK ∈ Rd×dk and WV ∈ Rd×dv are trainable query, key and value parameters respec-
tively. Here, the attention matrix A(X) ∈ RT ×T can be thought of as allowing different tokens to
“mix” with each other. M ∈ RT ×T is a mask taking values in {0, −∞} that depend on the mod-
elling task. For causal auto-regressive transformers like GPT, Mi,j = 0 iff i ≥ j, which prevents a
token from obtaining information from future tokens. In bidirectional models like BERT, masking
is typically applied at the token level and not in the attention mechanism (i.e. M is the zero matrix).
The Multi-Head Attention name arises because it is typical in practice to apply self-attention on H
                                                                 d
different “heads” (with independent parameters) with dv = dk = H    , as follows:

                             MHA(X) = Concat Attn1 (X), . . . , AttnH (X) WP ,

                                                                                                               (3)
where WP ∈ Rd×d denotes a trainable square projection matrix that combines different attention
heads. If we let WnV denote the value parameters for head n, then the concatenated value weights
WV = Concat(W1V , . . . , WH    V
                                  ) ∈ Rd×d can be viewed as a square matrix. One of our key findings,
in Sec. 4.2, is to show that fixing the value and projection parameters, WV and WP , to the identity
matrix significantly improves per-update training speed in skipless transformer blocks (to speeds
matching or even outperforming the standard Pre-LN block), whilst simultaneously significantly
reducing the parameter count and matrix-multiplication FLOPs required, thus increasing throughput.

4       S IMPLIFYING T RANSFORMER B LOCKS
We now describe how we arrive at our simplest Transformer block, Fig. 1 (top right), starting from
the Pre-LN block, using a combination of signal propagation theory and empirical observations.
Each subsection here will remove one block component at a time without compromising training
speed, and we aim to provide an intuitive account of our progress in simplifying the Pre-LN block.
All experiments in this section use an 18-block 768-width causal decoder-only GPT-like model on
the CodeParrot dataset,1 which is sufficiently large that we are in a single epoch regime with minimal
generalisation gap (Fig. 2), allowing us to focus on training speed. We provide depth scaling, and
non-causal encoder-only, experiments, in Sec. 5. We use a linear decay learning rate (LR) schedule2
with AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017), with linear warmup for the first 5% steps. The maximum
LR is tuned on training loss, using a logarithmic grid. Additional experimental details are in App. D.

4.1       R EMOVING THE ATTENTION SUB - BLOCK SKIP CONNECTION

We first consider a skipless attention sub-block, whose output has the simple interpretation of
adding, to each token, other token representations according to the attention matrix. In the nota-
tion of Eq. (1) this corresponds to αSA = 0. Naively removing the attention skip leads to a signal
degeneracy called rank collapse (Dong et al., 2021), which harms trainability (Noci et al., 2022).

Setup He et al. (2023) outline modifications needed to the self-attention mechanism in order to
correct these signal degeneracies at large depths, and train such deep skipless networks for the first
time. One method they introduce, Value-SkipInit, modifies the self-attention matrix to compute:
                                           A(X) ← (αIT + βA(X))                                                (4)
with trainable scalars α, β initialised to 1 and 0 respectively, and IT ∈ RT ×T is the identity matrix.
The key insight here is to initialise the self-attention matrix to have a dominant identity component
that encourages a token to attend to itself more relative to other tokens, much in the same way that a
Pre-LN skip upweights the skip branch relative to the residual branch for good signal propagation at
large depths (De & Smith, 2020). We point out that these considerations only apply at initialisation.
Noci et al. (2023) propose an extension, Shaped Attention, also motivated by signal propagation:
                                        A(X) ← (αIT + βA(X) − γC).                                             (5)
    1
        Our setting is taken from https://huggingface.co/learn/nlp-course/chapter7/6.
    2
        We found linear decay to slightly outperform cosine decay for both our models and baselines (c.f. Fig. 12).


                                                          4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Here, α, β, γ are trainable, and C is a constant (not trained) centering matrix, set to be equal to
                                                                    ⊤
the values of A when the query-key dot product √1d XWQ WK X⊤ is zero3 . Like He et al.
                                                      k
(2023), we initialise queries WQ = 0, which exactly zeros the query-key dot product at ini-
tialisation. Then, β = γ means that βA(X) − γC = 0 at initialisation, and α = 1 en-
sures a dominant identity component, and good signal propagation. Ali et al. (2023) also cen-
tre attention and show it helps prevent oversmoothing in vision transformers and graph NNs.
                                                                                                       4.0
We found Shaped Attention, Eq. (5), to slightly out-                         V-SkipInit ( SA = 0), train
perform Eq. (4) (c.f. Fig. 13), and use it in our ex-       3.5              V-SkipInit ( SA = 0), eval


                                                                           Cross-entropy Loss
                                                                             Pre-LN, train
periments on skipless attention sub-blocks, with β =        3.0
                                                                             Pre-LN, eval
γ = α = 1 at initialisation unless stated other-            2.5
wise. We also use head-dependent scalars in Eq. (5),
                                                            2.0
αh , βh and γh , which provided a small additional per-
                                                            1.5
formance boost.      One final important implementa-
tion detail is that for any skipless block we explic-       1.0
                                                                0      10K     20K       30K        40K
itly downweight the MLP branch by initialising train-                      Training step
                   1
able βFF = O( √L ) < 1 = αFF . This is moti- Figure 2: Loss of training speed in trans-
vated through signal propagation theory (c.f. Stable formers without attention sub-block skip
                                                        (He et al., 2023), even with Shaped Atten-
ResNet, Hayou et al. (2021)), and accounts for the tion, Eq. (5), and MLP skips (α = 1).
                                                                                             FF
fact that removing skip connections (in either MLP or
MHA sub-block) reduces the implicit downweighting effect of Pre-LN blocks (De & Smith,
2020). For the depth L = 18 networks in this section, we initialise βFF = 0.1.
                                                                                                       1.50
Recovering lost training speed Despite allowing skip-
                                                                           Eval Loss after 40K steps
                                                                                                       1.45
less transformers to train for the first time, He et al. (2023)                                        1.40
reported a significant loss of training speed per step com-                                            1.35
pared to the Pre-LN block. We verify this in Fig. 2.                                                   1.30
                                                                                                              Orth Winit
                                                                                                                    V , WP
                                                                                                                         init
To recover the lost training speed without attention skips,        1.25
                                                                                                Identity Winit
                                                                                                            V , WP
                                                                                                                 init
note that identity attention matrices make a deep trans-           1.20                         Pre-LN loss
                                                                                                V-SkipInit loss
former with no MLP sub-blocks act like a deep skipless             1.15
                                           QL                           0.0 0.2      0.4     0.6         0.8          1.0
                                                                               Residual weights V, P

linear NN at initialisation,4 f (X)=X l=1 WlV WlP ,                                                            V          P
where WlV , WlP are the value and projection weights in Figure 3: Restricting updates to W , W ,
                                                              through smaller βV , βP , recovers training
layer l. In He et al. (2023), they initialise WlV , WlP to be speed in skipless transformers (αSA = 0).
independent random orthogonal matrices to avoid signal
degeneracies from Gaussian initialisations (Saxe et al., 2013; Hu et al., 2020; Meterez et al., 2023).
It is known that such deep skipless networks train slower than their residual counterparts (Martens
et al., 2021). Moreover, it is also known that Pre-LN skips downweight residual branches (De &
Smith, 2020), which is equivalent to reduced learning rates & downscaled parameter updates from
initialisation in linear layers (e.g. Ding et al. (2023); we outline and empirically verify this duality in
App. A). This motivates us to study a reparameterisation of the value/projection weights WV , WP :
                   WV = αV Winit
                            V
                                 + βV ∆WV , and WP = αP Winit
                                                         P
                                                              + βP ∆WP ,                                                        (6)
                  V
with “skip” Winit    fixed to be random orthogonal to preserve the signal propagation achieved at
initialisation, and “residual” ∆WV trainable and initialised to zero. We consider downweighting
the residuals with fixed βV ≤ αV = 1, which biases the matrices WV , WP to stay closer to
initialisation, and would expect βV = O( √1L ) to recover the benefits of skip connections (Hayou
                                                    P
et al., 2021).5 . Similar considerations apply for Winit , ∆WP , αP , βP .
In Fig. 3, we find as expected that using smaller βV and βP with this reparameterisation, Eq. (6),
already restores much of the training speed loss in skipless attention-blocks, using orthogonally
              V       P
initialised Winit , Winit . To close this gap further, we note that from a signal propagation perspective,
               V       P
initialising Winit , Winit  to be the identity matrix is equivalent to orthogonal initialisation when the
   3
     For example, when there is no masking, C becomes the uniform T × T stochastic matrix: T1 11⊤
   4
     We set aside the MLP sub-block here for simplicity, but point out that all of our experiments use MLPs so
our findings carry over to the full setting.
   5
     Although the initial forward pass is identical regardless of βV , due to zero initialised ∆WV .


                                                            5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                    V        P
attention sub-block is skipless. With identity initialisation Winit    = Winit  = Id we see a consistent
improvement over orthogonal initialisation, which essentially matches the Pre-LN block. One thing
we can conclude from this experiment, is that restricting the updates to the values and projections
from their initialisation replicates the effects of the attention sub-block skip connection, and recovers
the lost per-update training speed. We investigate the difference in Fig. 3 of performance between
identity and random orthogonal in the appendix (Fig. 15).
4.2    R EMOVING VALUE AND P ROJECTION PARAMETERS

In fact, we can also conclude from Fig. 3 that it is possible to completely remove the value and
projection parameters WV , WP with minimal loss of per-update training speed. Namely, when
                                             V       P
βV = βP = 0 and identity-initialised Winit      = Winit  = I, we essentially match the Pre-LN block
performance after equal numbers of training steps. In this case, we have WV = WP = I through-
out training, i.e. the values and projection parameters are identity.
To further verify this surprising observation, we consider                                           0.20
                                                                                                                      Layer


                                                                      Residual/Skip gain ratios, /
                                                                                                            1   6          11         16
reparameterised WV , WP , as in Eq. (6) with identity                                                       2   7          12         17
   V      P                                                                                          0.15   3   8          13         18
Winit , Winit , but now trainable scalars αV , βV , αP , βP .                                               4   9          14         Proj P/ P
                                                                                                            5   10         15         Value V/ V
From an initialisation of αV =αP =1 and βV =βP =0.2,                                                 0.10
we plot the evolution of “residual-skip” ratios αβVV , αβPP in
                                                                                                     0.05
Fig. 4. Weight decay was not applied on αV , βV , αP , βP .
We see that the residual-skip weight ratios αβVV , αβPP con-      0.00
                                                                       0 5K 10K 15K 20K 25K 30K 35K 40K
verge to 0 for the vast majority of layers, which indicates                       Training step
that these reparameterised matrices WV , WP converge Figure 4:                 Residual-skip gain ratios
to the identity during training. As a result, the extra ca- αβV , αβP converge to 0 during training.
pacity to perform linear projections via WV , WP is not       V      P


used. We plot the corresponding trajectories for other scalar parameters like βFF , in Figs. 17 to 20,
which do not tend to 0. The model in Fig. 4 with trainable WV , WP achieved worse final evalua-
tion loss than the model in Fig. 3 with identity WV , WP (1.194 vs. 1.178). Interestingly, this trend
is reversed if the attention skip is re-added (Fig. 23).         3.00
                                                                                                                     V-SkipInit (He et al. 2023)
                                                                   2.75               Pre-LN
We thus elect to remove values and projection parameters
    V     P                                                        2.50               SAS (§4.2)
                                                                     Eval Cross-entropy


W , W in our skipless attention sub-blocks, by setting                                SAS-P (§4.3)
them to the identity.6 We refer to the resulting sub-block         2.25               SAS-P, no norm (§4.4)
                                                                                      Parallel (Wang et al, 2021)
as the Simplified Attention Sub-block (SAS). Our full SAS          2.00

block is depicted in Fig. 10 and we detail the mathemat-           1.75

ical computation in Eq. (12). We note that SAS blocks              1.50

use only half of the parameters as well as half the matrix-        1.25

multiplications in the attention sub-block: only query and              0   2     4        6
                                                                                 Runtime (hours)
                                                                                                   8        10

key parameters remain. This results in a 13% reduction
                                                              Figure 5: Training speed in terms of run-
in the total number of parameters (146M vs 167M for 18 time. We see our models match (or even
blocks) in the models we consider in this section.7           slightly outperform) the Pre-LN block.
In Fig. 5 we see that when comparing speed in terms of wall-clock runtime on an A5000 GPU, our
SAS block already trains at speeds (slightly) outperforming the default Pre-LN transformer. The
corresponding plot comparing speed in terms of training steps taken is provided in Fig. 26. A more
detailed analysis of efficiency gains in our simplified blocks can be found in Sec. 5.
Though we do not have a rigorous proof for why the training dynamics in skipless transformers
forgo additional capacity by converging to identity value and projection parameters (Fig. 4), nor why
fixing such matrices to the identity results in no performance degradation and in fact trains faster
than having trainable values and projections (Fig. 3), we offer some half-explanations. First, the fact
that WV , WP are simply linear projections of the input sequence representations X (as opposed to
in the MLP sub-block where elementwise non-linearities are places between such matrices), could
   6
     The only exception is the first layer’s value parameters W1V , which is the only ratio above 0.05 in Fig. 4.
We saw very minor performance gains by keeping W1V (c.f. Fig. 24), so keep it whilst removing all other
WlV , WlP for l ≤ L
   7
     In general, the % of all parameters removed by WV ,WP depends on the ratio of width d to the MLP
hidden width dFF , vocabulary size and depth. Here, we have width d = 768, MLP hidden width dFF = 3072 =
4d, vocabulary size 50K and depth L = 18. In the large depth limit, only the ratio dFF /d matters.


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


mean that the additional capacity afforded by such matrices is not particularly substantial.8 This is
corroborated by Trockman & Kolter (2023) who found in trained transformers the product WV WP
often has a dominant identity component. Also, from a signal propagation perspective, there is no
reason why initialising such matrices to be non-identity (e.g. orthogonal or Gaussian) would be
preferred to identity initialisation, nor is it clear why they would be necessary in the first place,
especially given the additional matrix-multiplication FLOPs they require.

4.3      R EMOVING THE MLP SUB - BLOCK SKIP CONNECTION

So far we have simplified the Pre-LN transformer block by removing, without loss of training speed,
three key components: 1) the attention sub-block skip connection, as well as 2) value and 3) projec-
tion matrices. We next turn to removing the remaining skip connection in the MLP sub-block.
This proved more challenging. Like previous works (Martens et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022; He
et al., 2023), we found that making activations more linear, motivated through signal propagation,
still resulted in a significant loss of per-update training speed without MLP skips when using Adam,
as shown in Fig. 25. We also experimented with variants of the Looks Linear initialisation (Balduzzi
et al., 2017), with Gaussian, orthogonal or identity weights, to no avail. As such, we use standard
activations (e.g. ReLU in this section) and initialisations in the MLP sub-block throughout our work.
Instead, we turn to the idea of parallel MHA and MLP sub-blocks (Zhao et al., 2019; Wang &
Komatsuzaki, 2021), which has proven popular in several recent large transformer models, such
as PALM (Chowdhery et al., 2022) and ViT-22B (Dehghani et al., 2023). The parallel transformer
block is depicted in Fig. 1 (bottom right), and mathematically, given input Xin it outputs Xout , where:
                  Xout = αcomb Xin + βFF MLP(Norm(Xin )) + βSA MHA(Norm(Xin )),                             (7)

with skip gain αcomb = 1, and residual gains βFF = βSA = 1 as default.
In the parallel block, the MLP and MHA sub-blocks each take the same (normalised) input, af-
fording more parallelisation compared to the standard Pre-LN block, which computes sub-blocks
sequentially. The two sub-blocks are combined by summing their outputs, in conjunction with a
single skip connection, with weight αcomb . This parallelisation, as well as the removal of one skip
connection and one normalisation layer enables efficiency gains: Chowdhery et al. (2022) report the
parallel block has 15% faster training speed compared to the standard “sequential” Pre-LN block.
It is straightforward to combine our simplifications from Secs. 4.1 and 4.2 with the parallel block in
Eq. (7): we simply 1) use our SAS attention sub-block, Eq. (12), 2) set fixed αcomb = 0 to remove all
skip connections in the block, and 3) downweight βFF < 1. The resulting block is pictured in Fig. 11,
and we refer to it as SAS-Parallel (SAS-P for short). We see in Fig. 5 that SAS-P trains even faster
in terms of runtime compared to the SAS and Pre-LN blocks, and matches the training speed of the
parallel block despite using 13% fewer parameters. Our intuition is that the combination of Shaped
Attention and identity values/projections preserves signal between blocks throughout training and
replaces the need for a skip connection in either sub-block. Moreover, we note that our attention
sub-block is the identity function, Xout = Xin , at initialisation, so there is no difference between our
sequential SAS (Fig. 10) and parallel SAS-P (Fig. 11) blocks at initialisation.

4.4      R EMOVING N ORMALISATION LAYERS

The final simplification we consider is removing normalisation layers, leaving us with our simplest
block (Fig. 1, top right). From a signal propagation initialisation perspective, normalisation has been
expendable at all stages of our simplifications in this section: the idea is that normalisation in Pre-LN
blocks implicitly downweights residual branches, and this beneficial effect can be replicated without
normalisation by another mechanism: either explicitly downweighting residual branches when skips
are used, or biasing attention matrices to the identity/transforming MLP non-linearities to be “more”
linear otherwise. As we account for these mechanisms in our modifications (downweighted MLP
βFF & Shaped Attention), from an initialisation perspective there is no need for normalisation.
Of course, these modifications have effects on training speeds and stability beyond initialisation,
which are harder to predict from existing theory alone. In Fig. 5 we see that removing normalisa-
   8
       E.g., in single-head attention one can reparameterise WV , WP into one matrix with no expressivity loss.


                                                        7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


tion allows even our simplest transformer block, which does not have skips, sequential sub-blocks,
values, projections or normalisations, to match the training speed of the Pre-LN block in terms of
runtime. Having said that, we do observe a slight degradation in training speed per iteration, as seen
in Fig. 26, suggesting that normalisation layers have some beneficial properties for training speed
beyond what is captured by signal propagation theory. We thus treat our SAS (Fig. 10) and SAS-P
(Fig. 11) blocks, with normalisation, as our main approaches. On this note, we point out that De-
hghani et al. (2023) found extra normalisation on the queries and keys to provide improved training
stability in ViT-22B, going against the recent trend of researchers seeking to remove normalisation.

5    F URTHER EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS
Having introduced all of our simplifications in Sec. 4, we now provide further empirical analysis of
our simplified blocks across a range of settings, as well as details of the efficiency gains afforded by
our simplifications. In interest of space, additional experimental details can be found in App. D.
Depth Scaling Given that signal propagation the-             4.0                   Pre-LN
ory often focuses on large depths, where signal de-                                SAS (§4.2)
                                                             3.5                   SAS-P (§4.3)


                                                                  Eval Cross-Entropy
generacies usually appear, it is natural to ask whether                            SAS-P, no norm (§4.4)
the improved training speeds of our simplified trans-        3.0                   V-SkipInit (He et al. 2023)
                                                                                   Depth=18
former blocks also extend to larger depths. In Fig. 6,                             Depth=72
                                                             2.5
we see that scaling depth from 18 to 72 blocks leads
to an increase in performance in our models as well          2.0
as the Pre-LN transformer, indicating that our sim-
                                                             1.5
plified models are able to not only train faster but
also to utilise the extra capacity that more depth pro-          0      5K       10K          15K         20K
                                                                             Training step
vides. Indeed, the per-update trajectories of our sim- Figure 6: Our models improve when deeper
plified blocks and Pre-LN are near-indistinguishable (dashed, marked lines) vs. shallower (solid lines),
across depths, when using normalisation.                unlike V-SkipInit (He et al., 2023).
On the other hand, we see that Value-SkipInit (He et al., 2023) actually trains slower per update
at depth 72 compared to 18 despite the increase in capacity and parameter count. Moreover, the
gap in performance between Value-SkipInit and the other models increases with larger depth, which
implies poor scalability of the previous method. We note that 72 blocks is already reasonably deep
by publically-available modern standards (Hoffmann et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023).

BERT Next, we demonstrate our simplified blocks’ performance extends to different datasets and
architectures besides autoregressive decoder-only, as well as on downstream tasks. We choose the
popular setting of the bidirectional encoder-only BERT model Devlin et al. (2018) for masked lan-
guage modelling, with downstream GLUE benchmark.           4.5
                                                                                             Crammed BERT (Pre-LN)
In particular, we adopt the “Crammed” BERT setup                                      Parallel (Wang et al, 2021)
                                                              4.0                     SAS (§4.2)
of Geiping & Goldstein (2023), which asks how well                                    SAS-P (§4.3)
                                                                                      SAS-P, no norm (§4.4)
one can train a BERT model with a modest train-                                       V-SkipInit (He et al. 2023)
                                                                  MLM loss


                                                              3.5
ing budget: 24 hours on a single consumer GPU.
The authors provide an architecture, data pipeline            3.0
and training setup that has been optimised for this
low resource setting. We note that the Crammed ar-            2.5
chitecture uses the Pre-LN block, and describe other
setup details in App. D. We plug-in our simplified                0      5      10      15           20           25
blocks, keeping the existing optimised hyperparam- Figure 7: MaskedRuntime          (hours)
                                                                              language modelling loss vs
eters, besides tuning learning rate and weight decay. runtime on a 2080Ti GPU for 24 hours.
In Fig. 7, we see that our simplified blocks (especially with normalisation) match the pre-training
speed on the masked language modelling task compared to the (Crammed) Pre-LN baseline within
the 24 hour runtime. On the other hand, the removal of skip connections without modifying the
values and projections (as in He et al. (2023)) once again leads to a significant loss of training speed.
In Fig. 27, we provide the equivalent plot in terms of microbatch steps.
Moreover in Table 1, we find that our methods match the performance of the Crammed BERT
baseline after finetuning on the GLUE benchmark. We provide a breakdown over the downstream
tasks in Table 2. We use the same finetuning protocol as Geiping & Goldstein (2023) (5 epochs,
constant hyperparameters across tasks, dropout regularisation) for a fair comparison. Interestingly,


                                                         8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Value-SkipInit is largely able to recover from its poor pre-training in the fine-tuning phase. This,
combined with the need for dropout when fine-tuning, suggests that factors besides pre-training
speed are also important for fine-tuning. As the focus of our work primarily concerns training speed
from random initialisations, we leave this to future work. Relatedly, we found removing normalisa-
tions (Sec. 4.4) to cause instabilities when fine-tuning, where a small minority of sequences in some
downstream datasets had NaN values in the initial forward pass from the pre-trained checkpoint.
Efficiency Gains In Table 1, we also detail the pa- Table 1: GLUE benchmark & efficiency gains.
rameter count and training speeds of models using Our SAS & SAS-P match the downstream perfor-
                                                      mance of the Pre-LN baseline up to statistical sig-
different Transformers blocks on the masked lan- nificance over 3 seeds, but use 16% fewer param-
guage modelling task. We compute the speed as eters and enjoy up to 16% faster throughput.
the ratio of the number of microbatch steps taken
within the 24 hours of pre-training, relative to the Block                    GLUE Params Speed
baseline Pre-LN Crammed BERT. We see that our Pre-LN (Crammed) 78.9±.7 120M                               1
models use 16% fewer parameters, and SAS-P & Parallel                       78.5±.6 120M               1.05
SAS are 16% & 9% faster per iteration, respectively, V-SkipInit             78.0±.3 120M               0.95
compared to the Pre-LN block in our setting. We        SAS (Sec.  4.2)      78.4 ±.8      101M         1.09
note that in our implementation the Parallel block SAS-P (Sec. 4.3)         78.3±.4 101M               1.16
                                                       SAS-P, no norm               - 101M             1.20
is only 5% faster than the Pre-LN block, whereas
Chowdhery et al. (2022) observed 15% faster training speeds, suggesting that further through-
out increases may be possible with a more optimised implementation. Our implementation, like
Geiping & Goldstein (2023), uses automated operator fusion in PyTorch (Sarofeen et al., 2022)
Longer training Finally, given the current trends of          2.0
                                                                                            Pre-LN
training smaller models for longer on more data (Hoff-        1.8
                                                                                            SAS (§4.2)
mann et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023), we investigate                                    SAS-P (§4.3)
                                                                Eval Cross-entropy          3x tokens
if our simplified blocks continue to match the training       1.6                           1x token
speeds of the Pre-LN block with longer training. To do
                                                              1.4
this, we take our models from Fig. 5 on CodeParrot and
train with 3× tokens. To be precise, we train for around      1.2
120K (rather than 40K) steps with batch size 128 and se-
                                                              1.0
quence length 128, which results in around 2B tokens.              0   5   10    15    20    25     30
In Fig. 8, we do indeed see that our simplified SAS and                     Runtime (hours)
SAS-P blocks continue to match or outerperform the Pre- Figure 8: Training speeds continue to hold
LN block in training speed when trained on more tokens. with longer training.

6    D ISCUSSION
Limitations and future work While we have demonstrated the efficacy of our simplifications
across architectures, datasets, and tasks, the models we have considered (100-300M parameters) are
small relative to the largest transformers. It would be interesting to investigate the performance of
our simplified blocks at larger scales, especially because Chowdhery et al. (2022) report parallel
blocks improve relative to Pre-LN blocks with scale. Our depth scaling experiments already show
promise in this regard. On the theoretical side, though we were able to match the training speed of
Pre-LN blocks with normalisation removed (Fig. 5), there are still unanswered questions regarding
the benefits of normalisation for training speed and stability, and we were unable to remove normal-
isation with good downstream task performance. Moreover, while we tuned key hyperparameters
like learning rate, it is possible that many default hyperparameters and choices we inherited, e.g. the
AdamW optimiser, or fine-tuning protocol, are overfit to the default Pre-LN block, and an exhaus-
tive hyperparameter search for our simplified blocks would yield further improvements. Finally, on
the practical side, we believe that a more hardware-specific implementation of our simplified blocks
could give further improvements to training speed and performance.
Conclusion In this work, we asked whether it is possible to simplify the standard Transformer
block by removing unnecessary components. Combining signal propagation theory and empirical
insights, we have shown that it is possible to remove skip connections, sequential sub-blocks, value
and projection parameters, without loss of training speed or downstream task performance. As a
result, our models have around 15% fewer parameters and 16% increased throughput. We believe
our work can lead to simpler architectures being used in practice, thereby helping to bridge the gap
between theory and practice in deep learning, and reducing the cost of large transformer models.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
Our code for experiments on auto-regressive transformers can be found at https://github.
com/bobby-he/simplified_transformers.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Sotiris Anagnostidis, Andrei Ivanov & Lorenzo Noci for helpful discussions
in the initial stages of this project, and James Martens, John Martinis, Keivan Mohtashami, Tiago
Pimentel & Imanol Schlag, as well as the anonymous reviewers, for constructive feedback on an
early version of this manuscript.

R EFERENCES
Ameen Ali, Tomer Galanti, and Lior Wolf.          Centered self-attention layers.   arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2306.01610, 2023.
Devansh Arpit, Vı́ctor Campos, and Yoshua Bengio. How to initialize your network? robust initial-
  ization for weightnorm & resnets. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc,
  E. Fox, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32.
  Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.
Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Layer normalization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1607.06450, 2016.
Thomas Bachlechner, Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder, Henry Mao, Gary Cottrell, and Julian
  McAuley. Rezero is all you need: Fast convergence at large depth. In Uncertainty in Artificial
  Intelligence, pp. 1352–1361. PMLR, 2021.
David Balduzzi, Marcus Frean, Lennox Leary, JP Lewis, Kurt Wan-Duo Ma, and Brian McWilliams.
  The shattered gradients problem: If resnets are the answer, then what is the question? In Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 342–350. PMLR, 2017.
Andy Brock, Soham De, Samuel L Smith, and Karen Simonyan. High-performance large-scale
  image recognition without normalization. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of
  the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 1059–1071. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021.
Krzysztof Marcin Choromanski, Valerii Likhosherstov, David Dohan, Xingyou Song, Andreea
  Gane, Tamas Sarlos, Peter Hawkins, Jared Quincy Davis, Afroz Mohiuddin, Lukasz Kaiser,
  David Benjamin Belanger, Lucy J Colwell, and Adrian Weller. Rethinking attention with per-
  formers. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=Ua6zuk0WRH.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.
Yann N Dauphin, Angela Fan, Michael Auli, and David Grangier. Language modeling with gated
  convolutional networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 933–941. PMLR,
  2017.
Jared Q Davis, Albert Gu, Krzysztof Choromanski, Tri Dao, Christopher Re, Chelsea Finn, and
   Percy Liang. Catformer: Designing stable transformers via sensitivity analysis. In Marina Meila
   and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning,
   volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2489–2499. PMLR, 18–24 Jul
   2021. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/davis21a.html.
Soham De and Sam Smith. Batch normalization biases residual blocks towards the identity function
  in deep networks. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 19964–19975. Curran As-
  sociates, Inc., 2020.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Mostafa Dehghani, Josip Djolonga, Basil Mustafa, Piotr Padlewski, Jonathan Heek, Justin Gilmer,
 Andreas Peter Steiner, Mathilde Caron, Robert Geirhos, Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin, et al. Scaling
 vision transformers to 22 billion parameters. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
 pp. 7480–7512. PMLR, 2023.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.

Xiaohan Ding, Xiangyu Zhang, Ningning Ma, Jungong Han, Guiguang Ding, and Jian Sun. Repvgg:
  Making vgg-style convnets great again. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
  puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 13733–13742, June 2021.

Xiaohan Ding, Honghao Chen, Xiangyu Zhang, Kaiqi Huang, Jungong Han, and Guiguang Ding.
  Re-parameterizing your optimizers rather than architectures. In The Eleventh International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=B92TMCG_7rp.

Yihe Dong, Jean-Baptiste Cordonnier, and Andreas Loukas. Attention is not all you need: Pure
  attention loses rank doubly exponentially with depth. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 2793–2803. PMLR, 2021.

Leo Gao, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Laurence Golding, Travis Hoppe, Charles Foster, Jason
  Phang, Horace He, Anish Thite, Noa Nabeshima, et al. The pile: An 800gb dataset of diverse text
  for language modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00027, 2020.

Jonas Geiping and Tom Goldstein. Cramming: Training a language model on a single GPU in one
  day, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=gUL6zYN4Uaf.

Boris Hanin and David Rolnick. How to start training: The effect of initialization and architecture.
  In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
  NIPS’18, pp. 569–579, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2018. Curran Associates Inc.

Soufiane Hayou and Greg Yang. Width and depth limits commute in residual networks. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2302.00453, 2023.

Soufiane Hayou, Arnaud Doucet, and Judith Rousseau. On the impact of the activation function
  on deep neural networks training. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), Pro-
  ceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings
  of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2672–2680. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019.

Soufiane Hayou, Eugenio Clerico, Bobby He, George Deligiannidis, Arnaud Doucet, and Judith
  Rousseau. Stable resnet. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp.
  1324–1332. PMLR, 2021.

Bobby He, James Martens, Guodong Zhang, Aleksandar Botev, Andrew Brock, Samuel L Smith,
  and Yee Whye Teh. Deep transformers without shortcuts: Modifying self-attention for faithful
  signal propagation. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=NPrsUQgMjKK.

Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.

Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al. Train-
  ing compute-optimal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556, 2022.

Wei Hu, Lechao Xiao, and Jeffrey Pennington. Provable benefit of orthogonal initialization in op-
 timizing deep linear networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
 URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=rkgqN1SYvr.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xiao Shi Huang, Felipe Perez, Jimmy Ba, and Maksims Volkovs. Improving transformer optimiza-
  tion through better initialization. In Hal Daumé III and Aarti Singh (eds.), Proceedings of the 37th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learn-
  ing Research, pp. 4475–4483. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
  press/v119/huang20f.html.
Angelos Katharopoulos, Apoorv Vyas, Nikolaos Pappas, and François Fleuret. Transformers are
  rnns: Fast autoregressive transformers with linear attention. In International conference on ma-
  chine learning, pp. 5156–5165. PMLR, 2020.
Jaehoon Lee, Jascha Sohl-dickstein, Jeffrey Pennington, Roman Novak, Sam Schoenholz, and
  Yasaman Bahri. Deep Neural Networks as Gaussian Processes. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2018.
Mufan Bill Li, Mihai Nica, and Daniel M Roy. The neural covariance sde: Shaped infinite depth-
 and-width networks at initialization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.02768, 2022.
Liyuan Liu, Xiaodong Liu, Jianfeng Gao, Weizhu Chen, and Jiawei Han. Understanding the diffi-
  culty of training transformers. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in
  Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 5747–5763, 2020.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter.        Decoupled weight decay regularization.        arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.
James Martens and Roger Grosse. Optimizing neural networks with kronecker-factored approximate
  curvature. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2408–2417. PMLR, 2015.
James Martens, Andy Ballard, Guillaume Desjardins, Grzegorz Swirszcz, Valentin Dalibard, Jascha
  Sohl-Dickstein, and Samuel S Schoenholz. Rapid training of deep neural networks without skip
  connections or normalization layers using deep kernel shaping. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.01765,
  2021.
Alexander G de G Matthews, Mark Rowland, Jiri Hron, Richard E Turner, and Zoubin Ghahramani.
  Gaussian Process Behaviour in Wide Deep Neural Networks. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, volume 4, 2018.
Alexandru Meterez, Amir Joudaki, Francesco Orabona, Alexander Immer, Gunnar Rätsch, and Hadi
  Daneshmand. Towards training without depth limits: Batch normalization without gradient ex-
  plosion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.02012, 2023.
Lorenzo Noci, Sotiris Anagnostidis, Luca Biggio, Antonio Orvieto, Sidak Pal Singh, and Aurelien
  Lucchi. Signal propagation in transformers: Theoretical perspectives and the role of rank collapse.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.03126, 2022.
Lorenzo Noci, Chuning Li, Mufan Bill Li, Bobby He, Thomas Hofmann, Chris Maddison, and
  Daniel M Roy. The shaped transformer: Attention models in the infinite depth-and-width limit.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.17759, 2023.
Telmo Pessoa Pires, António V Lopes, Yannick Assogba, and Hendra Setiawan. One wide feedfor-
  ward is all you need. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.01826, 2023.
Ben Poole, Subhaneil Lahiri, Maithra Raghu, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, and Surya Ganguli. Expo-
  nential expressivity in deep neural networks through transient chaos. In D. Lee, M. Sugiyama,
  U. Luxburg, I. Guyon, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 29. Curran Associates, Inc., 2016.
Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. 2019.
Christian Sarofeen, Piotr Bialecki, Jie Jiang, Kevin Stephano, Masaki Kozuki,
  Neal Vaidya, and Stas. Bekman.           Introducing nvFuser, a deep learning
  compiler for PyTorch.         2022.       URL https://pytorch.org/blog/
  introducing-nvfuser-a-deep-learning-compiler-for-pytorch/.


                                                  12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Andrew M Saxe, James L McClelland, and Surya Ganguli. Exact solutions to the nonlinear dynam-
  ics of learning in deep linear neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6120, 2013.

Imanol Schlag, Kazuki Irie, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Linear transformers are secretly fast weight
  programmers. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9355–9366. PMLR, 2021.

Samuel S Schoenholz, Justin Gilmer, Surya Ganguli, and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein. Deep information
  propagation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.

Sharath Nittur Sridhar, Anthony Sarah, and Sairam Sundaresan. Trimbert: Tailoring bert for trade-
  offs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.12411, 2022.

Aleksandar Stanić, Dylan Ashley, Oleg Serikov, Louis Kirsch, Francesco Faccio, Jürgen Schmidhu-
  ber, Thomas Hofmann, and Imanol Schlag. The languini kitchen: Enabling language modelling
  research at different scales of compute. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.11197, 2023.

Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Edouard Grave, Guillaume Lample, Herve Jegou, and Armand Joulin. Aug-
  menting self-attention with persistent memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.01470, 2019.

Wojciech Tarnowski, Piotr Warchoł, Stanisław Jastrzebski, Jacek Tabor, and Maciej Nowak. Dy-
 namical isometry is achieved in residual networks in a universal way for any activation function.
 In The 22nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 2221–2230.
 PMLR, 2019.

Hugo Touvron, Matthieu Cord, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Gabriel Synnaeve, and Hervé Jégou. Going
  deeper with image transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision, pp. 32–42, 2021.

Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.

Asher Trockman and J Zico Kolter. Mimetic initialization of self-attention layers. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.09828, 2023.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.

Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel R. Bowman.
  GLUE: A multi-task benchmark and analysis platform for natural language understanding. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=rJ4km2R5t7.

Ben Wang and Aran Komatsuzaki. GPT-J-6B: A 6 Billion Parameter Autoregressive Language
  Model. https://github.com/kingoflolz/mesh-transformer-jax, May 2021.

Hongyu Wang, Shuming Ma, Li Dong, Shaohan Huang, Dongdong Zhang, and Furu Wei. Deepnet:
  Scaling transformers to 1,000 layers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.00555, 2022a.

Peihao Wang, Wenqing Zheng, Tianlong Chen, and Zhangyang Wang. Anti-oversmoothing in deep
  vision transformers via the fourier domain analysis: From theory to practice. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2203.05962, 2022b.

Lechao Xiao, Yasaman Bahri, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Samuel Schoenholz, and Jeffrey Pennington.
  Dynamical isometry and a mean field theory of cnns: How to train 10,000-layer vanilla con-
  volutional neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5393–5402.
  PMLR, 2018.

Lechao Xiao, Jeffrey Pennington, and Samuel Schoenholz. Disentangling trainability and general-
  ization in deep neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10462–
  10472. PMLR, 2020.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ruibin Xiong, Yunchang Yang, Di He, Kai Zheng, Shuxin Zheng, Chen Xing, Huishuai Zhang,
  Yanyan Lan, Liwei Wang, and Tieyan Liu. On layer normalization in the transformer architecture.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10524–10533. PMLR, 2020.
Hongfei Xu, Qiuhui Liu, Josef van Genabith, Deyi Xiong, and Jingyi Zhang. Lipschitz constrained
  parameter initialization for deep transformers. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 397–402, 2020.
Greg Yang. Wide feedforward or recurrent neural networks of any architecture are gaussian pro-
  cesses. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett
  (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2019.
Greg Yang, Jeffrey Pennington, Vinay Rao, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, and Samuel S. Schoenholz. A
  mean field theory of batch normalization. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=SyMDXnCcF7.
Sheheryar Zaidi, Michael Schaarschmidt, James Martens, Hyunjik Kim, Yee Whye Teh, Alvaro
  Sanchez-Gonzalez, Peter Battaglia, Razvan Pascanu, and Jonathan Godwin. Pre-training via de-
  noising for molecular property prediction. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=tYIMtogyee.
Biao Zhang and Rico Sennrich. Root mean square layer normalization. Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Biao Zhang, Ivan Titov, and Rico Sennrich. Improving deep transformer with depth-scaled initial-
  ization and merged attention. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in
  Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language
  Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 898–909, 2019.
Guodong Zhang, Aleksandar Botev, and James Martens. Deep learning without shortcuts: Shaping
  the kernel with tailored rectifiers. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Hongyi Zhang, Yann N Dauphin, and Tengyu Ma. Fixup initialization: Residual learning without
  normalization. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Guangxiang Zhao, Xu Sun, Jingjing Xu, Zhiyuan Zhang, and Liangchen Luo. Muse: Parallel multi-
  scale attention for sequence to sequence learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.09483, 2019.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    D UALITY BETWEEN DOWNWEIGHTED RESIDUALS AND RESTRICTING
     UPDATES IN LINEAR LAYERS

In Sec. 4.1, we motivated our reparameterisation of the value and projection parameters, Eq. (6),
through a duality between downweighted residuals branches and restricting parameter updates (ma-
terialised through smaller learning rates) in linear layers. This is a relatively simple argument, found
elsewhere in the literature e.g. Ding et al. (2023), which we outline here for completeness.
We suppose we have a (differentiable) loss function L(W ), which is a function of some parameter
matrix W . We consider taking a gradient step to minimise L, with learning rate ηW from initialisa-
tion W0 . This would give new parameters W1 :

                                                        dL
                                    W1 = W0 − η W                                                   (8)
                                                        dW W =W0

Now suppose we have a reparameterisation of the parameters to W ′ , with the same loss L(W ′ ) as
before:


                                           W ′ = U + βV                                          (9)
for fixed scalar β, fixed matrix U and trainable parameter matrix V . We let V be initialised to V0 ,
satisfying W0 = U + βV0 .
If we take a gradient step in V with learning rate ηV , then we get new parameters V1 :

                                             dL
                             V1 = V0 − ηV
                                             dV V =V0
                                              dW ′       dL
                                = V0 − ηV ·            ·
                                               dV V =V0 dW ′ W ′ =W0
                                               dL
                                = V0 − ηV β
                                              dW ′ W ′ =W0
                                              dL
                                = V0 − ηV β                                                        (10)
                                              dW W =W0
where in the last line we just relabelled the reparameterisation variable W ′ to W .
Feeding Eq. (10) back into Eq. (9), we obtain:
                              W1′ = U + βV1
                                                             dL
                                     = U + βV0 − ηV β 2
                                                             dW W =W0
                                                       dL
                                     = W0 − η V β 2                                                (11)
                                                       dW W =W0
due to the equivalence of initialisations.
To match W1′ , Eq. (11), with W1 , Eq. (8), we require:
                                             ηW = ηV β 2 .

Thus, any gradient step we take in the reparameterisation, W ′ = U + βV , corresponds to taking the
same gradient step in original parameterisation, W , but with a learning rate scaled by β 2 . If β < 1,
as is the case in Pre-LN residual branches, this corresponds to downscaling the learning rate.
In the context of our reparameterisation of values and projection parameters Eq. (6), this is then
equivalent to downscaling the learning rates of WV , WP by βV2 , βP2 , if using (stochastic) gradi-
ent descent. With AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017), one factor of β gets divided out by the
preconditioner, so the reparameterisation acts as if we scale the learning rate by β not β 2 .


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To verify this theoretical duality empirically, we plot the equivalent of Fig. 3 but where, instead of
reparameterisation (Eq. (6)) with varied β, we reduce the learning rate of the value and projection
parameters (keeping the learning rate of other parameters fixed). As expected, we see that reducing
the ratio of learning rate for value/projection parameters compared to other parameters improves the
training speed, just like the downweighted residual reparametersiation (Fig. 3).


                                           1.50
               Eval Loss after 40K steps   1.45
                                           1.40
                                           1.35
                                           1.30
                                                                                 Id Winit
                                                                                      V , WP
                                                                                             init
                                           1.25
                                                                                 Orth Winit
                                                                                          V , WP
                                                                                                  init
                                           1.20                                  Pre-LN loss
                                                                                 V-SkipInit loss
                                           1.15
                                                  0.0     0.2     0.4      0.6         0.8               1.0
                                                   Ratio of LRs for W V, W P vs. other params
Figure 9: Equivalent of Fig. 3 that empirically confirms the duality between downweighted residuals
and reduced learning rates.


B    B LOCK LAYOUTS
In Fig. 10 and Fig. 11 we show the layouts of our SAS block (Sec. 4.2) and parallel SAS-P block
(Sec. 4.3). These are the equivalent plots to the layouts in Fig. 1.
Mathematically, our SAS attention sub-block computes (in the notation of Eq. (2)):

      Xout = MHA(Norm
                ]          1 (Xin )), where MHA(X) = Concat Attn1 (X), . . . , AttnH (X) ,
                                              ]                    g               g

                                                                                                      (12)

                                                                                      1        ⊤
    g h (X)=(αh IT +βh Ah (X)−γh C)Xh , and Ah (X)=SM
    Attn                                                                             √ XWhQ WhK X⊤ +M .
                                                                                      dk
                                                                                                      (13)
                       d
Here, Xh ∈RT × H are column blocks of X∈RT ×d , i.e. X=Concat(X1 , . . . , XH ), & SM is Softmax.

C    A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we provide additional experiments and ablations on top of those provided in the main
paper. The experiments in this section are ordered to follow the chronological order of where they
are referenced (or most relevant) in the main paper.

Linear vs Cosine decay LR schedule Fig. 12 compares linear and cosine decay LR schedule. We
see that linear decay provides better final performance across both our models and baselines, and
use linear decay throughout the rest of the paper.

Shaped Attention vs Value-SkipInit Fig. 13 explains our reasons for using Shaped Attention
Eq. (5) (Noci et al., 2023) over the modified attention matrix, αI + βA(X), Eq. (4), that was in-
troduced by He et al. (2023) in Value-SkipInit. We see that Shaped Attention gives a small but


                                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                               MLP Out

                                                 NonLin

                                                 MLP In

                                                 Norm


                                        Hx
                                           Shaped Attention



                                             Q            K


                                                 Norm


                  Figure 10: The SAS block that we obtain at the end of Sec. 4.2.


                                  Hx
                                    Shaped Attention             MLP Out

                                                                 NonLin

                                       Q         K               MLP In



                                                          Norm



      Figure 11: The SAS-P block, with normalisation, that we obtain at the end of Sec. 4.3.


consistent gain throughout training. The experiments here follow the same training and hyperpa-
rameter setup as those in Sec. 4.

Sensitivity to MLP block gain initialisation In Sec. 4.1, we motivated downweighting the initial-
isation of trainable MLP block weight βFF (c.f. Eqs. (1) and (7)) in skipless architectures to replicate
the implicit downweighting mechanism of Pre-LN skips. Fig. 14 shows the sensitivity of final loss
to our initialisation for trainable βFF .

Figure 3 with tied orthogonals In Fig. 3, we observed that restricting the updates to value and
projection parameters recovers nearly all of the lost training speed in Transformer blocks without
attention sub-block skips. This phenomenon occurred for both random orthogonal and identity
                  V      P
initialisations Winit , Winit , but identity initialisation outperformed orthogonal, which may be a bit
surprising as they should be identical from a signal propagation perspective.
To investigate this, we consider two alternatives:


                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                    1.50
                              4.0
                                                                                        Pre-LN, cosine                                                                  Pre-LN, cosine
                                                                                        Pre-LN, linear                              1.45                                Pre-LN, linear
    Eval Cross-entropy Loss


                                                                                                          Eval Cross-entropy Loss
                              3.5                                                       SAS, cosine                                                                     SAS, cosine
                                                                                                                                    1.40
                                                                                        SAS, linear                                                                     SAS, linear
                              3.0                                                       SAS-P, cosine                               1.35                                SAS-P, cosine
                                                                                        SAS-P, linear                                                                   SAS-P, linear
                              2.5                                                                                                   1.30
                              2.0                                                                                                   1.25

                              1.5                                                                                                   1.20

                                                                                                                                    1.15
                                    0                     10K                 20K   30K          40K                                    20K    25K    30K         35K         40K
                                                                        Training step                                                                Training step

Figure 12: Comparing training performance with cosine and linear decay LR schedulers on Code-
Parrot. The right plot is a zoomed-in version of the left. We see that linear decay consistently
provides a better final performance than cosine decay, despite trailing for most of the steps towards
the end of training.


                                                                  4.0
                                                                                                                  SAS-P, V-SkipInit attn
                                                                                                                  SAS-P, shaped attn
                                        Eval Cross-entropy Loss


                                                                  3.5

                                                                  3.0
                                                                                                                  SAS, V-SkipInit attn
                                                                                                                  SAS, shaped attn
                                                                  2.5

                                                                  2.0

                                                                  1.5

                                                                  1.0
                                                                          0               10K            20K                                  30K           40K
                                                                                                   Training step
Figure 13: Shaped Attention (dashed lines) provides a small performance boost compared to the
attention matrix of Value-SkipInit (solid lines), for both SAS and SAS-P blocks. All transformers
are 18-Layer autoregressive GPT models, and the dataset is CodeParrot.


                                                                                                         18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                           1.25


               Eval Loss after 40K steps
                                           1.24

                                           1.23

                                           1.22

                                           1.21

                                           1.20

                                           1.19

                                                  0.0   0.5    1.0         1.5   2.0   2.5   3.0
                                                  Initialisation for MLP residual weights FF
Figure 14: Final test loss achieved as a function of the initialisation for trainable MLP block gains
βFF on CodeParrot.


      1. “LL-tied” or last-layer tied: this is when we initialise all but the final layer projection ma-
                                                                                                    P
         trix as independent random orthogonals. Then for the final layer projection matrix Winit,L
         (or rather its transpose), we tie the initialisation to the previous layers, as:
                                                  L−1
                                                                      !
                                       P⊤
                                                  Y
                                                           V      P        V
                                    Winit,L =          Winit,l Winit,l Winit,L  .
                                                                     l=1
                                                                                QL         V      P
         The purpose of this is so that the combined product over all layers l=1 Winit,l      Winit,l is
         the identity, which mimicks the functional output of the whole transformer with identity
            V                P
         Winit,l = I = Winit,l    (up to the MLP blocks, but we note that the MLP weights are
         independently Gaussian initialised and so are rotationally invariant at initialisation, and are
         also downweighted as they lie on a downweighted residual branch).
                                                                                                     ⊤
                                                                                      V            P
      2. “All-tied”: this is when for each attention layer/sub-block l we have Winit,l      = Winit,l
         with random orthogonal initialisation, which makes the value-projection product identity,
            V      P
         Winit,l Winit,l = I ∀l ≤ L, and hence matches the outputs of each attention sub-block
         exactly as if we had identity values and projections at initialisation. This initialisation is
         similar to that of Trockman & Kolter (2023), although here we are considering skipless
         attention sub-blocks.

Fig. 15 is the equivalent of Fig. 3 but with LL-tied (yellow line with diamond markers) and all-tied
(blue line with star markers) included. In Fig. 15, we see that matching the functional output (as
in LL tied) with orthogonal initialisation provides a slight improvement to close the gap between
the random orthogonal (green line) and identity (purple line) initialisations. Matching the attention
sub-block outputs (as in all-tied) further improves performance, but does not fully close the gap to
identity initialisation. Interestingly, it seems like orthogonally initialised values and projections do
benefit from being trainable (i.e. small but non-zero βV , βP ). We leave a further exploration of these
observations to future work.

Further scalar parameter trajectories In Fig. 4 we saw that residual-skip gain ratios on the
values and projections αβVV , αβPP (from the reparameterisation in Eq. (6)) converge to zero during
training for the vast majority of layers, in models without attention sub-block skip connections. In
Fig. 16 we plot the corresponding plot to Fig. 4 but for a parallel block with no skip connections
(i.e. SAS-P with reparameterisation Eq. (6) and trainable values and projections. Like before, we
also initialise trainable βV , βP to 0.2, and αV , αP to 1). Again, we see that the vast majority of


                                                                      19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                           1.50


               Eval Loss after 40K steps
                                           1.45

                                           1.40

                                           1.35

                                           1.30                          Orth Winit
                                                                                 V , WP
                                                                                       init
                                                                         Orth Winit
                                                                                 V , W P , LL tied
                                                                                       init
                                           1.25                          Orth Winit
                                                                                 V = W P , all tied
                                                                                         init
                                                                         Identity Winit
                                                                                     V , WP
                                                                                            init
                                           1.20                          Pre-LN loss
                                                                         V-SkipInit loss
                                           1.15
                                                  0.0   0.2    0.4     0.6          0.8           1.0
                                                          Residual weights V, P
               Figure 15: Equivalent of Fig. 3 but with tied orthogonal initialisations.


β
α ratios converge to 0, indicating that the value and projection parameters converge to the identity.
Also, again we see that the first value matrix is the only ratio above 0.05 at the end of training.
Figs. 17 to 20 plot the corresponding trajectories, of the model in Fig. 4, for various other train-
able scalar parameters we have: namely, the three shaped attention parameters 1) α on the identity
(Fig. 17), 2) β on the softmax attention output (Fig. 18), 3) γ on the centring matrix (Fig. 19), as well
as 4) βFF on the MLP block (Fig. 20). We see that none of these other scalar parameters converge to
zero. The shaped attention parameters have error bars denoting standard deviations across (the 12)
heads.
In Fig. 21, we plot the equivalent of Fig. 4 but for an attention skipless model with random orthog-
onally initialiased (from the Haar measure) value and projection weights. Again, we see that the
vast majority of residual/skip gain ratios converge from their initial value of 0.2 to 0 during training
albeit with slightly more outliers than in Fig. 4.
However, in Fig. 22 we plot the equivalent of Figs. 4 and 21 but for a Pre-LN model that has attention
skip connection (and identity initialised values/projections). Now, we see that the introduction of
the skip connection encourages many more residual/skip gain ratios in the value/projection weights
to increase during training (notice the y-axis), i.e. encouraging the values/projections to leave their
identity initialisation. Together, these results reaffirm the complex interactions between skip con-
nections and value/projection weights in the standard transformer architecture highlighted by our
work.

Identity values and projections with default Pre-LN block In Sec. 4.2 we observed that re-
moving values and projection parameters by setting them to the identity improves the convergence
speed per parameter update of transformer blocks with skipless attention sub-blocks. This raises
the question of whether the same would occur in the standard block that uses attention sub-blocks
skip connections i.e. the Pre-LN block. In Fig. 23 we compare the default Pre-LN block to one
with values and projections set to be identity. We see that in this case identity values and projec-
tions actually slightly hurt performance in terms of loss reduction per update, in constrast to the
skipless case. We also tried to downweight the attention block residual (βSA < 1 in the notation
of Eq. (1)) with identity values and projections to see if the scale of the attention skip and residual
was the reason for this difference, but this did not change the findings of Fig. 23. We do not have a
satisfying explanation for this, but our intuition is that identity value and projections (as opposed to
e.g. Gaussian/random orthogonal initialisation) with attention skip means that the two branches of
the skip are no longer independent at initialisation and interfere with each other, though it is unclear
that this would continue to hold during training.


                                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             0.20
                                                                                    Layer
              Residual/Skip gain ratios, /
                                                             1           6              11          16
                                                             2           7              12          17
                                             0.15            3           8              13          18
                                                             4           9              14          Proj P/ P
                                                             5           10             15          Value V/ V
                                             0.10


                                             0.05


                                             0.00
                                                    0   5K   10K   15K        20K     25K    30K    35K   40K
                                                                     Training step
          Figure 16: Corresponding plot to Fig. 4 but for a parallel block with no skips.


                                             2.0
                                                                                        Layer
                                             1.8                         1             6           11           15
                                                                         2             7           12           16
              Shaped Attn skip gain,


                                             1.6
                                                                         3             8           13           17
                                             1.4                         4             9           14           18
                                                                         5             10
                                             1.2
                                             1.0
                                             0.8
                                             0.6
                                             0.4

                                                   0    5K   10K   15K        20K     25K    30K    35K   40K
                                                                     Training step
                                             Figure 17: Trajectories for shaped attention α parameter.


                                                                             21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                           2.0
                                                                 Layer
                                           1.8        1         6           11         15
              Shaped Attn residual gain,   1.6        2         7           12         16
                                                      3         8           13         17
                                           1.4        4         9           14         18
                                                      5         10
                                           1.2
                                           1.0
                                           0.8
                                           0.6
                                           0.4

                                                 0   5K   10K    15K     20K     25K   30K   35K   40K
                                                                     Training step
                                           Figure 18: Trajectories for shaped attention β parameter.


                                           2.0
                                                                 Layer
                                           1.8        1         6           11         15
              Shaped Attn centre gains,


                                           1.6        2         7           12         16
                                                      3         8           13         17
                                           1.4        4         9           14         18
                                                      5         10
                                           1.2
                                           1.0
                                           0.8
                                           0.6
                                           0.4

                                                 0   5K   10K    15K     20K     25K   30K   35K   40K
                                                                     Training step
                                           Figure 19: Trajectories for shaped attention γ parameter.


                                                                       22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             0.5
                                                                    Layer
                                                         1         6             11           15
                                                         2         7             12           16
              MLP residual gains, FF
                                             0.4
                                                         3         8             13           17
                                                         4         9             14           18
                                             0.3         5         10

                                             0.2


                                             0.1


                                             0.0
                                                   0    5K   10K    15K        20K     25K    30K   35K   40K
                                                                        Training step
                                               Figure 20: Trajectories for MLP block βFF parameter.


                                                        Skipless with orthogonal Winit
                                                                                  V , WP
                                                                                       init
                                             0.20                                    Layer
              Residual/Skip gain ratios, /


                                                             1            6              11         16
                                                             2            7              12         17
                                             0.15            3            8              13         18
                                                             4            9              14         Proj P/ P
                                                             5            10             15         Value V/ V
                                             0.10


                                             0.05


                                             0.00
                                                    0   5K   10K    15K        20K     25K    30K   35K   40K
                                                                        Training step
                                               Figure 21: Trajectories for MLP block βFF parameter.


                                                                           23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                               1.0
                                                                            Pre-LN (with skip)
                                                                                            Layer
                Residual/Skip gain ratios, /   0.8                1               6             11         16
                                                                  2               7             12         17
                                                                  3               8             13         18
                                               0.6                4               9             14         Proj P/ P
                                                                  5               10            15         Value V/ V
                                               0.4

                                               0.2

                                               0.0
                                                     0       5K   10K       15K        20K     25K   30K   35K   40K
                                                                              Training step
                                                 Figure 22: Trajectories for MLP block βFF parameter.


                                           3.00

                                           2.75                                W V, W P = I, Pre-LN
              Eval Cross-entropy Loss


                                                                               W V, W P I, Pre-LN
                                           2.50

                                           2.25

                                           2.00

                                           1.75

                                           1.50

                                           1.25
                                                         0            10K               20K          30K         40K
                                                                              Training step
Figure 23: Pre-LN block performs worse when setting values and projections to identity, unlike in
the skipless setting.


                                                                                       24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Using the first value matrix In Figs. 4 and 16 we see that the vast majority of value and projection
parameters stay close to the identity during training when initialised to identity, even when they have
the capacity to move away from initialisation. The first layer value matrix W1V is an exception to
this rule. In Fig. 24 we see that allowing the first layer value parameters to be trainable provides a
very small boost to training performance, when all other value and projection weights are fixed to
the identity. Intuitively it makes sense that the first layer value parameters would be more important
than others because they act directly on the input embedding at the beginning of the model. We thus
choose to reincorporate trainable value parameters (using identity initialisation in Eq. (6)) in the first
layer of our models using SAS and SAS-P blocks, but remove all other values WlV for l > 1, and
all projections too WlP ∀l ≥ 1, by fixing to the identity.

                                                                                                          1.50
                              4.0
                                                              SAS-P, W1V = I                                                              SAS-P, W1V = I
                                                              SAS-P                                       1.45
    Eval Cross-entropy Loss


                                                                                Eval Cross-entropy Loss
                                                                                                                                          SAS-P
                              3.5                             SAS, W1V = I                                1.40                            SAS, W1V = I
                                                              SAS                                                                         SAS
                              3.0                                                                         1.35

                              2.5                                                                         1.30

                              2.0                                                                         1.25

                              1.5                                                                         1.20

                                                                                                          1.15
                                    0   10K      20K      30K          40K                                    20K   25K    30K      35K         40K
                                              Training step                                                               Training step


Figure 24: Comparing training performance with trainable first layer values W1V vs with identity
first layer values W1V , for models using our SAS and SAS-P blocks. All other values and projections
are set to the identity. The right plot is a zoomed-in version of the left. We see that having trainable
first layer values provides a (very small) boost in performance.


Linearising MLP activations As stated in Sec. 4.3, we tried to use the recent idea of “linearising”
activation functions in order to obtain better signal propagation (Martens et al., 2021; Zhang et al.,
2022; Li et al., 2022) in deep NNs with skip connections, and recover lost training speed when the
MLP skip is removed. In particular, Li et al. (2022) show for Leaky ReLU,
                                                              LReLU(x) = max(x, sx),
with negative slope s ∈ [0, 1], we need s = 1 − O( √1L ) to obtain well behaved signal propagation
in MLPs at large depths L.
In Fig. 25, we took our 18-block model trained with SAS block (Fig. 10), and assessed training
performance without the MLP skip, αFF = 0. We tried 3 different activations: 1) standard ReLU, 2)
LReLU with slope s = 0.2, and 3) LReLU with s = 0.8 ≈ 1 − √118 .
We see that all blocks without MLP skip train significantly slower than our SAS block (which
matches the training speed of the Pre-LN block). In fact, linearising ReLU into LReLU seemed to
hurt training speed rather than help it. These findings are consistent with those of previous works
with AdamW optimiser (Martens et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022; He et al., 2023). We note that a
big reason behind this is that the architectures with skipless MLP sub-blocks required an order of
magnitude smaller learning rate (1e − 4 vs 1e − 3) otherwise training was unstable.

Loss vs training step In Fig. 26, we provide the equivalent plot to Fig. 5, but in terms of loss over
the steps taken. Our SAS and SAS-P essentially match the Pre-LN model in terms of loss reduction
per step, whilst removing normalisation slightly hurts performance.

Crammed Bert loss vs training step In Fig. 27 we plot the MLM loss in the Crammed Bert
setting on the Pile dataset, as a function of the number of microbatch steps taken. Because our
models have higher throughput they are able to take more steps within the 24 hour allotted time.


                                                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                        4.0
                                                            no MLP skip, LReLU slope=0.2
                                                            no MLP skip, LReLU slope=0.8


              Eval Cross-entropy Loss
                                        3.5
                                                            no MLP skip, ReLU
                                        3.0                 with MLP skip
                                        2.5

                                        2.0

                                        1.5

                                        1.0
                                              0      10K          20K          30K         40K
                                                             Training step
Figure 25: Removing MLP skips results in significant losses of training speed, even when linearising
activations.


                                   3.00
                                                                   V-SkipInit (He et al. 2023)
                                   2.75                            Pre-LN
                                   2.50                            SAS (§4.2)
              Eval Cross-entropy


                                                                   SAS-P (§4.3)
                                   2.25                            SAS-P, no norm (§4.4)
                                                                   Parallel (Wang et al, 2021)
                                   2.00

                                   1.75

                                   1.50

                                   1.25
                                              0       10K         20K          30K         40K
                                                              Training step
                                    Figure 26: Equivalent of Fig. 5 but with steps on the x-axis.


GLUE breakdown In Table 2, we provide a breakdown of the GLUE results in Table 1 in terms
of different tasks.

Autoregressive Language Modelling We investigate if our findings hold in the next-token pre-
diction language modelling domain. This also allows us to test at larger sequence lengths (512) than
other experiments in this work (128). The task is autoregressive language modelling on the Languini
Benchmark books dataset (Stanić et al., 2023), and we use the same codebase and tokeniser provided
by the authors. Models have 12 layers with width 768, which gives 100M parameters (including
tied embedding/unembedding) by default when MLP width is 3072 (4×768). Sequence length is
512 and we train for 19K steps on batch size 128, giving 1.2B training tokens. Learning rate is lin-
early warmed up for 500 steps to a maximum value that is tuned for all models separately (3e-3 for
our simplified models, 1e-3 for the default blocks), before linear decay. ALiBi positional encoding


                                                                 26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           4.5
                                                                     Crammed BERT (Pre-LN)
                                                                     Parallel (Wang et al, 2021)
                           4.0                                       SAS (§4.2)
                                                                     SAS-P (§4.3)
                                                                     SAS-P, no norm (§4.4)
                                                                     V-SkipInit (He et al. 2023)

                MLM loss
                           3.5


                           3.0


                           2.5


                                  0      100K       200K      300K      400K     500K     600K
                                                     Microbatch step
Figure 27: MLM loss vs microbatch steps taken. Note that because the LR schedule depends on the
total number of steps taken by a model, and is different in different models for the same number of
steps taken, comparing models in terms of MLM loss at a given step is not so informative.

      Table 2: Breakdown of GLUE results on different tasks. Results are the mean over 3 seeds.

                                 GLUE     MNLI       SST-2      STSB     RTE    QNLI      QQP      MRPC    CoLA
 Pre-LN (Crammed)            78.9±.7    81.2/81.6      89.9      87.6    56.3     88.9     87.1     88.3    49.4
 Parallel                    78.5±.6    80.8/80.9      91.0      87.5    54.9     88.0     87.0     87.3    49.0
 SAS (Sec. 4.2)              78.4±.8    79.7/80.1      90.3      84.7    58.4     87.5     86.8     87.5    50.6
 SAS-P (Sec. 4.3)            78.3±.4    79.5/79.4      90.8      85.2    59.1     87.5     86.5     86.0    50.5
 V-SkipInit                  78.0±.3    79.7/80.4      90.4      85.1    54.4     87.0     86.2     87.9    51.5



and GeLU activations are used. Training takes place on a single RTX-2080Ti (with microbatches of
size 16), and we use AdamW with weight decay 0.1.
We plot a training speed comparison of our simplified blocks against default in Fig. 28 below, in
terms of runtime on the x-axis and evaluation perplexity on the y-axis. We again see that our models
are able to match the training speed of default Pre-LN and Parallel blocks. Moreover, our SAS block
(orange curve with star markers) achieves the same final perplexity after 19K steps (22.37 vs 22.39)
as the Parallel block (pink curve with diamond markers) despite using 15% fewer parameters.


D      I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

In this section we add remaining implementation details that were not discussed in the main paper.
We break down our implementation details into two subsections, one for the next-token prediction
task on CodeParrot and one for our Crammed BERT (Geiping & Goldstein, 2023) masked language
modelling experiments pretrained on the Pile dataset (Gao et al., 2020) and fine-tuned to downstream
GLUE benchmark (Wang et al., 2019). To avoid repetition, any details that are mentioned in one
subsection but not the other are shared between both subsections. All runtime results on CodeParrot
were run on a single A5000 GPU.

D.1     C ODEPARROT NEXT- TOKEN PREDICTION

As mentioned, much of our setup is derived from https://huggingface.co/learn/
nlp-course/chapter7/6.


                                                           27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                            SAS-P
                                 50                                         SAS
                                 45
                                                                            Pre-LN
                                                                            Parallel

               Eval Perplexity
                                 40

                                 35

                                 30

                                 25

                                      2    4        6         8        10        12
                                               Runtime (hours)
       Figure 28: Eval perplexity vs runtime on an autoregressive language modelling task.



Model The model is a 18-layer GPT-style auto-regressive decoder-only transformer. We use width
d = 768, and H = 12 heads in multi-head attention. We remove dropout entirely as our focus
is on training speed, and we are always in a single-epoch regime so regularisation hurts training
speed. The MLP uses ReLU activation unless stated otherwise, and we use MLP hidden dimension
3072 = 4d. The only exception to this is in Fig. 6, where we reduce the MLP hidden dimension to
1536 = 2d to account for the increased memory requirements of larger depths.
For any of our simplified model we initialise βFF = 0.1 in Eq. (1) to account for the lack of skip,
apart from the 18-layer models in Fig. 6, where βFF = 0.2 due to the narrower width.
We use RMSNorm (Zhang & Sennrich, 2019) where applicable with epsilon 1e − 8, and add a
final normalisation after the decoder. Sinusoidal positional encodings are used and added at the
embedding level.


Parameter Initialisation For the Pre-LN and parallel blocks, we initialise all weights (including
the embedding layer) to have standard deviation 0.02 as is standard in GPT2 (Radford et al., 2019)
and BERT (Devlin et al., 2018). This is a choice that is prevalent in the field, and is on the order of
O( √1d ) for d = 768, that one would expect from signal propagation.

For our models, we always initialise W Q = 0 like (He et al., 2023), which as discussed zeros
the query-key dot product, and allows shaped attention to have a dominant identity component at
initialisation. Also as discussed, we initialise trainable scalar parameters in shaped attention to 1 for
simplicity; the same applies for the αV , βV we use in the first layer value parameters W1V . All other
scalar parameters in the attention and MLP branches βSA , βFF (initialised to 1 and 0.1 resp.) are also
trainable in our models, which we found to give a small boost in performance.


Training We use AdamW optimiser (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017) with weight decay 0.1 which
we tuned on a small grid, and found to work well for both baselines and our models. We do not
apply weight decay to any scalar gain parameter. We clip gradients with with clipping parameter 1,
and use epsilon of 1e − 8 and default betas of (0.9, 0.999) in AdamW. As discussed, we use a linear
decay rate with 5% of all steps used for linear warmup. The optimal learning rate was tuned in all
cases, and for our best (SAS and SAS-P) models, was found to be 1e−3, which exactly matched that
of the default Pre-LN. This held true also when we scaled to 72 layers. V-SkipInit needed a lower
learning rate for the depth scaling experiments (3e − 4 and 1e − 4 for depths 18 and 72 respectively).
We use batch size of 128 with microbatches of size 32.


                                                   28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Dataset The Codeparrot dataset is a large corpus of 20 million python files from GitHub. We
take the dataset, pre-processing and tokeniser from https://huggingface.co/learn/
nlp-course/chapter7/6. We use sequence length T = 128 throughout, and our tokeniser
has 50K vocabulary size. Our base experiments train for around 43K steps on batch size 128 and
sequence length 128 which is around 700M tokens. In Fig. 8 we scale this to 2B tokens.

Task The model is trained on next-token prediction using cross-entropy loss.

D.2     BERT ENCODER - ONLY

As discussed in Sec. 5, we inherit much of our hyperparameters from the Cramming setup of Geiping
& Goldstein (2023), and also base our implementation from their excellent codebase.9 We highlight
important implementation details here.

Model We use a 16-layer encoder only model, with width d = 768 and 12 heads. We use MLP
width 3072 = 4d, but now we use GLU (Dauphin et al., 2017) with GeLU activation, which essen-
tially halves the hidden dimension. We use LayerNorm (Ba et al., 2016) for normalisation where
applicable with epsilon 1e − 12 as taken from Geiping & Goldstein (2023); we always use a final
LN after all the layers. Again, we remove all dropout, and use a sequence length of 128. We found
our simplified skipless models prefered smaller MLP block scales and initialise βFF = 0.05.

Parameter Initialisation The initialisations are identical to those in Codeparrot, and are detailed
above.

Datasets Like Geiping & Goldstein (2023), we train on the Pile dataset (Gao et al., 2020), with a
WordPiece tokeniser of vocabulary size 32768, and a sequence length of 128. Our fastest runs took
around 600K steps with microbatch size 64 in 24 hours, which corresponds to around 5B tokens.

Training We again trained with AdamW optimiser, with weight decay 0.1. AdamW had hypa-
rameters [β1 , β2 ] = [0.9, 0.98], and epsilon 1e − 12. We used a microbatch of 64 (to fit on a
RTX-2080Ti), and scale the batch size to reach 8192 linearly after 60% of total training like in
Geiping & Goldstein (2023). We use the same aggressive learning rate as Geiping & Goldstein
(2023), which increase linearly to max value after 75% of all training steps, before linear decay, and
tune the maximum learning rate to 3e − 3 for our SAS and SAS-P models. This was slightly too
large for the SAS-P model without normalisation, so we reduce to 2e − 3. We inherit the clipping
parameter of 0.5 from Geiping & Goldstein (2023).

Fine-tuning We followed the same protocol as Geiping & Goldstein (2023), In particular, we fine-
tune for 5 epochs with fixed hyperparameters across tasks. We found dropout to be important for
good downstream performane (unlike during pre-training), and set dropout probability p = 0.1. We
use batch size 32, with a maximum learning of 1.5e − 4. We keep other hyperparameters, e.g. the
choice of cosine decay and AdamW epsilon 1e − 6, like from Geiping & Goldstein (2023).

Task The model is trained on the masked language modelling task with masking probability 0.25,
as in Geiping & Goldstein (2023).


   9
       https://github.com/JonasGeiping/cramming


                                                 29
