Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


U NDERSTANDING THE ROBUSTNESS OF M ULTI - MODAL
C ONTRASTIVE L EARNING TO D ISTRIBUTION S HIFT
    Yihao Xue, Siddharth Joshi, Dang Nguyen, Baharan Mirzasoleiman
    Department of Computer Science,
    University of California, Los Angeles
    yihaoxue@g.ucla.edu, sjoshi804@cs.ucla.edu,
    nguyentuanhaidang@gmail.com, baharan@cs.ucla.edu

                                             A BSTRACT
         Recently, multimodal contrastive learning (MMCL) approaches, such as CLIP
         (Radford et al., 2021), have achieved a remarkable success in learning represen-
         tations that are robust against distribution shift and generalize to new domains.
         Despite the empirical success, the mechanism behind learning such generalizable
         representations is not understood. In this work, we rigorously analyze this problem
         and uncover two mechanisms behind MMCL’s robustness: intra-class contrasting,
         which allows the model to learn features with a high variance, and inter-class fea-
         ture sharing, where annotated details in one class help learning other classes better.
         Both mechanisms prevent spurious features that are over-represented in the training
         data to overshadow the generalizable core features. This yields superior zero-
         shot classification accuracy under distribution shift. Furthermore, we theoretically
         demonstrate the benefits of using rich captions on robustness and explore the effect
         of annotating different types of details in the captions. We validate our theoretical
         findings through experiments, including a well-designed synthetic experiment and
         an experiment involving training CLIP models on MSCOCO (Lin et al., 2014)/Con-
         ceptual Captions (Sharma et al., 2018) and evaluating them on shifted ImageNets.


1     I NTRODUCTION
Learning classifiers that generalize under distribution shifts and across various domains has long
been a challenge in machine learning. A key reason is that modern models are highly susceptible to
learning simple, domain-dependent spurious features in the training data instead of more complex but
generalizable features (Zhu et al., 2016; Sagawa et al., 2019; Xiao et al., 2020; Taori et al., 2020).
Recently, Multimodal Contrastive Learning (MMCL) has demonstrated significant robustness in
zero-shot image classification. It trains vision and language encoders using a contrastive loss to align
representations of paired images and text, while pushing apart the representations of images and texts
from different pairs (e.g., CLIP (Radford et al., 2021), ALIGN (Jia et al., 2021)).
Radford et al. (2021) have shown that models trained with CLIP, an exemplar of MMCL algorithms,
exhibit better Out-of-Distribution (OOD) generalization (c.f. their Fig 13). Specifically, CLIP-
trained zero-shot classifiers achieve higher OOD accuracy compared to classifiers with equivalent
In-Distribution (ID) accuracy that are trained using various supervised learning techniques, including
existing robust methods. Interestingly, the advantage of CLIP diminishes if any label supervision is
introduced, e.g., through linear probing with labeled data on CLIP’s image encoder (c.f. Fig 14 of
(Radford et al., 2021)). Both findings suggest that the zero-shot classifier produced by CLIP is more
robust to distribution shifts than any classifier trained with label supervision.
However, a comprehensive understanding of the reasons behind does not yet exist in the literature.
Existing theoretical studies have only examined MMCL’s in-distribution generalization (Nakada
et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023a), but have not explored its OOD-robustness. In this paper, we aim to
explain how CLIP, and more broadly MMCL, produces a zero-shot classifier with superior robustness,
while demystifying the contributions of MMCL loss and image captions. This study is conducted by
comparing the zero-shot classifier learned through MMCL with classifiers learned via supervised
learning. The latter is arguably representative of all other non-zero-shot methods of classifier training,
as supervised learning is essentially involved (e.g., end-to-end supervised learning, and linear probing
on representations learned by unsupervised/self-supervised algorithms).


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Specifically, we demonstrate that the MMCL loss accompanied by rich image captions enables at
least two mechanisms providing robustness to zero-shot classification. (1) the intra-class contrasting
between image-text pairs within the same latent class enables MMCL to easily learn generalizable
features with a high variance, when they are annotated by text. In contrast, SL is highly prone to
learning simple spurious features instead of the more generalizable features with a higher variance
(Sagawa et al., 2020). For example if the majority of cow images with diverse shapes and colors appear
on a simple green grass background, SL learns the grass to predict ‘cow’, but MMCL successfully
learns the cow; (2) the inter-class feature sharing enabled by MMCL loss allows learning information
about a class that only exists and is annotated in other classes. For example, if all the images of the
tree class have green leaves but an image in the wolf class has a tree without leaves in its background,
MMCL can disassociate the green leaf from the tree class. In contrast, SL cannot leverage this
information and learns the green leaves as an indistinguishable part of ‘tree’. Hence, it fails to
classify trees without green leaves in the test data. Both mechanisms together enable MMCL to learn
representations that are robust against distribution shift and generalize to unseen domains.
Furthermore, to emphasize the importance of captions, we analyze the effect of varying caption
richness and show that rich captions are essential for achieving robustness. As an extreme case, if the
captions are merely labels, no gains in robustness can be achieved.
We further support our theoretical findings with experiments, including a well-designed synthetic
experiment and experiments on real datasets, including MSCOCO, Conceptual Captions, and shifted
versions of ImageNet. The results demonstrate the crucial roles of the MMCL loss function and rich
captions in achieving robustness, further validating our theoretical findings.

2    R ELATED W ORKS

Distribution shift. There is a long line of work on dealing with different types of distribution shift.
This includes sub-population shift and domain generalization among others, where distribution
of sub-populations in training and test data is different, and some sub-populations may be
underrepresented or missing in the training data (Cai et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2023; Santurkar
et al., 2020), (Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz, 2020; Joshi et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023b; Hu et al., 2020;
Fahrbach et al., 2023), or a hybrid of both Koh et al. (2021). Another line of research focuses on
evaluating models on natural variations in the source of data collection, with the precise category
of shift typically unformalized or unknown. For example, a dataset that contains art and cartoon
renditions of ImageNet classes (Hendrycks et al., 2021a), and other variations of ImageNet (Barbu
et al., 2019; Recht et al., 2019; Shankar et al., 2021). Despite the diversity of settings, extensive
studies (Sagawa et al., 2019; 2020; Xiao et al., 2020; Ilyas et al., 2019) revealed a common theme
across these subfields: deep learning models often rely heavily on spurious correlations that are
specific to the training data but do not hold in general, e.g., those between certain object classes
and backgrounds/textures in the image (Zhu et al., 2016; Geirhos et al., 2018).
Multi-modal (contrastive) learning. Learning better representations based on multiple modalities
has been a long pursuit (Ngiam et al., 2011; Srivastava & Salakhutdinov, 2012). Numerous methods
for learning joint vision-language representations (Li et al., 2019; Lu et al., 2019; Tan & Bansal,
2019; Li et al., 2020; Yao et al., 2021) have emerged. Among them, MMCL (Radford et al., 2021; Jia
et al., 2021; Mu et al., 2022; Goel et al., 2022; Pham et al., 2023) has stood out by achieving SOTA
performance in various tasks. Notably, (Radford et al., 2021) showed that MMCL on large image-
text datasets achieves a significant improvement in robustness to distribution shift. The empirical
investigations of (Fang et al., 2022) suggests that this is only attributed to the large diverse image
training data, with MMCL loss and text supervision contributing little. We show provably that it is
not only the diverse image data that contributes to superior robustness of MMCL. Indeed, MMCL
loss and richness of text annotations are crucial factors.

3    A F RAMEWORK FOR C OMPARING MMCL AND SL
In this section, we present a general framework for comparing MMCL and SL, along with the
corresponding notations. We start by modeling the multimodal data, and then formalize the MMCL
and SL pipelines and their evaluation for robustness to distribution shift. We will formulate and
analyze specific types of distribution shift in the next section.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.1   M ODELING M ULTIMODAL DATA
To model multimodal data, it is essential to capture the fact that inputs from different modalities can
represent the same abstract notion. For instance, both text and an image can represent ‘a cow on
grass’. We define underlying feature vectors to model this abstract notion, and model each input in a
specific modality as a projection of the underlying feature vector onto that modality’s input space.
Underlying feature . There is an underlying feature space shared among different modalities,
where abstract notions reside. We model this as a vector space Rl , where each vector is termed an
underlying feature vector (e.g., ‘a cow on grass’), and each element within the vector is referred to as
an underlying feature (e.g., ‘cow’).
Latent classes and labels. Each z is associated with a latent class, represented by a label y. We note
that the labels are only used by SL but not by MMCL.
Inputs in each modality. Each input example in a modality is an instantiation of an abstract notion.
We model this as a projection from an underlying feature vector to another space where this modality’s
inputs live. Formally, let M represent a modality. Given a underlying feature vector z , a corresponding
input x M in this modality is generated as: x M = D M µ M (zz ) + ξ M , where µ M (zz ) ∈ Rl is a random
vector that depends on z . It can be interpreted as a possibly distorted version of the original feature
vector z . Note that setting µ M (zz ) = z implies no distortion in the features when represented in
                                                                    σ2
this modality. ξ M ∈ RdM is a random noise drawn from N (0, dMξ IdM ). The matrix D M ∈ RdM ×l
(dM > l) is a matrix with orthonormal columns that can be interpreted as a dictionary matrix. It
captures the transformation from the lower dimensional feature space to the higher dimensional
input space. Different modalities can have different D M matrices, reflecting the idea that the
same underlying feature may be instantiated differently in each modality (e.g., colors are represented
differently in images and texts). Modeling modalities as above is consistent with (Nakada et al., 2023).
In this paper, for clarity and illustration, we focus on the popular vision and language modalities. We
let I denote the modality for images, and T denote the modality for texts. However, we note that our
framework and results directly apply to other modalities.
Distribution shift. We define two joint distributions between underlying features and latent classes:
P ⋆ , representing the ‘ground-truth’ in the real world, and P T r , from which our training data are
drawn. We let P T r exhibit spurious correlations between certain features and latent classes which
do not hold in the ground-truth P ⋆ . This setup captures the underlying reason for the performance
drop observed in various types of distribution shift scenarios, as we will discuss in Section 2.

3.2   M ULTI -M ODAL C ONTRASTIVE L EARNING (MMCL)
Unlike traditional supervised learning, MMCL does not see the input data’s latent classes, but is
instead given pairs of inputs from two modalities and aims to learn the correspondence between them.
Training dataset. The training dataset comprises n image-text pairs, denoted as {(x    xI,i , x T,i )}ni=1 ,
where for each index i, both x I,i and x T,i are generated based on the same underlying feature vector
z i . In practice, the texts are usually captions accompanying the images. The feature vectors {zz i }ni=1
are drawn from the training distribution C T r .
Linear encoders. The encoders for modalities I and T are denoted as gI : RdI → Rp and
gT : RdT → Rp respectively. We consider linear models for the encoders, given by gI (x        x) = W I x
and gT (x x) = W T x , where W I ∈ RdI ×p and W T ∈ RdT ×p with p ≥ l are the corresponding
encoder parameters. Linear encoders are employed widely in previous studies of MMCL (Nakada
et al., 2023; Ren & Li, 2023) and general feature learning (Jing et al., 2021; Tian et al., 2021; Ji et al.,
2021; Wu et al., 2022; Tian, 2022; Xue et al., 2023), to facilitate the analysis. In Section 6, we will
empirically confirm that our findings extend to non-linear models.
Representation learning with MMCL. MMCL learns representations for both modalities in a shared
latent space. We consider the linearized contrastive loss function from Nakada et al. (2023):
                         1       XX                        1     XX                  ρ
LMMCL (W W I ,W
              W T )=                    (sij −sii ) +                   (sji −sii )+ ∥W W⊤       2
                                                                                          I W T ∥F ,
                     2n(n − 1) i                      2n(n − 1) i                    2
                                       j̸=i                              j̸=i
                 xI,i )⊤ gT (x
where sij := gI (x                     W I x I,i )⊤W T x T,j is the similarity (measured by inner product)
                             xT,j ) = (W
between representations of an image and a text. This loss encourages the model to align each


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


image-text pair by increasing their representation similarity (sii ) and contrast between images and
texts that are not paired together by reducing their representation similarity (sij , i ̸= j). The last
term is a regularization term with ρ > 0. The linear loss and its uni-modal counterpart are widely
used in analysis of CL, as they closely captures the dynamics of popular contrastive losses (Ji et al.,
2021; Tian, 2022; Nakada et al., 2023), such as CLIP, as we will experimentally confirm in Section 6.
Prompts for zero-shot classification. We test the model’s capability in zero-shot classification,
where a text prompt is created for each label (e.g., ‘a photo of a dog’), and the prediction is determined
by the prompt with the highest representation similarity with the given image. To formalize this,
we define the prompt p y for each latent class y as p y = D T z¯y , where z̄z y := E(zz ,y)∼P ⋆ [zz |y]. That
is, the prompt is ‘the center of all underlying feature vectors with label y in the true distribution’
represented in modality T . This closely resembles real world practices where the representation of
multiple texts with engineered templates like ‘a bad photo of a {}’, ‘a good photo
of a {}’ are averaged (Radford et al., 2021).
Robustness evaluation. Given two encoders gI and gT with parameters W I and W T , respectively,
we evaluate the zero-shot performance on the true distribution P ⋆ . Given an image x I , the prediction
is ŷ(x                   xI )⊤ gT (ppy ). The test accuracy, denoted by AccMMCL
      xI ) = arg maxy gI (x                                                      W I , W T ), is
                                                                            P ⋆ (W

                     AccMMCL W I , W T ) = E(zz ,y)∈P ⋆ ,xxI =D
                        P ⋆ (W                                      z )+ξξ I [1(ŷ(x
                                                              D I µ(z              xI ) = y)],                      (1)
where 1(·) denotes the indicator function.
Relation to feature cross-covariance. We utilize the connection between the cross-covariance
between images and captions, and the MMCL objective for our analysis.
Definition 3.1. We define C T r as the cross-covariance between images’ and texts’ feature vectors
C T r := Ez ∈C T r , µ I (zz ), µ T (zz ) [µ       µT (zz )⊤ ]. When µ I (·) and µ T (·) both are identity, C T r is the
                                           µI (zz )µ
covariance of the original feature vector.
Lemma 3.2 (Informal). Given an image with feature µ ′ and a text with feature µ ′′ , the similarity
(inner product of representations) between them, computed using encoders trained on the training
                                                         Pl Pl
set, is: similarity score ≈ µ ′⊤C T rµ ′′ = i=1 j=1 Cij                  T r ′ ′′
                                                                            µi µj .
That is, the image-text similarity is a weighted sum of products between the features in image and
text inputs. The weights are determined by the feature cross-covariance matrix of training data,
whose i, j-th element is the covariance between feature i in images and feature j in texts.
Importance of zero-shot. We emphasize that using zero-shot classification instead of training a linear
classifier on the representations is crucial for achieving robustness in MMCL. The latter essentially
involves SL, which falls short for the same reasons as shown in our analysis for SL in Section 4.

3.3    S UPERVISED L EARNING (SL)

Standard SL has access to each input’s label and the inputs are from a single modality (i.e., images).
      xI,i , yi )}ni=1 be the training dataset with n inputs x I,i and their labels yi , we train a linear model
Let {(x
   x) = W ⊤x with weights W ∈ RdI ×q , where q = 1 for binary classification and q = #classes
f (x
for multi-class classification. We consider minimizing logistic loss for binary classification, and
Cross-Entropy loss for multiclass classification, with gradient descent at a sufficiently small step size.
Robustness evaluation. Given a model with weights W , the accuracy, denoted by AccSL                      W ), is
                                                                                                     P ⋆ (W
evaluated on the true distribiution P as AccP ⋆ (W                                    z )+ξξ I [1(ŷ(x
                                        ⋆        SL
                                                      W ) = E(zz ,y)∈P ⋆ ,xxI =D
                                                                               D I µ (z              xI ) = y)],
         xI ) = sign(W
where ŷ(x               W ⊤x Ij ) for binary classification, and ŷ(xxI ) = arg maxj [W          W ⊤x I ]j for
                                  W ⊤x I ]j denoting the j-th element in the vector W ⊤x I .
multi-class classification, with [W

4     T WO M ECHANISMS BEHIND THE ROBUSTNESS OF MMCL
Next, we explore two scenarios illustrating MMCL’s superior robustness to distribution shift,
compared to SL. First, we consider the scenario where generalizable core feature has a higher
variance than domain-dependent spurious feature. Then, we consider the data distribution where
each latent class has a core feature, that co-occurs with a strong spurious feature in the training data.
These features can occur in other latent classes as well, independently of each other. For clarity,
we set µ I (zz ) = z , µ T (zz ) = z , ∀zz ∈ Rl in this section.


                                                           4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.1     ROBUSTNESS VIA I NTRA - CLASS C ONTRASTING
We start by analyzing the first scenario which illustrates how MMCL can learn features that are chal-
lenging for SL to learn. Consider the case where the majority or all images of a ‘cow’ appear on ‘grass’.
Here, grass is a spurious feature with high correlation with cow. Grass is often a simple green surface
without a high variation. But, cows can vary a lot in their appearance. This makes cows more difficult
to learn than grass. Below, we will formalize this scenario and demonstrate that SL learns the spurious
feature (grass) but MMCL learns the generalizable feature (cow) and obtains a superior robustness.

4.1.1    D ISTRIBUTION OF FEATURES
The following definition simulates the aforementioned scenario.
Definition 4.1 (Data Model 1). In both P ⋆ and P T r , each label y is uniformly drawn from
{−1, 1} and the corresponding feature vector z ∈ R2 is generated as z = [zcore , zspu ]T where
                 2
zcore ∼ N (y, σcore ), represents the core feature that contains information of the label y, and zspu ∼
         2
N (a, σspu ). In the true distribution P ⋆ , a is uniformly drawn from {−1, 1} and is independent of
the label y, making the feature zspu irrelevant to the label. However, in the training distribution C T r ,
there is a strong correlation between a and y, s.t. Pr(a = y) = pspu , where 1 ≥ pspu > 1/2.
Recall from Section 3.1 that the inputs in each modality are generated based on feature vectors. In SL,
where we have only one modality, the situation becomes equivalent to the one analyzed in (Sagawa
et al., 2020). Similar variants are studied in (Wald et al., 2021; Aubin et al., 2021; Yao et al., 2022)
to investigate distribution shift and out-of-domain generalization. Despite its simplicity, this setup
reflects key aspects of general distribution shift. Here, zcore is the core feature and zspu is the spurious
feature, such as ‘grass’ in the aforementioned example, or texture/backgrounds in ImageNet.
We assume that the core feature has a larger variance than the spurious feature, indicated by the
values of σcore and σspu . This is detailed in below, along with some additional assumptions.
Assumption 4.2. The gap between the variances of the core and spurious features is significant:
                                              1
σcore = Θ(1), σcore ≥ 1 and σspu = O( √log      n
                                                  ). The spurious correlation is large: pspu = 1 − o(1).
We consider the high-dimensional (overparameterized) setting where n = ω(1), dI = Ω(n) and
dT = Ω(n). The noise levels are not too large: σξ,I = O(log n) and σξ,T = O(log n).

4.1.2    C OMPARING ROBUSTNESS OF SL AND MMCL
Under Assumption 4.2, SL tends to associate labels mostly with the spurious feature, as they appear
to be more stable and reliable for prediction compared to the core feature. This results in low accuracy
when tested on the ground-truth distribution, as demonstrated in the following theorem.
Theorem 4.3 (Theorem 1 from (Sagawa et al., 2020)). Let W ∗ represent the model trained using SL as
described in Section 3.3. Assuming that Assumption 4.2 holds, and n and dI are sufficiently large,
with a high probability, the accuracy of W ∗ on the true distribution satisfies AccSL   W ∗ ) ≤ 2/3. Ad-
                                                                                   P ⋆ (W
ditionally, the model’s test accuracy on examples where a ̸= y is ≤ 1/3, worse than random chance.

Next, we examine MMCL. From Lemma 3.2, we know that the  similarity between an                           image
                                                                                      2                    ′

                                               ′                               1 +  σ core 2p spu −  1   zcore
with feature z and a text with feature z is approximately [zcore zspu ]                            2        ′   ,
                                                                               2pspu − 1 1 + σspu         zspu
showing that the variance of features ensures that image and text features, that share the underlying
core features, have a higher similarity score. Furthermore, if we let z ′ be the feature z̄z y′ = [y ′ 0]⊤ in
label y ′ ’s corresponding prompt p y′ , we deduce that the similarity to the prompt is approximately
       2
(1 + σcore  )y ′ zcore + (2pspu − 1)y ′ zspu . Here, the core feature carries more weight when the variance
is large. In essence, since the MMCL loss contrasts images and unpaired texts in the same latent
classes, learning features that have high variance is encouraged; this is in contrast with SL, where
features that have low variance are preferred. With the above observation, after bounding the effect
of noise, we arrive at the following theorem (with proof in Appendix C.2).
Theorem 4.4. Let W ∗I and W ∗T be the weights of the encoders trained using MMCL as described in
                                                                                            1
Section 3.2. Under Assumption 4.2 1 , with a high probability of at least 1 − O( poly(n)          ) = 1 − o(1),
   1
     The theorem holds under more relaxed assumptions about the variances and spurious correlation level; see
details in Appendix C.2), but here we use Assumption 4.2 to keep consistency with Theorem 4.3


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the encoders achieve the following zero-shot accuracy on the true distribution
                                                   1        1
                        AccMMCL W ∗I , W ∗T ) ≥ 1 − Φ(κ1 ) − Φ(κ2 ) − o(1),
                           P ⋆ (W
                                                   2        2
                                     2                                              2
                        2pspu −2−σcore                                   −2pspu −σcore
where κ1 = √                                          , κ2 = √                                        and Φ denotes the
                 (1+σcore ) σcore +(2pspu −1)2 σspu
                     2     2 2                  2                (1+σcore ) σcore +(2pspu −1)2 σspu
                                                                     2     2 2                  2

CDF of the standard normal distribution. Meanwhile, the model’s test accuracy on examples where
a ̸= y is lower bounded by 1 − Φ(κ1 ) − o(1).
Corollary 4.5. With σcore = 1, for sufficiently large n, AccMMCL W ∗I , W ∗T ) ≥ 81%, Moreover, in
                                                            P ⋆ (W
this case, no model can achieve an accuracy higher than 85%.
This, compared with Theorem 4.3, demonstrates that MMCL can outperform SL by a large margin,
and comes close to achieving the best possible accuracy of 85%.
Additionally, in terms of performance on examples where the spurious correlation does not hold, i.e.,
a ̸= y, it’s evident that MMCL excels. As Theorem 4.3 shows, SL’s accuracy is even worse than
random chance. In contrast, Theorem 4.4 demonstrates that MMCL consistently performs better
than random chance. It maintains random chance even in the worst-case scenario, as indicated by
Φ(κ1 ) ≤ 12 , owing to 2pspu − 2 − σcore
                                    2
                                         ≤ 0. When σcore = 1, it achieves an accuracy of 69%.

4.2     ROBUSTNESS VIA I NTER - CLASS F EATURE S HARING

 Next, consider the second scenario and demonstrate how MMCL benefits from annotated details in
 some latent classes to disassociate spurious correlations in other latent classes, while SL fails to grasp
 these details. For example, typical images of a ‘tree’ have green leaves. However, trees in in the
 background of images of ‘wolf’ or ‘ski resort’ may appear without leaves. SL, which only observes
 the labels, tends to overlook the trees without leaves as they do not contribute to learning ‘wolf’ and
‘ski resort’, thus incorrectly correlating trees with the color green. In contrast, in MMCL, if the trees
without leaves are annotated in the captions, the model can disassociate the green leaves from tree.

4.2.1    D ISTRIBUTION OF FEATURES
We first present the underlying feature distributions and then compare MMCL’s robustness with SL.
Definition 4.6 (Data Model 2). True distribution P ⋆ . We have 2m latent classes in total, with
labels 1, . . . , 2m. For each label y, we define a unique alias (k, c): k = ⌊(y + 1)/2⌋, and c = 1
if y is odd, and c = −1 if y is even. The label is sampled uniformly. Let β ∈ [0, 1). Given a label
alias (k, c), the corresponding feature vector z = [z1 , z2 , . . . , z2m ]⊤ is generated as:
  ∀j ≤ m, if j = k then zj = c                                 if j ̸= k then zj ∼ U ({−β, +β})
  ∀j > m, if j = k + m then zj ∼ U ({−α, +α}) if j ̸= k + m then zj ∼ U ({−βα, βα})
where U (S) denotes the uniform distribution over set S.
Training distribution P T r . The training distribution is similar to the true distribution, but with
zk+m always equal to cα, making it appear as if the k + m-th coordinate also indicates the label.

Here, each feature vector in latent class (k, c) (e.g., ‘tree’) has a core feature at coordinate k
(characteristics of a tree) and a spurious feature at coordinate k + m that correlates with the latent
class in the training distribution but not the true distribution (e.g., the color green). With a large α,
such a spurious feature has a larger magnitude than the true feature, making it easier to be learned.
There are also other features at different coordinates that do not correlate with the label; these features
are weaker (indicated by β < 1) so that they do not change the latent class. One observation is that
examples in latent class other than (k, c) would show no correlation between the k-th and k + m-th
features, hinting at their independence from each other (e.g., trees are not necessarily green). We will
show that unlike SL, MMCL can leverage such a hint to obtain a superior robustness.

4.2.2    C OMPARING ROBUSTNESS OF SL AND MMCL
The theorem below demonstrates that SL achieves a low accuracy under distribution shift when the
spurious feature is strong, i.e., when α is large.


                                                           6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 4.7. Assuming that the input noise in each modality is zero, i.e., σξ,I = σξ,T = 0, and
all possible feature vectors in P T r uniformly appear in the training dataset. 2 Let W ∗ be the model
trained using SL as described in Section 3.3. The accuracy on the true distribution has the following
upper bound: AccSL        W ∗ ) ≤ 50% + (1+α2 )(1−β)
                     P ⋆ (W
                                                   2
                                                        2 −8 . For example, if α = 10 and β = 1/3, then
    SL      ∗
AccP ⋆ (WW ) ≤ 60%.
Next, we will examine how MMCL leverages the information about independence of core and spurious
features in each latent class, which is hidden in other latent classes. First, recall the conclusion in
                                                                                                              ′
Lemma 3.2, and" obtain that the similarity between an  # image with features z and a text with features z
                   1+(m−1)β 2               α
                               Im          m Im
is given by z ⊤         m
                        α            1+(m−1)β 2 2
                                                          z ′ . The fact that β only appears on the diagonal
                          I
                        m m               m      α  Im
and not on off-diagonal elements shows that the occurrence of core feature of a given latent class
in other latent classes increases the weight for same-feature products between images and texts rather
than different-feature products. For example, trees without green leaves in classes other than tree
increase the covariance between texts and images of tree, but do not contribute to the correlation
between tree and green. Hence appearance of green in any image has a limited impact on its similarity
to a text describing a tree. More precisely, when computing the similarity between a given image and
                                            2
the prompt for a tree, a weight 1+(m−1)β
                                       m      is assigned to ‘the true characteristic of a tree’ and a weight
 α
m  is assigned  to ‘green’. Here, a larger β leads to more weight placed on the core feature, highlighting
how MMCL utilizes shared features between classes to enhance robustness. This insight leads us
to the following theorem demonstrating the superior performance of MMCL under distribution shift.
Theorem 4.8. Under the same assumption as in Theorem 4.7 Let W ∗I and W ∗T be the weights of
                                                                                              2
encoders trained using MMCL as described in Section 3.2. Then as long as β 2 m > α 1−β          (1+β)
                                                                                                      − 1 + β2,
                                                                                  MMCL
the model has 100% zero-shot accuracy on the true distribution, i.e., AccP ⋆ (W         W ∗I , W ∗T ) = 100%.
We also observe that if the features were not shared between classes, i.e., β = 0, it would be impossible
for the model to achieve such performance. This once again emphasizes the role of shared features.
Important Consideration about Robustness An important question is whether the improvement
in accuracy under distribution shift is solely due to MMCL’s improvement in in-distribution
generalization. In Appendix E, we demonstrate that we control for in-distribution generalization
in both theoretical examples. Specifically, in Data Model 1, SL has slightly better in-distribution
accuracy, while in Data Model 2, both SL and MMCL achieve 100% in-distribution accuracy. Thus,
MMCL’s improvement solely results from enhanced robustness, and in fact, both relative and
effective robustness as defined in Taori et al. (2020).

5    U NDERSTANDING THE BENEFIT OF RICH IMAGE CAPTIONS
In Section 4, we assumed that both µ I (·) and µ T (·) are identity, implying that the captions mentioned
everything depicted in the image. However, in practice, captions often serve as annotations or
illustrations accompanying the image, with certain details omitted. Empirical evidence suggests that
rich captions are generally beneficial (Santurkar et al., 2022; Nguyen et al., 2023), but it remains
unclear if richness of captions can affect robustness and, if so, how. In this section, we theoretically
investigate this question by varying how much and what information is mentioned in captions.
Specifically, we keep µ I (·) as an identity function, while let µ T (zz ) represent a masked version of the
original feature vector z , where some information may not be reflected in caption.
Benefits of mentioning variations in the core features. Recall that in Section 4.1, utilizing Data
Model 1 (Definition 4.1), we showed that MMCL can learn large-variance core features better than
SL, resulting in less reliance on the spurious feature. Now, we use the same data model to explore
what happens if the feature variance is not fully reflected in the captions. For example, when the
caption only contains the word ‘cows’ or ‘grass’, without describing their appearance.
Definition
             5.1 (Feature masking in data model 1 (Definition
                                                                   4.1)). Given  a feature vector z =
 zcore                                                   y + ψcore (zcore − y)
         with corresponding y and a, we let µ T (zz ) =                         , with ψcore drawn from
  zspu                                                    a + ψspu (zspu − a)
Bernoulli(πcore ) and ψspu drawn from Bernoulli(πspu ). Both πcore and πspu are ∈ [0, 1].
   2
     Assumptions are made to simplify the analysis, but our analysis can be readily extended to show that same
conclusions holds with high probability in broader settings with sufficient sample size and reasonable noise level.


                                                        7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Here, zcore −y and zspu −a represent the variations in the core and spurious features, both of which are
Gaussian random variables by Definition 4.1. This implies that the captions capture these variations
with probabilities πcore and πspu , respectively. When π = 0, caption ignores all the details and treats
all features of the same kind as a single entity. The following theorem shows the effects of πcore , πspu .
Theorem 5.2. With data from data model 1 and µ T defined in Definition 5.1, with a high probability,
the model trained using MMCL has a test accuracy on examples where the spurious correlation does
                                                        2    2
                                                 2p−2−πcore σcore
not hold (i.e., a ̸= y) given by 1 − Φ( √      2   2  2 2         2 2
                                                                      ) ± o(1). The non-negligible part
                                          (1+πcore σcore ) σcore +(2p−1) σspu
of this accuracy increases as πcore increases and is independent of πspu .
The theorem reveals that the model exhibits less reliance on the spurious correlation when the
caption mentions the variance in the core feature (e.g., appearance of the cow in each specific image).
Additionally, we notice that mentioning variance in the spurious feature has minimal effect on the
robustness, as it does not impact the correlation with the core feature.
Mentioning more features benefits robustness. Next, we utilize data model 2 to explore the effect
of mentioning more features in the captions.
Definition 5.3 (Feature masking in data model 2 (Definition 4.6)). For a feature vector z with label
(k, c), let µ T (zz ) = ψ ⊙ z , where ψ = [ψ1 . . . ψl ]⊤ with ψk = 1 and ψj ∼ Bernoulli(π) for j ̸= k.
Here, the caption always mentions the feature indicating the latent class, while other features are
mentioned with a probability π. Note that π = 0 corresponds to the setting where the caption is just
the same as the label. The following theorem demonstrates that the model can achieve robustness only
when the caption sufficiently mentions features that are not directly related to the image’s latent class.
Theorem 5.4. With data model 2 and µ T defined in Definition 5.3, let W ∗I and W ∗T be the
weights of encoders trained using MMCL. Then the model’s accuracy on the true distribution
satisfies AccMMCL
             P ⋆ (WW ∗I , W ∗T ) = 100% if π > π̃, and AccMMCL
                                                            P ⋆ (WW ∗I , W ∗T ) ≤ 50% if π < π̃, where
       (1+β)α2 −1+β
π̃ := (1−β)β 2 (m−1) .
As explained in Section 4.2, even if certain features do not directly indicate labels for a class, they
can still help learn relationships between features (for example, not all trees are green), and this
knowledge can be valuable for other classes. However, if these features are missing from the captions,
they contribute less to the cross-covariance matrix used by the model for predictions (Lemma 3.2). In
the extreme case where π = 0, captions reduce to labels used by SL, and robustness does not improve.

6    E XPERIMENTS
A Semi-synthetic Experiment. We conduct a
carefully designed semi-synthetic binary clas-
sification experiment to showcase MMCL’s ro-
bustness and the significance of rich captions.
The task is to distinguish digits 0 to 4 (class 1)
                                                            Figure 1: Construction of captions.
from digits 5 to 9 (class 2). In the training set,
MNIST (Deng, 2012) digits are placed on colored backgrounds, including three types of blue and
three types of red. As illustrated Figure 4, for digits 0-4, 99.5% of images have randomly selected
shades of blue as the background, while the remaining 0.5% have random red backgrounds. The same
applies to digits 5-9, but with blue and red swapped. In the test set, backgrounds are randomly chosen
for all images. Therefore, digits represent the core feature, while colors serve as the spurious feature
whose correlation with classes only exist in the training data. Captions are simulated as vectors,
where the first coordinate contains digit information and the second contains color information.
Both features exhibit variance; for example, there are four variations of digits between 0 and 4 and
three variations of blue backgrounds. We use πcore and πspu to control the specificity of the captions,
determining how much the caption mentions the variance in each feature. Being ‘specific’ means
mentioning the exact value (e.g., specifying a particular shade of blue), while ‘not specific’ means re-
ferring to a value that represents an entire category (e.g., using the mean value for three shades of blue
to represent any blue). Figure 1 shows an example. For more details, please refer to Appendix G.1.
We plot the OOD accuracy in Figure 2, while varying the values of πcore and πspu . We observe: (1)
With sufficiently rich captions (high πcore ), MMCL exhibits better robustness than SL (horizontal


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                            MSCOCO                                                                                                          MSCOCO
                                                                                     CLIP                                      100              MSCOCO
                                                                                                                                                                                          20        w/ intra-class contr.
              75.0


                                                        OOD Accuracy (%)
                                                                           80        SL                                                  standard caption


                                                                                                                                                                       OOD Accuracy (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                    w/o intra-class contr.


                                                                                                                OOD Accuracy (%)
OOD accuracy (%)
                                                                                                                                         label as caption
                                                                                                                                   80
              72.5                                                         60                                                                                                             15
              70.0                                                                                                                 60
                                                                           40                                                                                                             10
              67.5                                                                                                                 40
              65.0            πspu = 1, varying πcore                      20                                                                                                              5
              62.5            πcore = 1, varying πspu                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                            0
              60.0            supervised                                        20          40    60       80                           40        60        80   100                           10         20        30        40   50
                                                                                       ID Accuracy (%)                                       ID Accuracy (%)                                         ID Accuracy (%)
                     0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0                                         Conceptual Captions                                Conceptual Captions                                         Conceptual Captions
                          πcore or πspu                                                                                                                                               17.5
                                                                                     CLIP                                          50    standard caption                                            w/ intra-class contr.
                                                                       50


                                                        OOD Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                OOD Accuracy (%)
                                                                                     SL                                                  label as caption                             15.0


                                                                                                                                                                       OOD Accuracy (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                     w/o intra-class contr.
                                                                       40                                                          40                                                 12.5
   Figure 2: OOD accuracy          30                            30                                                                                                                   10.0
                                                                                                                                                                                       7.5
   on the semi-synthetic           20                            20
                                                                                                                                                                                       5.0
   data.     A large πcore         10                            10                                                                                                                    2.5
                                    0                             0                                                                                                                    0.0
   is crucial for ensuring            0    25     50    75
                                           ID Accuracy (%)
                                                           100      0   25     50    75
                                                                        ID Accuracy (%)
                                                                                        100   0       20        40
                                                                                                  ID Accuracy (%)
   MMCL’s superior robust-           (a) MMCL vs SL             (b) Caption richness (c) Intra-class contr.
   ness compared to SL, but
   the value of πspu has min- Figure    3:  (a)  MMCL      is  more   robust than SL. (b) Caption richness and
   imal effect.               (c) intra-class      contrasting  contribute       to robustness. Note that (c) is in a
                              different setup than (a)(b), as detailed in Appendices G.2 and G.3.
line). (2) A high πcore , indicating that the captions mentioning the variance of the core feature,
is essential for achieving robustness, as reducing πcore significantly hurts the robustness. (3) In
contrast, πspu has minimal effect on robustness. It’s worth noting that (2) and (3) directly validate
the conclusions from Theorem 5.2. Additional discussion can be found in Appendix G.1.
Robustness on real data. We further coroborate our conclusions with experiments on MSCOCO
(Lin et al., 2014) and Conceptual Captions (Sharma et al., 2018). We train models on these two
datasets, and evaluate them on six shifted versions of ImageNets. See experimental details in
Appendices G.2 and G.3).
MMCL is more OOD-robust than SL. We employ the widely used CLIP loss for MMCL and CE loss
for SL to compare the robustness of the resulting models. Due to computational resource constraints,
we adopt the simplified training setting from (Ren & Li, 2023), training a 3-layer MLP on top of
frozen pretrained encoders. Following (Taori et al., 2020), we plot the ID-ODD accuracy relationship
by varying the model size (width of the MLP). Fig 3a shows that models trained with MMCL
demonstrate superior robustness on both datasets. Note that although the ID accuracy of CLIP is
lower than that of SL, resulting in seemingly comparable OOD accuracies, we anticipate the actual
advantage of CLIP to become more pronounced as the dataset size scales, similar to the original
dataset used in (Radford et al., 2021). We also provide results regarding with other algorithms,
including SimCLR and SupCon, and other backbone architectures in Appendix G.4.
Richness of captions is critical in achieving robustness. To demonstrate the impact of caption richness
on robustness, we train an alternative version of CLIP wherein the captions are simplified to be the
same as the labels. As depicted in Fig 3b, this modification leads to diminished robustness, which
corroborates the theoretical conclusions in Section 5.
Intra-class contrasting contributes to robustness. To illustrate the mechanism theoretically presented
in Section 4.1, we modify the CLIP loss to exclude pairs from the denominator if they are from
the same class, thereby eliminating contrasting between images and texts of the same class. In this
experiment, unlike the previous ones, we train the encoders from scratch and obtain different ID-OOD
accuracy pairs by varying the training data size. This is because the effect of intra-class contrasting
was not evident in the 3-layer MLP setting, likely due to the small model’s limited capacity rendering
it less sensitive to modifications in the loss. In Fig 3c, we observe that removing intra-class contrasting
from the loss compromises robustness, confirming the importance of intra-class contrasting.

7                  C ONCLUSION

In this work, we provided the first theoretical explanation for MMCL’s enhanced OOD robustness
compared to SL. We showed conclusively that this robustness is attributed to aspects of the MMCL
loss function, i.e. (1) intra-class contrasting (2) inter-class feature sharing, as well as the nature
of multi-modal data i.e. (3) richness of captions. We confirmed our theoretical results using both
synthetic and real-world experiments. Our findings could inspire the development of improved loss
functions and data curation practices to further enhance MMCL’s robustness.


                                                                                                           9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Acknowledgements This research is partially supported by the National Science Foundation CA-
REER Award 2146492 and Cisco Systems.

R EFERENCES
Sanjeev Arora, Hrishikesh Khandeparkar, Mikhail Khodak, Orestis Plevrakis, and Nikunj Saun-
  shi. A theoretical analysis of contrastive unsupervised representation learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1902.09229, 2019.

Benjamin Aubin, Agnieszka Słowik, Martin Arjovsky, Leon Bottou, and David Lopez-Paz. Linear
  unit-tests for invariance discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.10867, 2021.

Andrei Barbu, David Mayo, Julian Alverio, William Luo, Christopher Wang, Dan Gutfreund, Josh
 Tenenbaum, and Boris Katz. Objectnet: A large-scale bias-controlled dataset for pushing the limits
  of object recognition models. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.

Tianle Cai, Ruiqi Gao, Jason Lee, and Qi Lei. A theory of label propagation for subpopulation shift.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1170–1182. PMLR, 2021.

Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A Simple Framework for
  Contrastive Learning of Visual Representations. February 2020. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2002.05709.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.05709v3.

Ching-Yao Chuang, Joshua Robinson, Yen-Chen Lin, Antonio Torralba, and Stefanie Jegelka. Debi-
  ased Contrastive Learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp.
  8765–8775. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
  paper/2020/hash/63c3ddcc7b23daa1e42dc41f9a44a873-Abstract.html.

Li Deng. The mnist database of handwritten digit images for machine learning research. IEEE Signal
  Processing Magazine, 29(6):141–142, 2012.

Matthew Fahrbach, Adel Javanmard, Vahab Mirrokni, and Pratik Worah. Learning rate schedules in
 the presence of distribution shift. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara
 Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), Proceedings of the 40th International
 Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
 9523–9546. PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/
 fahrbach23a.html.

Alex Fang, Gabriel Ilharco, Mitchell Wortsman, Yuhao Wan, Vaishaal Shankar, Achal Dave, and
  Ludwig Schmidt. Data determines distributional robustness in contrastive language image pre-
  training (clip). In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6216–6234. PMLR, 2022.

Robert Geirhos, Patricia Rubisch, Claudio Michaelis, Matthias Bethge, Felix A Wichmann, and
  Wieland Brendel. Imagenet-trained cnns are biased towards texture; increasing shape bias improves
  accuracy and robustness. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.12231, 2018.

Shashank Goel, Hritik Bansal, Sumit Bhatia, Ryan Rossi, Vishwa Vinay, and Aditya Grover. Cyclip:
  Cyclic contrastive language-image pretraining. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 35:6704–6719, 2022.

Ishaan Gulrajani and David Lopez-Paz. In search of lost domain generalization. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2007.01434, 2020.

Jeff Z HaoChen, Colin Wei, Adrien Gaidon, and Tengyu Ma. Provable guarantees for self-supervised
   deep learning with spectral contrastive loss. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
   34:5000–5011, 2021.

Dan Hendrycks, Steven Basart, Norman Mu, Saurav Kadavath, Frank Wang, Evan Dorundo, Rahul
  Desai, Tyler Zhu, Samyak Parajuli, Mike Guo, et al. The many faces of robustness: A critical
  analysis of out-of-distribution generalization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
  Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 8340–8349, 2021a.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Dan Hendrycks, Kevin Zhao, Steven Basart, Jacob Steinhardt, and Dawn Song. Natural adversarial
  examples. CVPR, 2021b.
Weihua Hu, Matthias Fey, Marinka Zitnik, Yuxiao Dong, Hongyu Ren, Bowen Liu, Michele Catasta,
 and Jure Leskovec. Open graph benchmark: Datasets for machine learning on graphs. Advances in
 neural information processing systems, 33:22118–22133, 2020.
Andrew Ilyas, Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, Logan Engstrom, Brandon Tran, and Aleksander
  Madry. Adversarial examples are not bugs, they are features. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 32, 2019.
Wenlong Ji, Zhun Deng, Ryumei Nakada, James Zou, and Linjun Zhang. The power of contrast for
 feature learning: A theoretical analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.02473, 2021.
Chao Jia, Yinfei Yang, Ye Xia, Yi-Ting Chen, Zarana Parekh, Hieu Pham, Quoc Le, Yun-Hsuan Sung,
  Zhen Li, and Tom Duerig. Scaling up visual and vision-language representation learning with
  noisy text supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 4904–4916. PMLR,
  2021.
Li Jing, Pascal Vincent, Yann LeCun, and Yuandong Tian. Understanding dimensional collapse in
  contrastive self-supervised learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.09348, 2021.
Siddharth Joshi, Yu Yang, Yihao Xue, Wenhan Yang, and Baharan Mirzasoleiman. Towards mitigating
  spurious correlations in the wild: A benchmark and a more realistic dataset, 2023.
Prannay Khosla, Piotr Teterwak, Chen Wang, Aaron Sarna, Yonglong Tian, Phillip Isola, Aaron
  Maschinot, Ce Liu, and Dilip Krishnan. Supervised contrastive learning. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 33:18661–18673, 2020.
Pang Wei Koh, Shiori Sagawa, Henrik Marklund, Sang Michael Xie, Marvin Zhang, Akshay Bal-
  subramani, Weihua Hu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Richard Lanas Phillips, Irena Gao, et al. Wilds: A
  benchmark of in-the-wild distribution shifts. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 5637–5664. PMLR, 2021.
Liunian Harold Li, Mark Yatskar, Da Yin, Cho-Jui Hsieh, and Kai-Wei Chang. Visualbert: A simple
  and performant baseline for vision and language. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.03557, 2019.
Xiujun Li, Xi Yin, Chunyuan Li, Pengchuan Zhang, Xiaowei Hu, Lei Zhang, Lijuan Wang, Houdong
  Hu, Li Dong, Furu Wei, et al. Oscar: Object-semantics aligned pre-training for vision-language
  tasks. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28,
  2020, Proceedings, Part XXX 16, pp. 121–137. Springer, 2020.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In Computer Vision–
  ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12, 2014, Proceedings,
  Part V 13, pp. 740–755. Springer, 2014.
Jiasen Lu, Dhruv Batra, Devi Parikh, and Stefan Lee. Vilbert: Pretraining task-agnostic visiolinguistic
   representations for vision-and-language tasks. Advances in neural information processing systems,
   32, 2019.
Stephen J Montgomery-Smith. The distribution of rademacher sums. Proceedings of the American
  Mathematical Society, 109(2):517–522, 1990.
Norman Mu, Alexander Kirillov, David Wagner, and Saining Xie. Slip: Self-supervision meets
  language-image pre-training. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 529–544. Springer,
  2022.
Ryumei Nakada, Halil Ibrahim Gulluk, Zhun Deng, Wenlong Ji, James Zou, and Linjun Zhang.
  Understanding multimodal contrastive learning and incorporating unpaired data. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.06232, 2023.
Edwin G Ng, Bo Pang, Piyush Sharma, and Radu Soricut. Understanding guided image captioning
  performance across domains. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.02339, 2020.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jiquan Ngiam, Aditya Khosla, Mingyu Kim, Juhan Nam, Honglak Lee, and Andrew Y Ng. Multi-
   modal deep learning. In Proceedings of the 28th international conference on machine learning
   (ICML-11), pp. 689–696, 2011.
Thao Nguyen, Samir Yitzhak Gadre, Gabriel Ilharco, Sewoong Oh, and Ludwig Schmidt. Improving
  multimodal datasets with image captioning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.10350, 2023.
Hieu Pham, Zihang Dai, Golnaz Ghiasi, Kenji Kawaguchi, Hanxiao Liu, Adams Wei Yu, Jiahui Yu,
  Yi-Ting Chen, Minh-Thang Luong, Yonghui Wu, et al. Combined scaling for zero-shot transfer
  learning. Neurocomputing, 555:126658, 2023.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Benjamin Recht, Rebecca Roelofs, Ludwig Schmidt, and Vaishaal Shankar. Do imagenet classifiers
  generalize to imagenet? In International conference on machine learning, pp. 5389–5400. PMLR,
  2019.
Yunwei Ren and Yuanzhi Li. On the importance of contrastive loss in multimodal learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2304.03717, 2023.
Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng Huang,
  Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, Alexander C. Berg, and Li Fei-Fei. ImageNet
  Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge. International Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV), 115
  (3):211–252, 2015. doi: 10.1007/s11263-015-0816-y.
Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Tatsunori B Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Distributionally robust
  neural networks for group shifts: On the importance of regularization for worst-case generalization.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.08731, 2019.
Shiori Sagawa, Aditi Raghunathan, Pang Wei Koh, and Percy Liang. An investigation of why
  overparameterization exacerbates spurious correlations. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 8346–8356. PMLR, 2020.
Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, and Aleksander Madry. Breeds: Benchmarks for subpopulation
  shift. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.04859, 2020.
Shibani Santurkar, Yann Dubois, Rohan Taori, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Is a cap-
  tion worth a thousand images? a controlled study for representation learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2207.07635, 2022.
Nikunj Saunshi, Jordan Ash, Surbhi Goel, Dipendra Misra, Cyril Zhang, Sanjeev Arora, Sham
  Kakade, and Akshay Krishnamurthy. Understanding contrastive learning requires incorporating
  inductive biases. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.14037, 2022.
Vaishaal Shankar, Achal Dave, Rebecca Roelofs, Deva Ramanan, Benjamin Recht, and Ludwig
  Schmidt. Do image classifiers generalize across time? In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Interna-
  tional Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 9661–9669, 2021.
Piyush Sharma, Nan Ding, Sebastian Goodman, and Radu Soricut. Conceptual captions: A cleaned,
  hypernymed, image alt-text dataset for automatic image captioning. In Proceedings of the 56th
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp.
  2556–2565, 2018.
Galen R Shorack and GR Shorack. Probability for statisticians, volume 951. Springer, 2000.
Daniel Soudry, Elad Hoffer, Mor Shpigel Nacson, Suriya Gunasekar, and Nathan Srebro. The implicit
  bias of gradient descent on separable data. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 19(1):
  2822–2878, 2018.
Nitish Srivastava and Russ R Salakhutdinov. Multimodal learning with deep boltzmann machines.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 25, 2012.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hao Tan and Mohit Bansal. Lxmert: Learning cross-modality encoder representations from trans-
  formers. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.07490, 2019.
Rohan Taori, Achal Dave, Vaishaal Shankar, Nicholas Carlini, Benjamin Recht, and Ludwig Schmidt.
  Measuring robustness to natural distribution shifts in image classification. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 33:18583–18599, 2020.
Yuandong Tian. Understanding deep contrastive learning via coordinate-wise optimization. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:19511–19522, 2022.
Yuandong Tian, Xinlei Chen, and Surya Ganguli. Understanding self-supervised learning dynamics
  without contrastive pairs. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10268–10278.
  PMLR, 2021.
Christopher Tosh, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Daniel Hsu. Contrastive estimation reveals topic
  posterior information to linear models. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 22:281–1, 2021a.
Christopher Tosh, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Daniel Hsu. Contrastive learning, multi-view redun-
  dancy, and linear models. In Algorithmic Learning Theory, pp. 1179–1206. PMLR, 2021b.
Martin J Wainwright. High-dimensional statistics: A non-asymptotic viewpoint, volume 48. Cam-
 bridge university press, 2019.
Yoav Wald, Amir Feder, Daniel Greenfeld, and Uri Shalit. On calibration and out-of-domain
  generalization. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:2215–2227, 2021.
Haohan Wang, Songwei Ge, Zachary Lipton, and Eric P Xing. Learning robust global representations
  by penalizing local predictive power. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp.
 10506–10518, 2019.
Tongzhou Wang and Phillip Isola. Understanding contrastive representation learning through align-
  ment and uniformity on the hypersphere. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  9929–9939. PMLR, 2020.
Per-Åke Wedin. Perturbation bounds in connection with singular value decomposition. BIT Numerical
  Mathematics, 12:99–111, 1972.
Zixin Wen and Yuanzhi Li. Toward understanding the feature learning process of self-supervised
  contrastive learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 11112–11122. PMLR,
  2021.
Ruijia Wu, Linjun Zhang, and T Tony Cai. Sparse topic modeling: Computational efficiency, near-
  optimal algorithms, and statistical inference. Journal of the American Statistical Association, pp.
 1–13, 2022.
Kai Xiao, Logan Engstrom, Andrew Ilyas, and Aleksander Madry. Noise or signal: The role of image
  backgrounds in object recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.09994, 2020.
Yihao Xue, Siddharth Joshi, Eric Gan, Pin-Yu Chen, and Baharan Mirzasoleiman. Which features
  are learnt by contrastive learning? on the role of simplicity bias in class collapse and feature
  suppression. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16536, 2023.
Yuzhe Yang, Haoran Zhang, Dina Katabi, and Marzyeh Ghassemi. Change is hard: A closer look at
  subpopulation shift. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.12254, 2023.
Huaxiu Yao, Linjun Zhang, and Chelsea Finn. Meta-learning with fewer tasks through task interpola-
  tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.02695, 2021.
Huaxiu Yao, Yu Wang, Sai Li, Linjun Zhang, Weixin Liang, James Zou, and Chelsea Finn. Improving
  out-of-distribution robustness via selective augmentation. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 25407–25437. PMLR, 2022.
Qi Zhang, Yifei Wang, and Yisen Wang. On the generalization of multi-modal contrastive learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.04272, 2023a.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xingxuan Zhang, Yue He, Renzhe Xu, Han Yu, Zheyan Shen, and Peng Cui. Nico++: Towards
  better benchmarking for domain generalization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 16036–16047, 2023b.
Zhuotun Zhu, Lingxi Xie, and Alan L Yuille. Object recognition with and without objects. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1611.06596, 2016.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A DDITIONAL R ELATED W ORK
Uni-modal contrastive learning. There have been both empirical Chen et al. (2020); Chuang et al.
(2020); Khosla et al. (2020) and theoretical studies about CL Wang & Isola (2020); Tosh et al.
(2021a;b); Arora et al. (2019); HaoChen et al. (2021); Wen & Li (2021); Ji et al. (2021); Saunshi et al.
(2022); Xue et al. (2023). We will demonstrate for the first time how the contrastive aspect of the
loss can benefit OOD robustness, while noting that this advantage only exists when equipped with
multi-modality and zero-shot learning, which are present in MMCL but not in unimodal CL.

B     P RELIMINARIES
B.1   M INIMIZER OF MMCL LOSS

Nakada et al. (2023) has shown the equivalence between minimizing linear MMCL and SVD. We
reiterate this for reference in our proof. As defined in Section 3.2, our loss function is
                            1      XX                       1      XX                    ρ
LMMCL (W W I ,WW T )=                     (sij −sii ) +                    (sji −sii )+ ∥W W⊤      2
                                                                                            I W T ∥F ,
                        2n(n − 1) i                     2n(n − 1) i                      2
                                        j̸=i                           j̸=i

which can be rewritten as a matrix factorization objective
                                                         ρ
                         L(W                  W ISW ⊤
                           W I , W T ) = − Tr(W            W⊤
                                                    T ) + ∥W
                                                                    2
                                                             I W T ∥F ,                               (2)
                                                         2
where S is the cross-covariance matrix
                                1X                    1     X
                          S :=        x I,ix ⊤
                                             T,i −            x I,ix ⊤
                                                                     T,j .                            (3)
                                n i                n(n − 1)
                                                               i̸=j
                                                                           Pd
The following directly follows from Eckart-Young-Mirsky theorem: let i=1 λiu I,iu ⊤        T,i with λ1 ≥
λ2 ≥ . . . λd > 0 be the SVD of S , and let W ∗I , W ∗T be the minimizer of the loss, then
                                                        p
                                                  1X
                                      W ∗⊤ ∗
                                        I WT =          λiu I,iu ⊤
                                                                 T,i                                  (4)
                                                  ρ i=1

B.2   M INIMIZER OF SL LOSS

We note that in both Data Model 1 and Data Model 2, under the assumptions we’ve made, the training
data are separable, or separable with high probability. As shown in Soudry et al. (2018), minimizing
the logistic loss or Cross-Entropy losses with a linear model at a sufficiently small step size converges
to the solution for a hard-margin SVM. Therefore, in our analysis for SL, we equivalently examine
this solution.

C     A NALYSIS FOR DATA M ODEL 1
C.1   A NALYSIS FOR SL

Here, we briefly explain how Theorem 4.4 is derived from Theorem 1 in (Sagawa et al., 2020). Firstly,
we provide the following version, which is a direct translation from (Sagawa et al., 2020) but with
our notations. First let nmaj denote the number of examples with a = y in the training set and
                                                                            ′2 := 2                 σ2
nmaj denote the number of examples with a ̸= y in the training set. Define σcore σcore + dξ,I
                                                                                           I
                                                                                              ,
 ′2 := 2        σ2   ′2 :=
                                2
                               σξ,I (d−2)
σspu  σspu + dξ,I
               I
                  , σξ,I            d     .
                           n               1     ′2           ′2           1          ′2      n
Theorem C.1. For any maj   n    ≥ 1 − 2001    , σcore ≥ 1, σspu  ≤ 16 log 100n maj
                                                                                   , σξ,I     maj
                                                                                          ≤ 600  2 and

nmin ≥ 100, there exists d0 such that for all d > d0 , with high probability over draws of the training
data
                     Test error on examples where a ̸= y achieved by W ∗ ≥ 2/3.


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


It is now easy to see that the quantities in Assumption 4.2 can satisfy the conditions in the theorem
above when they become sufficiently asymptotic. Note that the above statement is about test error on
examples where a ̸= y, which accounts for half of the entire distribution P ⋆ , so the accuracy on the
entire distribution P ⋆ is at most 21 × 100% + 21 × (1 − 2/3) = 2/3.

C.2     A NALYSIS FOR MMCL

We note that Theorem 4.4 holds under a more relaxed assumption, which the following anlaysis is
based on.
Assumption C.2. The gap between the variances of the core and spurious features is significant:
σcore − σspu = Θ(1) and σspu = O(1). p can be any value between 12 and 1. We consider the
high-dimensional (overparameterized) setting where n = ω(1), dI = Ω(n) and dT = Ω(n). The
noise levels are not too large: σξ,I = O(log n) and σξ,T = O(log n).

                                                                                          yi + ζ1,i
We define the following notations. We write each zi as zi =                                          , where ζ1,i and ζ2,i are
                                                                                          ai + ζ2,i

                                                                                             ζ
Gaussian variables according to our definition. We also let ζ i = 1,i . Let Z = [ζζ 1 , ζ 2 , . . . , ζ n ],
                                                                                             ζ2,i

                                                                                                              y , y , . . . , yn
Ξ I = [ξξ I,1 , ξ I,2 , . . . , ξ I,n ], Ξ T = [ξξ T,1 , ξ T,2 , . . . , ξ T,n ]. Additionally, we let F = 1 2                      .
                                                                                                             a1 , a2 , . . . , an

C.2.1      U SEFUL C ONCENTRATION B OUNDS
Lemma C.3 (Montgomery-Smith (1990)). Let {xi }ni=1 be a set of random Rademacher variables,
then with probability at least 1 − δ, the following holds
                                            n
                                                      r
                                         1X             2 ln(1/δ)
                                       |       xi | ≤
                                         n i=1              n

Lemma C.4 (Mills’ ratio. Exercise 6.1 in (Shorack & Shorack, 2000).). Let v be a Gaussian random
variable drawn from N (0, 1). Then for all λ > 0,
                                     λ      1  λ2              1 1  λ2
                                           √ e− 2 < Pr(v ≥ λ) < √ e− 2 .
                                 λ2 + 1     2π                 λ 2π
Corollary C.5. Let {xi }ni=1 be a set of random variables independently drawn from N (0, σ 2 ), then
                                    1
with probability at least 1 − O( poly(n) ), the following holds
                                           n             r
                                        1X                  log n
                                      |       xi | ≤ O(σ          )
                                        n i=1                 n

Lemma C.6 (Restatement of Theorem 6.1 from (Wainwright, 2019)). Let X ∈ Rn×d be a random
matrix with x ⊤
              i as its i-th row. Each x i is drawn i.i.d. from N (0, Σ ). Then with probability at least
1 − δ, the maximal singular value of X , denoted as σmax (X    X ) satisfies the following
                                              √
                                                        p
                                  √                         2 ln(1/δ)      p
                     σmax (X X ) ≤ nγmax ( Σ )(1 +                     ) + Tr(Σ   Σ).
                                                               n
Lemma C.7 (Gaussian covariance estimation, Example 6.3 from (Wainwright, 2019)). Let {vv i }ni=1
be a set of vectors ∈ Rd independently drawn from N (0, Σ ), and let Σ̂
                                                                     Σ = n1 ni=1 v iv ⊤
                                                                           P
                                                                                      i then with
                            −nδ 2 /2
probability at least 1 − 2e
                                            r            r
                              ∥Σ̂Σ − Σ ∥2     d            d
                                          ≤2    + 2δ + (      + 2)2 .
                                   ∥Σ
                                    Σ∥2       n            n

C.2.2      C ONCENTRATION OF THE C ROSS - COVARIANCE
Concentrations in Low-dimensional Underlying Feature Space:


                                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma C.8. With probability at least 1 − δ the following holds
                               n
                                                       r
                            1X                             ln(1/δ)
                          |       ai yi − (2p − 1)| ≤ 2            .
                            n i=1                             n

Proof. By Hoeffding’s inequality.
                                               1
Lemma C.9. With probability at least 1 − O( poly(n) ) the following holds
                        n              2                          r
                     1X          ⊤     σcore   0               2    log n
                   ∥        ζ iζ i −           2    ∥2 ≤ O(σcore          )
                     n i=1              0    σspu                     n

Proof. By Lemma C.7.
                                                1
Lemma C.10. With probability at least 1 − O( poly(n) )
                                       n                      r
                                    1 X yi ⊤                    log n
                                  ∥          ζ i ∥2 ≤ O(σcore         )
                                          a
                                    n i=1 i                       n

Proof. By Lemma C.5.
                                                1
Lemma C.11. With probability at least 1 − O( poly(n) )
                            n                 2
                                                                         r
                         1X         ⊤    1 + σcore     2p − 1              log n
                       ∥       z iz i −                    2     ∥2 ≤ O(         )                           (5)
                         n i=1            2p − 1      1 + σspu               n

                  Pn        ⊤
Proof. Write n1    i=1 z iz i as the following
        n              n                           n            n                              n
     1X             1 X yi2           yi ai     1 X yi ⊤ 1 X                                1X
           z iz ⊤ =                           +          ζ +       ζ i [yi         ai ] +         ζ iζ ⊤
                                                                                                       i .
     n i=1      i
                    n i=1 ai yi        a2i      n i=1 ai i   n i=1                          n i=1

Then invoking Lemmas C.8, C.9 and C.10 completes the proof.
                                                 1
Lemma C.12. With probability at least 1 − O( poly(n) )
                                      n              r
                                   1X                  log n
                                 ∥       z i ∥2 ≤ O(         )
                                   n i=1                 n

                                               Pn
Proof. Note that each of the two elements in n1 i=1 z i can be seen as the sum of the mean of n
independent Rademacher variables and the mean of n independent Gaussian variables. Combining
Lemmas C.3 and C.5 completes the proof.
                                                1
Lemma C.13. With probability at least 1 − O( poly(n) )
              n                    n                 2
                                                                                       r
           1X                1     X            1 + σcore        2p − 1                      log n
                 z iz ⊤
                      i −            z i z ⊤
                                           j −                       2             = O(            ).
           n i=1          n(n − 1)               2p − 1         1 + σspu       2               n
                                       i̸=j


Proof.
   n                    n             n                     n    n                n
1X                1     X          1X                1     X     X         1     X
      z iz ⊤
           i −            z iz ⊤
                               j =       z iz ⊤
                                              i −             zi   zj +              z iz ⊤
                                                                                          i
n i=1          n(n − 1)            n i=1          n(n − 1) i=1 j=1      n(n − 1) i=1
                           i̸=j
                                             n                    n     n                  n
                                          1X               n 1X 1X                  1     X
                                      =         z iz ⊤
                                                     i −            z i    z j +              z iz ⊤
                                                                                                   i .
                                          n i=1          n − 1 n i=1 n j=1       n(n − 1) i=1


                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Note that by Lemma C.12, the norm of the second term on the RHS is O( logn n ), and by Lemma C.11
the norm of the third term is O( n1 ). Combining these results and applying Lemma C.11 to the first
term yields:
              n                         n                2
                                                                                r
            1X         ⊤      1        X
                                               ⊤    1 + σcore  2p − 1              log n
                  z iz i −                z iz j −                  2       = O(         ).
           n i=1           n(n − 1)                  2p − 1   1 + σ spu   2          n
                                         i̸=j


Concentrations in High-dimensional Input Space:
Corollary C.14. By applying Lemma C.6, we can conclude that the following statements hold with a
probability of at least 1 − 3δ
                                               p
                                 √               2 ln(1/δ)     q
                                                                   2    2
                          ∥ZZ∥2 ≤ nσcore (1 +              ) + σcore + σspu
                                               s    n
                                       r
                                          n      2 ln(1/δ)
                         ∥Ξ
                          ΞI ∥2 ≤σξ,I (      +             ) + σξ,I
                                         dI         ndI
                                        r      s
                                           n      2 ln(1/δ)
                         ∥Ξ
                          ΞT ∥2 ≤σξ,T (      +              ) + σξ,T
                                          dT         ndT
                                                1
Lemma C.15. With probability at least 1 − O( poly(n) )

                           n                                       n
                        1X                 σξ,I                1X                σξ,T
                    ∥         ξ I,i ∥ ≤ O( √ )      and    ∥         ξ T,i ∥ ≤ O( √ ).
                        n i=1                n                 n i=1               n


                                                           Pn
Proof. This can be obtained by recognizing that n1   i=1 ξ I,i can be treated as a single sample
             σI2                                              1
from N (0, ndI IdI ) and by applying Lemma C.6 with δ = poly(n)  . A similar argument applies to
1
  P n
n   i=1 ξ T,i .


                                                1
Lemma C.16. With probability at least 1 − O( poly(n) )

                        2

                   1 + σcore        2p − 1             σξ,T + σξ,I   σξ,I σξ,T
         S − DI                         2     D⊤
                                               T   ≤O(     √       +           )
                    2p − 1         1 + σspu      2           n           n
                                                           √              √
                                                       σξ,A log n + σξ,B log n + σξ,I σξ,T
                                                   +O(                                     )
                                                      r                 n
                                                         log n
                                                   +O(         ),
                                                           n
where S is defined in Equation 3.


Proof. Firstly let’s write S as
                                  n
                               1X                    1     X
                        S=           x I,ix ⊤
                                            T,i −            x I,ix ⊤
                                                                    T,i                         (6)
                               n i=1              n(n − 1)
                                                           i̸=j
                                  n
                               1X                       1     X
                          =          D I z iz ⊤  ⊤
                                              i DT −            D I z iz ⊤  ⊤
                                                                         j DT + R
                               n i=1                 n(n − 1)
                                                                  i̸=j



                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where
       n
    1X                                                     1     X
R=         D I z iξ ⊤
          (D                     ⊤ ⊤            ⊤
                    T,i + ξ I,iz i D T + ξ I,iξ T,i ) −            D I z iξ ⊤
                                                                  (D                     ⊤ ⊤            ⊤
                                                                            T,j + ξ I,iz j D T + ξ I,iξ T,j )
    n i=1                                               n(n − 1)
                                                                    i̸=j
              n
         1    X
   =              D I z iξ ⊤
                 (D                     ⊤ ⊤            ⊤
                           T,i + ξ I,iz i D T + ξ I,iξ T,i )
       n − 1 i=1
       |                       {z                         }
                               R1
                  n X
                    n
          1       X
   −                     D I z iξ ⊤
                        (D                     ⊤ ⊤            ⊤
                                  T,j + ξ I,iz j D T + ξ I,iξ T,j ) .
       n(n − 1) i=1 j=1
       |                          {z                             }
                                    R2
Let’s rewrite R 1 as

                            1                 ⊤             ⊤ ⊤        ⊤
                      R1 =           F + Z )Ξ
                                D I (F      ΞT + Ξ I (F
                                                      F + Z) D T + ΞI ΞT .
                           n−1
Then
            1
∥R
 R 1 ∥2 ≤          ∥D
                    D I ∥2 (∥F
                             F ∥2 + ∥ZZ∥2 )∥Ξ
                                            ΞT ∥2 + ∥ΞΞI ∥2 (∥F
                                                              F ∥2 + ∥Z
                                                                      Z∥2 )∥D
                                                                            D T ∥2 + ∥Ξ
                                                                                      ΞI ∥2 ∥Ξ
                                                                                             ΞT ∥2 .
           n−1
Note that ∥D
           D I ∥2 = ∥D
                     D√ T ∥2 = 1 since they have orthonormal columns. Additionally, we can observe
                                                                                                1
that ∥F
      F ∥2 ≤ ∥FF ∥F = 2n. By combining these and applying Corollary C.14 with δ = O( poly(n)        )
we obtain the following
                                 σ + σcore σξ,T + σξ,I + σcore σξ,I     σξ,I σξ,T
                    R1 ∥2 ≤O( ξ,T
                   ∥R                            √                    +           )
                                                   n                        n
                                 σξ,T + σξ,I    σξ,I σξ,T
                            =O(      √        +           )                                       (7)
                                       n            n
Next, we rewrite R 2 as
                      n         n               n             n              n             n
        n         1X         1X           ⊤  1X            1X ⊤ ⊤ 1X                    1X           ⊤
R2 =          DI        z i(       ξ T,j ) +       ξ I,i (       zj) DT +       ξ I,i (       ξ T,i ) .
      n−1         n i=1      n j=1           n i=1         n j=1          n i=1         n i=1
Then applying Lemmas C.12 and C.15 yields
                                       √             √
                                  σξ,A log n + σξ,B log n + σξ,I σξ,T
                      ∥R
                       R2 ∥2 ≤ O(                                       ).                 (8)
                                                    n
Additionally we observe that
                                                                                       
   n                                                      n
 1X                       1    X                       1 X                 1   X
      D I z iz ⊤  ⊤
               i DT −             D I z iz ⊤  ⊤
                                           j DT = DI
                                                            z iz ⊤
                                                                  i −            z iz ⊤
                                                                                      j
                                                                                         D⊤
                                                                                           T.
n i=1                 n(n − 1)                         n i=1          n(n − 1)
                                      i̸=j                                                 i̸=j
Therefore by Lemma C.11
            n                                                               2

         1X              ⊤ ⊤          1    X
                                                         ⊤ ⊤          1 + σcore      0
                D I z iz i D T −                D I z iz j D T − D I                   2     D⊤
                                                                                              T
         n i=1                    n(n − 1)                                0       1 + σspu        2
                                           i̸=j
                            r
                              log n
     ≤∥DD I ∥2 ∥D
                D T ∥2 O(           )
                                n
          r
             log n
     =O(            )                                                                                     (9)
                n
Then, combining Equations 9, 7, 8, 6 yields
                           2

                    1 + σcore    2p − 1                  σξ,T + σξ,I    σξ,I σξ,T
        S − DI                        2   D⊤T     ≤O(        √       +            )
                     2p − 1 1 + σspu            2              n            n
                                                              √              √
                                                         σξ,A log n + σξ,B log n + σξ,I σξ,T
                                                  +O(                                           )
                                                        r                  n
                                                           log n
                                                  +O(            )
                                                             n


                                                        19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.2.3    P ERTURBATION IN SVD
Lemma C.17. G ∗ ∈ RdI ×dT is a matrix whose SVD is i=1 λiu iv ⊤
                                                               P2
                                                                         i wherePλ1 > λ2 > 0,
                                                       ∗
λ1 = Θ(1), λ2 = Θ(1) and λ1 − λ2 = Θ(1). G = G + E where ∥E         E ∥2 ≤ ϵ. Let ri=1 λ̃iu˜iv˜i ⊤ be
                                  Pp                            √
the SVD of G . If ϵ = o(1), then ∥ i=1 λ̃iu˜iv˜i ⊤ − G ∗ ∥2 ≤ O( ϵ), where 2 ≤ p ≤ r.


Proof. Weyl’s Theorem tells us that |λ˜1 − λ1 | ≤ ϵ, |λ˜2 − λ2 | ≤ ϵ and |λ̃i | ≤ ϵ for i ≥ 3 . Now, let’s
define δ = min{λ1 − λ2 , λ2 }. By applying Wedin’s Theorem (Wedin, 1972) with the singular values
partitioned into {λ1 } and {λi }i̸=1 , we have sin θ(u    u1 ) ≤ O( δϵ ). Similarly, by applying Wedin’s
                                                     u1 , ũ
Theorem with the singular values partitioned into {λ2 } and {λi }i̸=2 , we have sin θ(u         u2 ) ≤ O( δϵ ).
                                                                                           u2 , ũ
Considering that δ = Θ(1), we further have sin θ(u       u1 ) ≤ O(ϵ) and sin θ(u
                                                    u1 , ũ                           u2 ) ≤ O(ϵ). Similar
                                                                                 u2 , ũ
conclusions hold for ṽv i ’s as well.
                                                        ui and u i :
Now, for i = 1, 2, let’s examine the difference between ũ
                                 ui − u i ∥2 =2(1 − cos θ(u
                                ∥ũ                          ui , ũ
                                                                  ui ))
                                                    p
                                             =2(1 − 1 − sin θ(u       ui , ũ
                                                                           ui ))
                                                     sin θ(u ui , ũ
                                                                  ui )
                                             =2     p
                                                1 + 1 − sin θ(u      ui , ũ
                                                                          ui )
                                             =O(sin θ(uui , ũ
                                                            ui ))
                                             ≤O(ϵ).
                               √                                                        √
Therefore, ∥ũ
             ui − u i ∥ ≤ O( ϵ). Similarly, we can deduce that ∥ṽv i − v i ∥ ≤ O( ϵ). By some
                                               P2                             √
algebraic calculations, we further have ∥ i=1 λ̃iu˜iv˜i ⊤ − G ∗ ∥2 ≤ O( ϵ). Now, if p ≥ 3, we
                                                                 Pp
previously established that |λ̃i | ≤ ϵ for i ≥ 3. Consequently, ∥ i=3 λ̃iu˜iv˜i ⊤ ∥2 = max{λ̃i }pi=3 ≤ ϵ.
       Pp                               P2                        Pp                       √
Thus, ∥ i=1 λ̃iu˜iv˜i ⊤ − G ∗ ∥2 ≤ ∥ i=1 λ̃iu˜iv˜i ⊤ − G ∗ ∥2 + ∥ i=3 λ̃iu˜iv˜i ⊤ ∥2 ≤ O( ϵ).

For convenience, let’s define
                                            √            √                    r
              σξ,T + σξ,I   σξ,I σξ,T   σξ,A log n + σξ,B log n + σξ,I σξ,T     log n
        ϵ0 :=     √       +           +                                     +         .
                    n           n                       n                         n
                                                                                               1
Corollary C.18. The minimizer satisfies the following with a probability of at least 1 − O( poly(n) ),
                                            2

                              1       1 + σcore   2p − 1              1 √
                 W ∗⊤
                ∥W  I W  ∗
                         T −    D I                    2    D⊤T ∥2 ≤ O( ϵ0 ).
                              ρ        2p − 1 1 + σspu                ρ

C.2.4    Z ERO - SHOT CLASSIFICATION
In the following analysis, we will examine the zero-shot accuracy in an event where
                                             2

                      ∗⊤    ∗    1      1 + σcore  2p − 1              1 √
                  ∥W I
                    W    W  T −    D I                   2   D⊤T ∥2 ≤ O( ϵ0 ).
                                 ρ       2p − 1 1 + σspu               ρ
                                                                                           1
It is important to note that such an event occurs with a probability of at least 1 − O( poly(n) ) by
Corollary C.18.

                y + ζ1
Let x I = D I            + ξ I be a test input satisfies y = 1, a = −1.
                a + ζ2
                                                  1
By Lemma C.6, with probability at least 1 − O( poly(n) )

                                             ∥x
                                              xI ∥ ≤ O(log n).                                            (10)


                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                        y
Recall that the prompts are p y = D T      for y = −1, 1. Then
                                        0
                                           2

                  ∗ (y)   1 ⊤        1 + σcore   2p − 1        (y)             1 √
     x⊤I W  ∗⊤
            I  W  T T −
                   x        x   D I                  2    D⊤T xT   ≤∥x    x(y)
                                                                     xI ∥∥x T ∥ O( ϵ0 )           (11)
                          ρ I         2p − 1 1 + σspu                          ρ
                                                                    1 √
                                                                   ≤ O( ϵ0 log n).
                                                                    ρ

                                      2

                               1 + σcore    2p − 1       (y)
Now let’s look at x ⊤
                    I DI                         2   D⊤
                                                      T xT .
                                2p − 1 1 + σspu
                  2

             1 + σcore        2p − 1         (y)
    x⊤                                  D⊤                        2

     I DI                         2      T x T = y (1 + ζ1 )(1 + σcore ) + (−1 + ζ2 )(2p − 1) .   (12)
              2p − 1         1 + σspu
                                                                                           ∗ (1)
In order for the model to make correct predictions for this example, we need x ⊤     ∗⊤
                                                                                 I W I W T xT >
           ∗ (−1)
x⊤    ∗⊤
 I W I W T xT     . Based on Equation 11, we can establish the following sufficient condition:
                                     2

                     1 ⊤        1 + σcore 2p − 1         (1)   1 √
                       xI D I                  2   D⊤T x T − O( ϵ0 log n)
                     ρ           2p − 1 1 + σspu               ρ
                                     2

                     1          1 + σcore 2p − 1         (−1)    1 √
                  > x⊤    D I                  2   D⊤T xT     + O( ϵ0 log n).
                     ρ I         2p − 1 1 + σspu                 ρ
By substituting Equation 12 into the above expressions, we obtain:
                                  2                               √
                   (1 + ζ1 )(1 + σcore ) + (−1 + ζ2 )(2p − 1) − O( ϵ0 log n) > 0.                 (13)
                                                  √
Let ϵ1 denote last term on the LHS, i.e., ϵ1 = O( ϵ0 log n).
                               2
By recognizing that ζ1 (1 + σcore ) + ζ2 (2p − 1) is a variable follows the Gaussian distribution
N 0, (1 + σcore ) σcore + (2p − 1)2 σspu
            2    2 2                 2
                                         , we can derive the following probability:
                                           2

                       Pr (1 + ζ1 )(1 + σcore ) + (−1 + ζ2 )(2p − 1) − ϵ1 > 0                (14)
                                                             2
                                               2p − 2 − σcore   + ϵ1
                      =       Pr    (v > q                                    )
                          v∼N (0,1)
                                          (1 + σcore ) σcore + (2p − 1)2 σspu
                                                2     2 2                 2

                                                  2
                                    2p − 2 − σcore   + ϵ1
                      =1 − Φ( q                                    ),
                               (1 + σcore ) σcore + (2p − 1)2 σspu
                                     2     2 2                 2


where Φ(·) denotes the CDF of the standard normal distribution.
Therefore, we can conclude that, in order for the model to make correct predictions, the failure
                                  2p−2−σ 2 +ϵ1
probability is bounded by Φ( √(1+σ2 )2 σ2 core
                                           +(2p−1)2 σ 2
                                                        ) plus the probability for Equation 10 to not
                                         core   core        spu
hold. Thus, the error rate on test examples where y = 1, a = −1, denoted by Err(1,−1) , is bounded
by:
             W ∗I , W ∗T )
  Err(1,−1) (W
                         2
               2p − 2 − σcore + ϵ1                        1
≤Φ( q                                           ) + O(         )
              2 )2 σ 2 + (2p − 1)2 σ 2
        (1 + σcore                                     poly(n)
                    core            spu
                                                                                                    
                            2
                  2p − 2 − σcore                                       ϵ1                       1
=Φ( q                                           ) + O q                                   +            ⃝
                                                                                                         1
              2 )2 σ 2 + (2p − 1)2 σ 2
        (1 + σcore                                             2 )2 σ 2 + (2p − 1)2 σ 2
                                                         (1 + σcore                          poly(n)
                    core            spu                               core           spu
                            2

                  2p − 2 − σcore                              1
=Φ( q                                           ) + O ϵ1 +            .
              2 )2 σ 2 + (2p − 1)2 σ 2
        (1 + σcore                                         poly(n)
                    core            spu

Note that Equation ⃝
                   1 is obtained by taking the first order Taylor approximation for Φ.


                                                       21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We can also derive that Err(−1,1) is bounded in the same way as above. Similarly, we can obtain
                                                     2

                                            −2p − σcore                             1
 Err(1,1) = Err(−1,−1) ≤ Φ( q                                       ) + O ϵ1 +             . (15)
                                         2 )2 σ 2 + (2p − 1)2 σ 2
                                  (1 + σcore                                    poly(n)
                                               core             spu

Converting error rate to accuracy yields Theorem 4.4.                          Note that the error rate can
be lower bounded with the same non-negligible term.                            For example, Err(−1,−1) ≥
                2
           −2p−σcore
Φ( √     2  2 2       2 2
                          ) − o(1).
      (1+σcore ) σcore +(2p−1) σspu


C.3    MMCL WITH F EATURE M ASKING

With feature masking, the proof is almost the same as above, but we just need to realize that the only
change is in the covariance of features, thus we would get
                                                2

                             1      1 + πcore σcore   2p − 1               1 √
                W ∗⊤
               ∥W  I W  ∗
                        T −    D I                             2    D⊤
                                                                     T ∥2 ≤ O( ϵ0 ).
                             ρ         2p  −  1     1 + π    σ
                                                          spu spu          ρ
Then going through the same steps as in Section C.2.4 yields Theorem 5.2.

D     A NALYSIS FOR DATA M ODEL 2
D.1    A NALYSIS FOR SL

For a vector v , we use v [j] to denote its j-th element. W.O.L.G., let D I ∈ dI × l be the first l-th
columns of an identity matrix (since by definition D I has orthonormal columns and we can always
apply a change of basis).
By definition, the solution of SVM, denoted by W ∗ , satisfies
 W ∗ = arg           min             W ∥ s.t. w ⊤
                                    ∥W                    ⊤
                                                                         xI , y) and y ′ ̸= y in the training set.
                                                y x I − w y ′ x I ≥ 1, ∀(x
                   w 1 ... w 2m ]
               W =[w
                                                                                                               (16)

                                                                                  c
          W = [ŵ
Construct Ŵ   w 1 ŵ
                   w 2 . . . ŵ
                             w 2m ], where ŵ
                                           w 2k−1+(1+c)/2 ’s k-th element is (1−β)(1+α 2 ) , its

                          cα
(k + m)-th element is (1−β)(1+α                                                              W
                               2 ) and its other elements are zero. It is easy to check that Ŵ

                        w⊤
satisfies the condition ŵ         w⊤
                           y x I − ŵ                       xI , y) and y ′ ̸= y from the training set, and
                                      y ′ x I ≥ 1, for any (x
          √             1
                                   √
∥Ŵ
 W ∥ = 2m × (1−β)(1+α         2) ×    1 + α2 .
Definition D.1. Define S as the set of classes such that ∀(k, c) ∈ S ((k, c) is the alias of y), the
                               xI , y) from P ⋆ , such that xI ’s (k + m)-th element is −αc, and the
following holds: ∃ an example (x
margin maximizer on training data can make the correct prediction on this example, i.e.,
                                    [x                         w⊤
                                     xI ]k+m = −αc and arg max ŵ j x I = y.                                   (17)
                                                                     j

                                                                             8
Define ϵ := |S|/m Next, we are going to show that the assumption ϵ > (1+α2 )(1−β)2 −8 would lead

to contradiction.
Assume |S| ≥ ϵm. For each (k, c) ∈ S, let x +   I be the input of an example satisfying the condition in
equation 17. Then x +
                    I ’s k-th  element  is c, and (k + m)-th element is −αc. We construct an example
x−
 I  whose  k-th element  is c, (k + m)-th   element  is αc, and the remaining elements are the opposite
of the corresponding elements in x +I .
From assumption 17, we have
                                          ∀j ̸= y, w ∗⊤  +     ∗⊤ +
                                                     y x I − w j x I > 0.                                      (18)
Note that x −
            I shows in the training set. By the condition for the SVM solution, we have
                                                         −     ∗⊤ −
                                          ∀j ̸= y, w ∗⊤
                                                     y x I − w j x I ≥ 1.                                      (19)


                                                           22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Now, for any j ̸= y, let’s compute a lower bound for ∥ww ∗y − w ∗j ∥. Any vector w ∗y − w ∗j can be written
      +     −                                                                −
    xI + bx
as ax      xI + v ⊥ , where v ⊥ is a vector orthogonal to both x +   I and x I . By equations 18 and 19,
we have

                                          c1 a + c2 b > 0
                                                              ,                                        (20)
                                          c2 a + c3 b ≥ 1
where
                                   x+   2        2               2

                              c1 =∥x I ∥ = (1 + α ) 1 + (m − 1)β                                           (21)
                                        −
                                  x+⊤
                              c2 =x              2           2
                                    I x I = 1 − α − (m − 1)β (1 + α )
                                                                       2
                                                                                                           (22)
                                   x−   2        2               2

                              c3 =∥x I ∥ = (1 + α ) 1 + (m − 1)β     .                                     (23)

Remember that we want to lower bound the following quantity
                              w ∗y − w ∗j ∥2 =c1 a2 + c3 b2 + 2c2 ab + ∥vv ⊥ ∥2 ,
                             ∥w                                                                            (24)

given the constraints in 20. By equations 21 to 23, (2c2 )2 −4c1 c3 < 0. Then c1 a2 +c3 b2 +2c2 ab = D
is always an ellipse or a circle centered at the origin in the a-b coordinate system, where a larger
D means a larger radius. Also, given that c1 > 0, c2 < 0, c3 > 0, by plotting the feasible area,
we can observe that D achieves its minimum when the intersection point of lines c1 a + c2 b = 0
and c2 a + c3 b = 1 is exactly at the ellipse (or circle). Now we can solve for the minimum of
c1 a2 + c3 b2 + 2c2 ab:
                                                                 c1
                                  c1 a2 + c3 b2 + 2c2 ab ≥               .
                                                             c1 c3 − c22
Then by equation 24 we have
                                                                c1
                                         w ∗y − w ∗j ∥2 ≥
                                        ∥w                              .
                                                            c1 c3 − c22
                                           w ∗y ∥2 + ∥w
Then we get the following lower bound for ∥w          w ∗j ∥2

                                              w ∗y ∥ + ∥w
                                            (∥w          w ∗j ∥)2
                        w ∗y ∥2 + ∥w
                       ∥w          w ∗j ∥2 ≥
                                                      2
                                              w ∗y − w ∗j ∥)2
                                            (∥w
                                          ≥
                                                    2
                                            1      c1
                                          ≥                                                                (25)
                                            2 c1 c3 − c22

                                               1       (1 + α2 ) 1 + (m − 1)β   2
                                          =
                                               8
                                                   α 1 + (m − 1)β + (m − 1)β 2
                                                    2               2


                                           1
                                          ≥ .                                                              (26)
                                           8

Now since there are at least ϵm different such y’s, and for each y we can pick a distinct j, we get that
the sum of the squared norms of the corresponding weights is at least ϵm/8. Then we introduce the
following lemma.
Lemma D.2. For any i ̸= j, the following holds for the margin maximizer W ∗ :
                                                                 1
                                   w ∗i ∥2 + ∥ŵ
                                  ∥w          w j ∥2 ≥
                                                         (1 + α2 )(1 − β)2

Proof. Consider any y, y ′ whose aliases are (k, c) and (k ′ , c′ ) and y ̸= y ′ . Firstly, recall the condition
in Equation 16 which is
                                w ∗⊤        ∗⊤
                                  y x I − w y ′ x I ≥ 1, ∀x
                                                          xI with label y.


                                                       23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


By the condition in Equation 16, we also have
                              w ∗⊤    ′      ∗⊤ ′
                                y ′ x I − w y x I ≥ 1, ∀xx′I with label y ′ .
Note that we assume all examples occur in the training data in the theorem. We let x I be an example
whose k ′ -th element is β and k ′ + m-th element is βα, and let x ′I be an example whose k-th element
is β and k + m-th element is βα, and other elements are the same as in x I . Note that such examples
exist. Then we have
                              xI ∥2 =∥x
                             ∥x          x′I ∥2 = (1 + α)2 (1 + (m − 1))β 2 )
                             −xx⊤   ′             2
                                I x I = − (1 + α )β(2 + (m − 2)β).
Similar to the steps from equations 19 to 25, we can solve that
                                                    1                  1
                       w ∗y ∥2 + ∥w
                      ∥w          w ∗y′ ∥2 ≥           ⊤   ′
                                                             =                  .
                                             ∥x   2
                                              xI ∥ + x I x I   (1 + α )(1 − β)2
                                                                     2

Note that this hold for any y ̸= y ′ which completes the proof.

                                            W ∗ ∥2 ≥ ϵm
Combining equation 26 and Lemma D.2 yields ∥W                            1
                                                      8 + (1 − ϵ)m (1+α2 )(1−β)2 . Then the
                       8
assumption ϵ > (1+α2 )(1−β)              W ∗ ∥ > ∥Ŵ
                            2 −8 yields ∥W                                               W ∗ ∥ is the
                                                   W ∥, which contradicts the fact that ∥W
                                                                            8
solution which separates the data with smallest norm. Therefore ϵ ≤ (1+α2 )(1−β) 2 −8 . Then we can

bound the accuracy on P by⋆

              1              1    ϵm             ϵ                     2
                 × 100% + ×           = 50% + ≤ 50% +                                .
              2              2 2m                4           (1 + α2 )(1 − β)2 − 8

D.2    A NALYSIS FOR MMCL

Here we analyze with the feature masking defined in Definition 5.3. To obtain Theorem 4.8, we just
need to set π = 1.
As shown in Section B.1, the minimizer can be expressed in terms of SVM of S . We can calculate
that                           "                                     #
                                     1+π(m−1)β 2              πα
                                                 Im            m Im
                            D⊤
                       S = CD I
                                         m
                                         α               1+(m−1)β 2
                                                                              DT ,                    (27)
                                           I
                                         m m                 m      πα2 Im
where C is some constant.
Then, at test time, the similarity between an input x I = D I z from class y and a prompt p c′ = D T c′e k′
from class (k ′ , y ′ ) denoted by Sim, is given by
                                            1 + π(m − 1)β 2

                                                                    α
                             Sim = Czz ⊤                      e k′ + e k′ +m .
                                                    m               m
There are two cases to consider. if (k, c) = (k ′ , c′ )
                                                1     m − 1 2 α2
                                   Sim1 = C( +               πβ ±       ).                            (28)
                                               m         m          m
If k = k ′ , c ̸= c′
                                                  1      m − 1 2 α2
                                   Sim2 = −C( −                πβ ±       )                           (29)
                                                 m        m           m
          ′
If k ̸= k
                                                  1      m−1 2           α2
                                Sim3 = C(±β( +                 πβ ) ± β )                             (30)
                                                 m        m              m
To achieve 100% accuracy, we need Sim1 > Sim2 , Sim1 > Sim3 . which yields,
                                                          α2 − 1
                                            π(m − 1) >                                                (31)
                                                            β2
and
                                (1 − β)β 2 π(m − 1) > (1 + β)α2 − 1 + β.                              (32)
Note that if inequality 32 holds, then inequality 31 holds as well. Therefore we only need inequality
32, which completes Theorem 5.4.
We note that Theorem 4.8 is obtained by setting π = 1.


                                                    24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E     A NALYSIS FOR I N - DISTRIBUTION ACCURACY
E.1   DATA MODEL 1

We provide a brief explanation about the in-distribution accuracy, starting from SL.
W.L.O.G., we can let D I be the first l columns of the identity matrix. Then the core and spurious
features show in the first two elements of the input. Let ŵcore and ŵspu denote first two elements of
the SL loss minimizer W ∗ ∈ RdI , respectively.
In the following, for simplicity, we assume (1) ∥[ŵcore ŵspu ]∥ = Ω(1); (2) ŵspu > 0. However, it’s
worth noting that both of these assumptions can be shown to hold with high probability through more
involved analysis.
As shown in Proposition 3 in (Sagawa et al., 2020), the following holds
                                                    1 − (1 + c)γ 2 − c′ − ŵspu − ŵcore
                            Φ−1 (0.006) ≥                q                                              (33)
                                                             2 σ ′ 2 + ŵ σ ′ 2
                                                           ŵcore core    spu spu

                                                                                                  ŵ
where c < 1/2000, c′ < 1/1000, γ = 9/10. After some calculation we have R := ŵcore
                                                                               spu
                                                                                    > 1.51. also
alignment with noise is bounded.
Lemma 1 in (Sagawa et al., 2020) shows that
                                                                                  ′2
                                                                              s2 σξ,I      n
                         W ∗ ∥2 ≤ u2 + s2 σξ,I
                        ∥W                 ′2
                                               (1 + c1 )nmin +                    4
                                                                                      = O( 2 ),         (34)
                                                                                n         σξ,I

where u = 1.3125, s = σ2.61
                        ′2 .
                             ξ,I

                                                zcore
                      xI , y), where x I = D I
Given a test example (x                                 + ξ I , we have
                                                 zspu

                                 ∗                    zcore
                              |W I − [ŵcore ŵspu ]
                               W   x                               W ∗ξ I |.
                                                              | ≤ |W                                    (35)
                                                       zspu
By considering that W ∗ξ I is a Gaussian variable and applying Lemma C.4 , we have
                                                        r
                                    ∗             ∗        log dI
                                 |W
                                  W ξ I | = O(∥W
                                               W ∥σξ,I            ),                                    (36)
                                                             dI
which further gives
                                                                    r
                                                    ∗                   log dI
                                                 |W
                                                  W ξ I | = O(n                )                        (37)
                                                                          dI
by equation 34. Thus with sufficiently large d, |W W ∗ξ I | =  o(1). Given that ∥[ŵcore ŵspu ]∥ is at least
                                                         z
constant, the prediction is dominated by [ŵcore ŵspu ] core .
                                                         zspu
Let’s begin by considering test examples where a = y. By following similar steps as in equations 13
and 14, we can get the accuracy on such examples Φ( √σ2 1+R+R2 σ 2
                                                                   ) ± o(1). In the scenario where
                                                                           core    spu

σcore = 1 and σspu = 0, given that R > 1.51, the above accuracy is Φ(2.51) = 99.4% ± o(1). Given
that in the in-distribution test data, such examples occur with probability p = 1 − o(1), the overall
in-distribution accuracy is Φ(2.51) = 99.4% ± o(1).
For MMCL, from Section C.2.4, the accuracy on examples where a = y is 1 −
                 2
          −2p−σcore
Φ( √(1+σ2 )2 σ2 +(2p−1)2 σ2
                            ) ± o(1). Considering that pspu = 1 − o(1), the in-distribution ac-
          core   core          spu
                                      −2p−σ 2
curacy is also 1 − Φ( √(1+σ2 )2 σ2 +(2p−1)
                                    core
                                           2 σ2
                                                ) ± o(1). In the case where σcore = 1, σspu = 0, the
                                   core   core           spu

above accuracy is 1 − Φ(−1.5) ± o(1) = 93.93% ± o(1).
Therefore we see that SL has slightly higher in-distribution accuracy.


                                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.2    DATA MODEL 2

For data model 2, it is evident that SL can achieve 100% in-distribution accuracy, as under our
assumption, every possible example shows in the training set and they are seperable. For MMCL,
every example in P T r also shows in P ⋆ . The fact that it achieves 100% accuracy on P ⋆ , as we
have already proved, implies a 100% in-distribution accuracy.


F     C OMPARISON BETWEEN S UP C ON , S ELF -S UPERVISED -CL AND MMCL

F.1    A D ETAILED D ISCUSSION

While the original analysis in the main paper has already thoroughly demonstrated the mechanisms
leading to MMCL’s robustness, an in-depth comparison between SupCon, Self-Supervised-CL (e.g.,
SimCLR), and MMCL offers an alternative interpretation of the same findings. We hope this can
further illustrate the roles of two crucial elements in MMCL: contrasting between individual examples
and multimodality.
1. SupCon < Self-Supervised-CL: Role of contrasting between individual examples. Let’s
compare the representations learned by two different unimodal representation learning techniques:
SupCon and Self-Supervised-CL. Although their loss functions are quite similar, Self-Supervised-CL
contrasts any two different examples, while SupCon contrasts only those with different labels. We
have the following important conclusions: (1) Self-Supervised-CL closely resembles MMCL but
within a single modality. Consequently, its learned representations exhibit a similar structure to
MMCL’s representations in that modality. This includes learning large-variance features and features
shared between classes. (2) In contrast, SupCon’s representations exacerbate the issue of spurious
correlations because it maps both core and spurious features to the same direction in representations,
making them entangled. We theoretically demonstrate this in Theorems F.1 and F.2 in the next
subsection.
2. Self-Supervised-CL < MMCL: Role of multi-modality. Now, one may ask, given that Self-
Supervised-CL achieves good representation structures, can it achieve the same level of robustness as
MMCL? Well, (1) No, because Self-Supervised-CL solely learns unimodal (e.g., image) representa-
tions. To enable classification, we rely on supervised learning on these representations, which, as we
have already shown, is not robust. (2) Yes, only if one could align representations of language and
image modalities for zero-shot classification (bypassing supervised learning) after separately learning
representations in each modality with Self-Supervised-CL. However, this essentially falls into the
category of MMCL because MMCL precisely performs these two tasks – contrasting individual
examples and aligning between modalities –simultaneously. An alternative way to think about this is
that even if we adopt MMCL’s image representations, training a linear classifier on the representations
instead of conducting zero-shot classification would lead reduced robustness. Evidence for this can
be found in Figures 14 and 15 in the CLIP paper (Radford 2021), where zero-shot classification
outperforms logistic regression/few-shot learning on representations.

F.2    T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS FOR S UP C ON

We consider the following supervised contrastive loss, which is naturally analogous to the MMCL
loss used in the main paper, and is akin to the linear loss widely adopted in theoretical CL papers in
the literature Ji et al. (2021); Nakada et al. (2023).

                                                                      
                                                     x       ⊤ x
                    1 X 1 X                     X g(x I,i )  g(x    )
                                                                  I,k    ρ
    LSupCon (W
             W) = −      +
                              xI,i )⊤ g(x
                            g(x         xI,j ) −              −
                                                                            W ⊤W ∥2F .
                                                                         + ∥W
                    n i Ni                                 Ni             2
                                 j∥i                       k∦i

where j ∥ i represents that examples i and j are from the same class, k ∦ i represents that examples i
and k are from different classes, Ni+ = |{j | j ∥ i}| and Ni− = |{k | k ∦ i}|. We consider a linear
model g(xxI ) = W x I with W ∈ Rp×d . The examples are drawn from the training distribution P T r
within the image modality.


                                                 26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.2.1   DATA M ODEL 1, S UP C ON
Since SupCon solely learns representations, to enable classification, we need to add a classifier l on
top of the encoder g. we consider a linear classifier l(vv ) = β ⊤v where β ∈ Rp . The entire model,
consisting of both the encoder and the added classifier, is represented as l(g(x         xI )) = β ⊤W x . Its
              xI ) is given by sign(l(g(x
prediction ŷ(x                             xI ))). The test accuracy on the true distribution is then denoted
as AccP ⋆ (ww , β ) := Ez ,y∈P ⋆ ,xxI =D      z )+ξξ I [1(ŷ(x
                                       D I µ (z              xI ) = y)].
The following theorem demonstrates that SupCon is not robust to distribution shifts, resulting in
random chance accuracy across the entire true distribution P ⋆ and making almost entirely wrong
predictions on examples where a ̸= y. To simplify the analysis we consider minimizing the population
loss in noiseless setting. It’s important to note that similar results in general cases can be obtained
using concentration bounds similar to those in Sections C.2.2 and C.2.3.
Theorem F.1. Consider Assumption 4.2 and additionally consider the noiseless setting where
σξ,I = 0 and let n → ∞. Let W ∗ be the minimizer of the SupCon loss, then no linear classifier can
separate the learned representations of the two classes well. More specifically, ∀β
                                                                                  β,
                                              W ∗ , β ) ≤ 50% + o(1).
                                      AccP ⋆ (W
Meanwhile, the model’s test accuracy on examples where a ̸= y is o(1), i.e., approaching zero.

Proof. First, we define
                                    1      X                      X
                      S SupCon :=     (          x(y)x̄
                                                 x̄  x(y)⊤ −               x(y)x̄
                                                                           x̄  x(−y)⊤ ),
                                    2
                                      y∈{−1,1}                  y∈{−1,1}

                 1
       x(y) := n/2
                      P
where x̄              x I,i from class y x I,i denotes mean of examples from class y. Based on our
assumption, we can easily calculate S SupCon as follows

                                                    1       2pspu − 1
                          S SupCon = 2D   DI                             D⊤
                                                                          I .
                                                2pspu − 1 (2pspu − 1)2
    Pd
Let i=1 λiu iu i⊤ represent the eigen decomposition of S SupCon . Similar to the explanation provided
in Section B.1, by rewriting LSupCon as a matrix factorization objective and applying the Eckart-
Young-Mirsky theorem, we obtain the minimizer of the loss as follows:
                                                            p
                                                       1X
                                          W ∗⊤W ∗ =          λiu iu ⊤
                                                                    i ,
                                                       ρ i=1

We can easily compute
                     the eigen       vectors
                                              and eigen values for S SupCon : λ1 = (2pspu −
                      √      1
                        (2pspu −1)2 +1
1)2 + 1, µ 1 = D I                    , and λ2 = · · · = λd = 0. Therefore, W ∗ =
                      √ 2pspu −12
                        (2pspu −1) +1
                          1            √ 2pspu −12 ]DD⊤
p
             2
  (2pspu − 1) + 1 [
                 P  √           2                      I where P can be any p × 1 vector with
                           (2pspu −1) +1       (2pspu −1) +1
norm 1. Consequently
               s
                  2((2pspu − 1)2 + 1)             1           2pspu − 1
        W ∗x =                        P [p                 p                 ]DD⊤  Ix
                           ρ                          2
                                           (2pspu − 1) + 1  (2pspu − 1)2 + 1
               s
                  2((2pspu − 1)2 + 1)             1           2pspu − 1
             =                        P [p                 p                 ]zz .                       (38)
                           ρ                          2
                                           (2pspu − 1) + 1  (2pspu − 1)2 + 1
For any β , the test accuracy is given by
                                         W ∗ , β ) = Pr(yβ
                                 AccP ⋆ (W               β ⊤W ∗x > 0)
By equation 38 and some calculation we get
                                W ∗ , β ) = Pr(ν1 + ν2 > −1 − (2pspu − 1)ay)
                        AccP ⋆ (W


                                                       27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where
                                            ν1 =yξcore
                                            ν2 =y(2pspu − 1)ξspu
and each can be considered as a Gaussian random variable with zero mean, independent from each
other. Therefore
                                       1                          1
 Pr(ν1 + ν2 > −1 − (2pspu − 1)ay) = Pr(ν1 + ν2 > −2pspu ) + Pr(ν1 + ν2 > 2(pspu − 1)).
                                       2                          2
                   ν1 +ν2
Considering √σ2 +(2p    −1)2 σ 2
                                 ∼ N (0, 1), we have
                 core     spu    spu

                         1                   2pspu                  1              2(1 − pspu )
              W ∗ , β ) ≤ Φ( q
      AccP ⋆ (W                                                  ) + Φ( q                                      )
                         2    σ2                         2 2        2    σ2                       2 2
                                       core + (2pspu − 1) σspu                  core + (2pspu − 1) σspu

                         1                   2pspu
                        = Φ( q                                   ) + o(1)      because pspu = 1 − o(1)
                         2    σ2                         2 2
                                       core + (2pspu − 1) σspu

                        ≤50% + o(1).
                                                                                           2(1−p     )
Additionally, the accuracy on examples where a ̸= y is given by 12 Φ( √σ2 +(2p spu−1)2 σ2 ) = o(1),
                                                                                    core       spu       spu
i.e., almost zero.

F.3   DATA M ODEL 2, S UP C ON

Theorem F.2. Under the same assumption as in Theorems 4.7 and 4.8. Let W ∗ be the minimizer of
the LSupCon loss. If we train a multi-class linear classifier g(ff ) = B f with with B 2m×p using Cross-
Entropy loss on the learned representations (i.e., given by W ∗x I ), the test accuracy over the true
distribution is 50%. Formally, let B ∗ be the trained linear classifier AccP ∗ (WW ∗ , B ∗ ) = 50%. More-
over, no linear classifier can achieve accuracy better than 75%, i.e., ∀B               W ∗ , B ) ≤ 75%.
                                                                            B , AccP ∗ (W

Proof. First, we define
                                                       2m
                                                  1    X
                                  S SupCon =               x¯I (y)x¯I (y)⊤ ,
                                                2m − 1 y=1

       x(y)             1
                                                               e⊤    e⊤   ⊤
                                      P
where x̄ I := # examples from class y  xI from class y x I = [ce k αce k ] for any y with alias (k, c). Here
e k denotes the k-th standard basis in R . Similar to the previous subsection, by rewriting the
                                              m

objective and applying the Eckart-Young-Mirsky theorem, we obtain
                                                            p
                                                       1X
                                         W ∗⊤W ∗ =           λiu iu ⊤
                                                                    i ,
                                                       ρ i=1
         Pd
where ρ1 i=1 λiu iu ⊤ i is the eigen decomposition of S SupCon .The eigenvalues and vectors can be
calculated as follows:
                     2                              1             α
            λi =          (1 + α2 ), u i = D I [ √       e⊤
                                                          i √          e⊤  ⊤
                                                                        i ] , ∀i ∈ [m]
                  2m − 1                           1+α 2        1 + α2
            λi = 0, ∀i > m.
Therefore
                                                                   ⊤
                                               r                   u1
                                                   2(1 + α2 )      .. 
                                       W∗ =                     P  . ,
                                                     2m − 1
                                                                   u⊤
                                                                    m

where P ∈ Rp×m can be any matrix with orthonormal columns. Consequently, for any example x I
in class (k, c),
                        r
                  ∗       2(1 + α2 )      c                          α2
                 W xI =              (√        + sign(zz [k + m]) √         P ek .
                                                                           )P          (39)
                           2m − 1       1 + α2                      1 + α2


                                                       28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


On the training distribution, sign(zz [k + m]) is always c. Therefore, the linear classifier trained on the
representations of the training data would be (recall the relation between CE loss and SVD in Section
B.1):

                                           q                    
                                                2m−1 1    ⊤
                                                       2e
                                              q 2 1+α 1 
                                                       ⊤
                                         − 2m−1   1
                                                     2e 
                                         
                                    B∗ =  q 2 1+α 1  P ⊤ .
                                            2m−1 1
                                                     e⊤ 
                                                        
                                          q 2 1+α2 2 
                                         
                                          − 2m−1
                                              2
                                                   1
                                                      e⊤
                                                 1+α2 2


On the true distribution, B ∗ can make correct predictions for examples that also show during training.
However, for any example x I from class y with alias (k, c), if its z satisfy that z [k + m] = −cα, it
can be observed that (BB ∗W ∗x I )[y − c] > (B
                                             B ∗W ∗x I )[y], leading to incorrect predictions. Therefore,
the overall accuracy is 50%.
Next, we analyze the case for arbitrary B . For any two classes (k, −1) and (k, 1) in the true
distribution, we can group them into four groups denoted by Gc,sign(zz [k+m]) , i.e., based on the
combinations of c and sign(zz [k + m]). Since α > 1, we have

     −1        α2         1        α2        −1        α2         1        α2
√          −√        <√        −√        <√        +√        <√        +√        .
    1 + α2    1 + α2    1 + α2    1 + α2    1 + α2    1 + α2    1 + α2    1 + α2

Combining this with equation 39, we conclude that the four groups lie on the same line. Moreover,
going from G−1,− to G1,1 , we pass through G1,−1 first and then G−1,1 . Given this order, no linear
model can classify more than three out of the four groups correctly. Since this is true for any pair
of classes (k, −1) and (k, 1), it follows that no model can perform better than 75% accuracy on the
entire distribution.


G     E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

G.1    T HE SEMI - SYNTHETIC E XPERIMENT

Image generation. Firstly, we define three types of blue: dark blue, medium blue, and light blue,
as well as three types of red: dark red, medium red, and light red. Then, we modify images in the
MNIST dataset. To generate the training data, for each image with a digit between 0 and 4, there is a
99.5% probability that the background will be colored with a random shade of blue from the three
types; otherwise, it will be colored with a random shade of red. Similarly, for each image with a digit
between 5 and 9, there is a 99.5% probability that the background will be colored with a random
shade of red from the three types; otherwise, it will be colored with a random shade of blue. The task
is to classify whether the digit in an image falls between 0-4 or 5-9. To generate the test data, the
color is uniformly selected from all six colors for each image.
Caption generation. We simulate captions using vectors. Each caption is a 200-dimensional vector
                                      1
generated as v + ξ , where ξ ∼ N (0, 2000 I200 ) and v = [a, b, 0, 0, 0, . . . , 0]⊤ with a, b generated as
follows.
First, we define a dictionary that assigns a value to each color and digit:

DICT = { 0 : − 4 . 5 , 1 : − 3 . 5 , 2 : − 2 . 5 , 3 : − 1 . 5 , 4 : − 0 . 5 , \ \
5: 0.5 , 6: 1.5 , 7: 2.5 , 8: 3.5 , 9: 4.5 , \ \
" d a r k b l u e " : − 2 . 5 , " medium b l u e " : − 1 . 5 , " l i g h t b l u e " : − 0 . 5 , \ \
" l i g h t r e d " : 0 . 5 , " medium r e d " : 1 . 5 , " d a r k r e d " : 2 . 5 }



                                                     29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                    Figure 4: Construction of images


We also define the following values as the means for each category:
                        4
                   1X
       mean0-4 =      DICT[d] = −2.5
                   4
                       d=1
                    9
                   1X
       mean5-9 =             DICT[d] = 2.5
                   4
                       d=5
                 DICT[“dark blue"] + DICT[“medium blue"] + DICT[“light blue"]
      meanblue =                                                                       = −1.5
                                                    3
                 DICT[“dark red"] + DICT[“medium red"] + DICT[“light red"]
       meanred =                                                                  = 1.5
                                                  3
For an image with digit d and color c, the corresponding a and b are given by:

               DICT[d],                                         with probability πcore
         a=
               mean0-4 if d ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3, 4} else mean5-9 ,    with probability 1 − πcore

               DICT[c],                                         with probability πspu
         b=
               meanblue if c is a kind of blue else meanred ,   with probability 1 − πspu .

Training details. For MMCL, we choose LeNet with an output dimension of 128 as our vision
encoder. For the ‘language’ model, since the captions are represented as vectors, we employ a linear
model with an output dimension of 128. We use the CLIP loss, but without normalization when
computing similarity. We use momentum SGD as the optimizer with a learning rate of 0.01, weight
decay of 0.001, momentum of 0.9, a batch size of 128. The model is trained for 100 epochs. For
SL, we train a LeNet using momentum SGD with a learning rate of 0.01, weight decay of 0.001,
momentum of 0.9, a batch size of 128, for 40 epoch to minimize the Cross-Entropy loss.
In distribution accuracy. To measure the in-distribution test accuracy, we evaluate the models on a
dataset constructed in the same way as the training data but with images from the MNIST test set.
Figure 5 presents the results, showing that supervised learning achieves the highest in-distribution
accuracy. This indicates that the improvement in out-of-distribution accuracy shown in Figure 2 can
only be attributed to MMCL’s superior robustness. In other words, MMCL enhances both effective
robustness and relative robustness, as defined in (Taori et al., 2020).

G.2   E XPERIMENTS ON MS COCO

Datasets. The MSCOCO dataset Lin et al. (2014), or Microsoft Common Objects in COntext, is a
comprehensive computer vision dataset comprising diverse images annotated with object masks and
captions. We train our model on MSCOCO and test on 6 different variants of ImageNet Russakovsky
et al. (2015) as follows. ImageNet1K, a subset of the ImageNet dataset, contains over a million
high-resolution images for image classification. ImageNetv2Recht et al. (2019) addresses biases and


                                                  30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                100
                                                                 πspu = 1, varying πcore
                                                     90


                                   ID accuracy (%)
                                                                 πcore = 1, varying πspu
                                                     80          supervised

                                                     70
                                                     60
                                                     50
                                                          0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
                                                               πcore or πspu

Figure 5: In-distribution test accuracy evaluated on a dataset constructed in the same way as the
training data but with images from the MNIST testset.


offers a balanced category distribution. ImageNet Sketch Wang et al. (2019) features hand-drawn
object sketches, while ImageNet-A Hendrycks et al. (2021b) serves as an adversarial benchmark.
ImageNet-R Hendrycks et al. (2021a) offers real-world, unfiltered images, and ObjectNet Barbu et al.
(2019) emphasizes robustness with objects in varied, cluttered scenes.
Settings. (1) Training 3-layer MLPs on top of frozen encoders (Figures 3a and 3b). Due to the
limited time and compute resource constraints, we consider a simplified setting similar to the one
used in Ren & Li (2023). We use the pre-trained ResNet50 of CLIP, followed by a 3-layer fully
connected network (MLP) with batch norm between layers for the image encoder part. During
training, we freeze the ResNet50 part and solely train the 3-layer MLP. Similarly, for the text part,
we employ a separate MLP with the same size on top of the pre-trained Transformer of CLIP
and only train the MLP. The hidden and the output dimensions of this MLP are selected from the
set {16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512, 768, 1024, 2048, 4096, 8192} to produce different accuracy pairs. We
train for 100 epochs with a batch size of 256. Other hyperparameters are set to their default values.
Each experiment is run on 1 NVIDIA A6000. (2) Training the entire model (Figure 3c). We use the
official Pytorch implementation of CyCLIP Goel et al. (2022)3 . We train CLIP (with ResNet50 as the
image encoder and Transformer as the text encoder) on MSCOCO for 100 epochs with a batch size
of 512. Other hyperparameters are set to their default values. Each experiment is run on 2 NVIDIA
A6000.
Evaluation. Following the measurement proposed in Taori et al. (2020), which has become a standard
way of measuring robustness, we plot OOD accuracy (the average of the zero-shot accuracies on
6 shifted versions of ImageNet) against ID accuracy (the zero-shot accuracy on the validation set
of MSCOCO). In setting (1), to obtain different ID-OOD accuracy pairs, we train MLPs with 11
different widths as described above. In Setting (2), to obtain different ID-OOD accuracy pairs, we
train models on 25%, 50%, 75%, and 100% of the original dataset. Note that, for ImageNet variants,
we only sample a subset of classes (320 out of 1000) that can be mapped to the 80 MSCOCO classes.

G.3      E XPERIMENTS ON C ONCEPTUAL C APTIONS

Datasets. Conceptual Caption (CC3M) Sharma et al. (2018) consists of around 3 million image-
caption pairs which are collected and processed from Internet webpages. The dataset is divided into
Training, Validation, and Test splits. The Training split includes 3,318,333 pairs in which a subset of
2,007,528 has machine-generated labels Ng et al. (2020). Utilizing the image labels in the subset of
CC3M’s Training split, we filter a subset of CC3M training images whose predicted labels belong to
ImageNet classes with a confidence score of at least 0.6. To mitigate the effect of class imbalance,
we further select classes with at least 100 but no more than 10,000 samples. The resulting subset
consists of 296,801 images corresponding to 316 classes of ImageNet. To create the training and
validation datasets, we split the subset with the 7:3 ratio in a stratified fashion.
Settings. (1) Training 3-layer MLPs on top of frozen encoders (Figures 3a and 3b). We use the same
settings in Appendix G.2 except for the batch size which we increase to 1024 because the training set

   3
       https://github.com/goel-shashank/CyCLIP


                                                                  31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                        Top1 accuracy
                                                     CLIP
                                         50


                          OOD Accuracy (%)
                                                     SupCon
                                                     SimCLR
                                         40          SL
                                         30
                                         20
                                         10
                                             0
                                                 0     25          50   75   100
                                                       ID Accuracy (%)
Figure 6: Comparison of robustness (OOD-ID relation) on CC3M between different learning ap-
proaches when changing the model width.


is larger. (2) Training the entire model (Figure 3c). We use the same settings as training MSCOCO in
Appendix G.2. We cannot increase the batch size in this case due to the GPU memory constraint.
Evaluation. We train different models on the training set and perform zero-shot 316-class classifi-
cation on the validation set for CLIP. Similar to Appendix G.2, all models are evaluated on the test
sets of 6 ImageNet variants, and the average accuracy across these datasets is considered the OOD
accuracy.

G.4   A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

Comparison between different learning algorithms. In this experiment, we compare CLIP with
SL, SupCon, and SimCLR. We train the same MLP as in CLIP on the pre-computed embeddings
of images but with different losses for SL, SupCon, and SimCLR. The image embeddings are
computed using the pre-trained CLIP image encoder. For a fair comparison, we also train them
for 100 epochs with a batch size of 1024. Other parameters are set to the same values as the
settings of CLIP. For SupCon and SimCLR, following the standard linear evaluation procedure,
we discard the projection head and additionally train a linear classifier on the representations to
perform classification. The model width (i.e., the hidden and output dimensions of MLP) varies in the
set {16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512, 768, 1024, 2048, 4096, 8192}. Figure 6 illustrates that training CLIP
yields better robustness than other learning algorithms in terms of zero-shot accuracy. This result
is well aligned with our analysis in Appendix F. Interestingly, the robustness of SL, SupCon, and
SimCLR is almost similar, resulting in nearly identical slopes.
Comparison between CLIP and SL with different image encoder’s architectures. In this
experiment, we change the architecture of the CLIP image encoder. We utilize four different
architectures including ResNet50, ResNet101, ResNet50x4, and ViT-B-32 whose pre-trained weights
are available. Figure 7 illustrates that training CLIP on CC3M yields better robustness than training
SL across different encoders’ architectures.


                                                              32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                         Top1 accuracy
                                                 CLIP-RN50            SL-RN50
                                        100      CLIP-RN101           SL-RN101
                         OOD Accuracy (%)


                                                 CLIP-RN50x4          SL-RN50x4
                                            80   CLIP-ViT-B-32        SL-ViT-B-32

                                            60
                                            40
                                            20
                                             0
                                                 20         40        60            80   100
                                                       ID Accuracy (%)
Figure 7: Comparison of robustness (OOD-ID relation) on CC3M between CLIP and SL when
changing the image encoder’s architecture. The solid lines represent CLIP models while the dashed
ones represent SL models.


                                                                 33
