Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L EARNING TO ACT WITHOUT ACTIONS
 Dominik Schmidt∗                                          Minqi Jiang
 Weco AI                                                   FAIR at Meta AI



                                                A BSTRACT
             Pre-training large models on vast amounts of web data has proven to be an ef-
             fective approach for obtaining powerful, general models in domains such as lan-
             guage and vision. However, this paradigm has not yet taken hold in reinforcement
             learning. This is because videos, the most abundant form of embodied behavioral
             data on the web, lack the action labels required by existing methods for imitating
             behavior from demonstrations. We introduce Latent Action Policies (LAPO), a
             method for recovering latent action information—and thereby latent-action poli-
             cies, world models, and inverse dynamics models—purely from videos. LAPO is
             the first method able to recover the structure of the true action space just from
             observed dynamics, even in challenging procedurally-generated environments.
             LAPO enables training latent-action policies that can be rapidly fine-tuned into
             expert-level policies, either offline using a small action-labeled dataset, or online
             with rewards. LAPO takes a first step towards pre-training powerful, generalist
             policies and world models on the vast amounts of videos readily available on the
             web. Our code is available here: https://github.com/schmidtdominik/LAPO.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Training on web-scale data has shown to be an effective approach for obtaining powerful models
with broad capabilities in domains including language and vision (Radford et al., 2019; Caron et al.,
2021). Much recent work has thus sought to apply the same paradigm in deep reinforcement learn-
ing (RL, Sutton & Barto, 2018), in order to learn generalist policies from massive amounts of web
data (Baker et al., 2022; Reed et al., 2022). However, common methods for learning policies from
offline demonstrations, such as imitation learning (Pomerleau, 1988; Ross & Bagnell, 2010) and
offline RL (Kumar et al., 2020; Levine et al., 2020), typically require action or reward labels, which
are missing from purely observational data, such as videos found on the web.
In this work we introduce Latent Action Policies (LAPO), a method for recovering latent-action
information from videos. In addition to inferring the structure of the underlying action space purely
from observed dynamics, LAPO produces latent-action versions of useful RL models including
forward-dynamics models (world models), inverse-dynamics models, and importantly, policies.
LAPO is founded on the key insights that (1) some notion of a latent action that explains an en-
vironment transition can be inferred from observations alone, and (2) given such inferred latent
actions per transition, a latent-action policy can be obtained using standard imitation learning meth-
ods. Our experiments provide strong evidence that such latent policies accurately capture the ob-
served expert’s behavior, by showing that they can be efficiently fine-tuned into expert-level policies
in the true action space. This results makes LAPO a significant step toward pre-training general,
rapidly-adaptable policies on massive action-free demonstration datasets, such as the vast quantities
of videos available on the web.
Crucially, LAPO learns to infer latent actions, and consequently, obtain latent action policies in a
fully unsupervised manner. LAPO is similar to prior work (Torabi et al., 2018; Schmeckpeper et al.,
2020; Baker et al., 2022; Zheng et al., 2023) in that we first train an inverse dynamics model (IDM)
that predicts the action taken between two consecutive observations, and then use this IDM to add
action labels to a large action-free dataset. However, unlike these prior works, which rely on some
amount of ground-truth action-labelled data for training the IDM, LAPO does not make use of any
labels and infers latent action information purely from observed environment dynamics. To do so,
    ∗
        Correspondence to dominik.schmidt.22@ucl.ac.uk .


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: UMAP projection of the learned latent action space for Miner alongside illustrative next-state pre-
dictions generated by the FDM for each cluster of latent actions. Each point represents a continuous latent
action generated by the IDM for a transition in the video dataset. Each point is color-coded by the true action
taken by the agent at that transition. For clarity, NOOP actions are omitted. The structure of the latent action
space is highly interpretable and closely corresponds to the true action space, even though no ground-truth
action labels were used during training.

the IDM in LAPO learns to predict latent actions rather than true actions. These latent actions take
the form of a learned representation that explains an observed transition. To learn this representation,
LAPO makes use of a simple unsupervised objective that seeks to establish predictive consistency
between the IDM and a separate forward dynamics model (FDM). The FDM is trained on transitions
consisting of two consecutive observations (ot , ot+1 ) to predict the future observation ot+1 , given
the past observation ot and a latent action. This latent action is generated by the IDM given both
past and future observations. Thus, unlike the FDM which sees only the past, the IDM has access to
both the past and future and learns to pass useful information about the future to the FDM through
the latent action. By making the latent action an information bottleneck (Tishby et al., 2000), we
prevent the IDM from simply forwarding the entire future observation to the FDM, thereby forcing
it to learn a highly compressed encoding of state transitions. We refer to this encoding as a latent
action, as it captures the observable effects of the agent’s true actions.
In our experiments in Section 6, we train a latent IDM via LAPO on large expert-level action-free
offline datasets for each of the 16 games of the Procgen Benchmark (Cobbe et al., 2019; 2020). We
observe that the structure of the learned latent action spaces are highly interpretable, often exhibiting
clusters that closely align with the true action space (see Figure 1). This is a remarkable result, as
our approach uses zero ground-truth action labels and instead recovers all action information purely
from observed dynamics. To go beyond merely recovering action information, we then show how
we can leverage the learned latent representation to quickly obtain powerful expert-level policies
in downstream tasks: We first use the IDM to assign latent action labels to each transition in the
same video dataset on which it was trained. We then perform behavior cloning on the resulting
action-observation dataset to learn a latent-action policy, which imitates the latent actions predicted
by the IDM. Finally, to deploy the policy in the online environment, we seek to turn it from a latent
action policy into a policy in the true action space. We show that if a tiny, action-labeled dataset is
available, a latent → true action decoder can be learned in a supervised manner and used to decode
the outputs of the latent policy. This approach is extremely data-efficient, requiring only ∼200
labeled transitions to exceed the performance of 4M steps of regular RL via PPO. Alternatively,
if an online environment is available, we show that simply fine-tuning the last layers of the latent
policy with a general-purpose RL algorithm allows the policy to rapidly adapt to the true action
space and recover (or at times exceed) expert performance. These results indicate that latent policies
produced by LAPO capture meaningful behavior in the latent action space.
While we take a first step in demonstrating the potential of these latent representations for obtain-
ing powerful policies in Section 6, the fundamental contribution of this work is simply showing
that comprehensive action information can be recovered from pure video through unsupervised ob-
jectives, such as the one proposed herein. This result opens the door to future work that employs
representation learning methods like LAPO to train powerful, generalist policies and world models
on massive video datasets from the web.


                                                       2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2   R ELATED WORK
Most closely related to our approach, ILPO (Edwards et al., 2019) aims to infer latent actions via a
dynamics modelling objective. However, unlike LAPO, ILPO learns a latent policy rather than an
IDM jointly with the FDM, and uses a discrete rather than a continuous latent action space. For each
FDM update, ILPO identifies the discrete latent action that minimizes the next-state prediction error,
and only optimizes the FDM for that specific action. In practice, this objective can lead to mode
collapse, where a feedback loop causes only a small number of discrete latents to ever be selected
(Struckmeier & Kyrki, 2023). By using an IDM rather than a discrete latent policy, LAPO avoids
enumerating all hypothetically possible transitions and instead learns the latent action corresponding
to the actual observed transition. To train the policy, ILPO minimizes the difference between the true
next state and the expectation of the next state under the policy. This loss is ill-conditioned, as even
when it is minimized, the next-state predictions for individual latent actions do not have to align
with the environment. Moreover, LAPO’s use of continuous rather than finite discrete latents may
allow better modeling in complex and partially-observable environments, as any information useful
for prediction can be captured within the latent representation. We provide evidence for this in
Appendix A.5, where we show that ILPO breaks down when applied to more than a single Procgen
level at a time. Finally, ILPO’s use of discrete latents makes its computational complexity linear
rather than constant in the latent dimensionality, due to the required enumeration of all actions.
In the model-based setting, FICC (Ye et al., 2023) pre-trains a world model from observation-only
demonstrations. FICC thus seeks to distill dynamics from demonstrations, rather than behaviors, as
done by LAPO. Moreover, while the cyclic consistency loss used by FICC closely resembles the
LAPO objective, the adaptation phase of FICC must operate in reverse, mapping true actions to
latent actions in order to finetune the world model. Unlike the approach taken by LAPO, this adap-
tation strategy cannot make direct use of online, ground-truth action labels, and requires continued
training and application of a world model. In contrast, LAPO directly produces latent action poli-
cies imitating the expert behavior, which can be rapidly adapted online to expert-level performance.
Outside of RL, Playable Video Generation (PVG, Menapace et al., 2021) similarly focuses on world
model learning with a similar objective for the purpose of controllable video generation. Like ILPO,
PVG uses a more limiting, small set of discrete latent actions.
A related set of semi-supervised approaches first train an IDM using a smaller dataset containing
ground-truth action labels, and then use this IDM to label a larger action-free dataset, which can
subsequently be used for behavior cloning. VPT (Baker et al., 2022) and ACO (Zhang et al., 2022)
follow this approach, training an IDM on action-labeled data which is then used to generate pseudo
labels for training policies on unlabeled footage gathered from the web. RLV (Schmeckpeper et al.,
2020) uses an observation-only dataset within an online RL loop, where action and reward labels are
provided by an IDM trained on action-labelled data and a hand-crafted reward function respectively.
Similarly, BCO (Torabi et al., 2018) trains an IDM through environment interaction, then uses the
IDM to label action-free demonstrations for behavior cloning. However, relying on interactions
for labels can be inefficient, as finding useful labels online may itself be a difficult RL exploration
problem. SS-ORL (Zheng et al., 2023) is similar to VPT but performs offline RL instead of imitation
learning on the IDM-labelled data and requires reward-labels. Unlike these methods, LAPO avoids
the need for significant amounts of action-labeled data to train an IDM, by directly inferring latent
actions and latent policies which can easily be decoded into true actions.
LAPO differs from previous methods for imitation learning from observation (IfO; Torabi et al.,
2019a;b; Yang et al., 2019), which typically require the imitating policy to have access to the true
action space when training on action-free demonstrations. Crucially, unlike these prior approaches,
LAPO does not require access to the ground-truth action space to learn from action-free demon-
strations. Other methods leverage observation-only demonstrations for purposes other than learning
useful behaviors. Intention-Conditioned Value Functions (ICVF; Ghosh et al., 2023) uses a temporal
difference learning objective based on observation-only demonstrations to learn state representations
useful for downstream RL tasks. Aytar et al. (2018) propose to use expert demonstrations during
online RL to guide the agent along the expert’s trajectories. For this, they propose two auxiliary
classification tasks for learning state representations based on observation-only demonstrations.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3     BACKGROUND
3.1    R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

Throughout this paper, we consider RL under partial observability, using the framework of the
partially-observable Markov decision process (POMDP, Åström, 1965; Kaelbling et al., 1998). A
POMDP consists of a tuple (S, A, T , R, O, Ω, γ), where S is the state space, A is the action space,
O is the observation space, and γ is the discount factor. At each timestep t, the RL agent receives
an observation ot derived from the state st , according to the observation function Ω : S 7→ O,
and takes
        P∞ an action according to its policy π(at |ot ), in order to maximize its expected discounted
return, k=t γ k−t rk . The environment then transitions to the next state st+1 according to the tran-
sition function, T : S × A 7→ S, and agent receives a reward rt based on the reward function
R : S × A × S 7→ R. This work considers first learning a policy π from offline demonstrations,
followed by further fine-tuning the policy online as the agent interacts with its environment.

3.2    L EARNING FROM O BSERVATIONS

Often, we have access to recordings of a performant policy, e.g. a human expert, performing a
task of interest. When the dataset includes the action labels for transitions, a supervised learning
approach called behavior cloning (BC, Pomerleau, 1988) can be used to train an RL policy to directly
imitate the expert. Consider a dataset D of such expert trajectories within the environment, where
each trajectory τ consists of a list of all transition tuples (o0 , a0 , o1 ), . . . , (o|τ |−1 , a|τ |−1 , o|τ | ) in
a complete episode within the environment. BC then trains a policy πBC to imitate the expert by
minimizing the cross-entropy loss between the policy’s action distribution and the expert’s action a∗
                                       1
                                          P       P|τ |          ∗
for each observation in D: LBC = − |D|       τ ∈D    t=0 log(π(at |ot )).

Unfortunately, most demonstration data in the wild, e.g. videos, do not contain action labels. In this
case, the demonstration data simply consists of a continuous stream of observations taking the form
(o0 , o1 , . . . , o|τ | ). This setting, sometimes called imitation learning from observations (IfO, Torabi
et al., 2019a), poses a more difficult (and practical) challenge. IfO methods often seek to learn a
model that predicts the missing action labels, typically trained on a separate dataset with ground-
truth actions. Once labeled this way, the previously action-free dataset can then be used for BC. In
this work, we likewise convert the IfO problem into the BC problem. However, instead of relying on
access to a dataset with ground-truth action labels, our method directly infers latent actions zt that
explain each observed transition (ot , ot+1 ), with which we train latent action policies, π̃(zt |ot ).

3.3    DYNAMICS M ODELS

LAPO employs two kinds of dynamics models: The first is the inverse dynamics model,
pIDM (at |ot , ot+1 ), which predicts which action at was taken by the agent between consecutive obser-
vations ot and ot+1 . An IDM can be used to label a sequence of observations with the corresponding
sequence of actions. The second is the forward dynamics model, pFDM (ot+1 |ot , at ), which predicts
the next observation ot+1 given the previous observation ot and the action at taken by the agent after
observing ot . The FDM can be used as an approximation of the environment’s transition function.
In this work, the IDM and FDM are deterministic and implemented as deep neural networks. Unlike
a standard IDM, the IDM used by LAPO predicts continuous latent actions, zt ∈ Z, where Z = Rn .

3.4    V ECTOR - QUANTIZATION

Vector-quantization (Gray, 1984, VQ) is a method for learning discrete features by quantizing an
underlying continuous representation. This has been shown particularly useful in deep learning,
where VQ enables learning discrete representations while allowing gradients to flow through the
quantization step. VQ has been used effectively in many domains including vision (van den Oord
et al., 2017; Ramesh et al., 2021b; Huh et al., 2023), audio (Dhariwal et al., 2020; Zeghidour et al.,
2022), and model-based RL (Micheli et al., 2023). To quantize a continuous vector z, VQ maintains
a codebook {c1 , c2 , . . . , cm } and maps z to the closest codebook vector ci . The straight-through
gradient estimator is used to pass gradients through the quantization step (Bengio et al., 2013).



                                                          4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4     L ATENT ACTION P OLICIES
4.1   L EARNING A L ATENT ACTION R EPRESENTATION

We now describe our approach for learning a latent IDM via a
forward dynamics modelling objective (see Fig. 2). First, to learn
about the action at time t, we sample a sequence of observations
ot−k , . . . , ot , ot+1 from our observation-only dataset. Here, ot
and ot+1 are the observations before and after the action of inter-
est is taken and observations ot−k , . . . , ot−1 are additional con-
text controlled by hyperparameter k ≥ 0. The IDM then predicts
the latent action zt based on the full sequence of observations.
                  zt ∼ pIDM (·|ot−k , . . . , ot , ot+1 )
Next, the FDM predicts the post-transition observation ot+1
based only on the past observations ot−k , . . . , ot and the latent
action zt .                                                               Figure 2: LAPO architecture. Both
               ôt+1 ∼ pFDM (·|ot−k , . . . , ot , zt )                   IDM and FDM observe ot , but only
                                                                          the IDM observes ot+1 . To en-
Both models are trained jointly via gradient descent to minimize          able accurate predictions of ot+1 ,
the next state prediction error ||ôt+1 − ot+1 ||2 .                      the IDM must pass useful transi-
This method, as described so far, would likely result in the IDM          tion information through the quan-
learning to simply copy ot+1 into zt , and the FDM learning to            tized information bottleneck zt to
                                                                          the FDM.
forward zt as is. To remedy this, we make the latent action an
information bottleneck. This forces the IDM to compress any information to be passed to the FDM.
Since both the FDM and IDM have access to past observations but only the IDM observes the post-
transition observation ot+1 , the IDM is learns to encode only the difference between ot+1 and ot into
zt , rather than full information about ot+1 . Naturally, one highly efficient encoding of the differences
of two consecutive observations, at least in deterministic environments, is simply the agent’s true
action. Our hypothesis is thus, that forcing the IDM to heavily compress transition information as
described, may allow us to learn a latent action representation with a structure closely corresponding
to the true action space.
As both the IDM and FDM have access to past observations, the learned latent actions may become
conditional on these observations. Intuitively, this means that some latent action z could correspond
to different true actions when performed in different states. While this is not necessarily an issue,
biasing the method toward simpler representations is likely preferrable (Solmonoff, 1964; Schmid-
huber, 1997; Hutter, 2003). Consequently, we apply vector quantization (VQ) to each latent action
before passing it to the FDM, thus forcing the IDM to reuse the limited number of discrete latents
across different parts of the state-space, leading to disentangled representations.

4.2   B EHAVIOR C LONING A L ATENT ACTION P OLICY

Using the trained latent IDM, we now seek to obtain a policy. For this, we initialize a latent policy
π : O → Z and perform behavior cloning on the same observation-only dataset that the IDM was
trained on, with the required action labels generated by the IDM. This is done via gradient descent
with respect to policy parameters on the loss ||π(ot ) − zt ||2 where zt ∼ pIDM (·|ot−k , . . . , ot , ot+1 ).

4.3   D ECODING L ATENT ACTIONS

The policy π, obtained via BC, produces actions in the latent action space. We now consider different
ways to adapt π to produce outputs in the true action space, depending on the kinds of data available.

Small action-labeled dataset. If a small dataset of true-action-labeled transitions is available, we
can train an action decoder, d : Z → A, to map the IDM-predicted latent action for each transition
to the known ground-truth action. The trained decoder can then be composed with the frozen latent
policy and the resulting decoded latent policy, d ◦ π : O → A, can be deployed online.


                                                            5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Online environment. By interacting with the online environment we get both action-labeled tran-
sitions, which can be used to train a decoder in a supervised manner as described above, and a reward
signal, which can be used for online RL. By doing both simultaneously, we can quickly bootstrap a
crude, initial decoder via supervised learning, and then fine-tune the entire composed policy d ◦ π
by directly optimizing for the environment’s reward function via RL. Through RL, the performance
of the policy can be potentially be improved beyond that of the data-generating policy. In particular,
when the data was generated by a mixture of policies of different skill levels or pursuing different
goals (as is the case with data from the web), this step can extract the data-generating policies more
closely aligned with the reward function used for fine-tuning.

5     E XPERIMENTAL S ETTING
Our experiments center on the Procgen Benchmark (Cobbe et al., 2020), as it features a wide variety
of tasks that present different challenges for our method. Compared to other classic benchmarks such
as Atari (Bellemare et al., 2013), the procedural generation underlying Procgen introduces a difficult
generalization problem and results in greater visual complexity which makes dynamics modeling
at pixel-level challenging. Moreover, several Procgen environments feature partial observability,
which along with stochasticity, presents issues for methods attempting to infer actions purely from
observation by making it ambiguous which parts of an environment transition are due to the agent
and which are due to stochastic effects or unobserved information. Our observation-only dataset
consists of approximately 8M frames sampled from an expert policy that was trained with PPO for
50M frames. The use of this synthetic dataset, rather than video data from the web, allows us to
better evaluate our method, as we can directly access the expert policy’s true actions, as well as
metadata such as episodic returns for evaluation purposes.
We use the IMPALA-CNN (Espeholt et al., 2018) to implement both our policy and IDM with a 4x
channel multiplier as used by Cobbe et al. (2020), and U-Net (Ronneberger et al., 2015) based on
a ResNet backbone (He et al., 2016) with approximately 8M parameters for the FDM. The latent
action decoder is a fully-connected network with hidden sizes (128, 128). We use an EMA-based
update (Polyak & Juditsky, 1992) for the vector quantization embedding. We use a single observa-
tion of additional pre-transition context, i.e. k = 1. When decoding the latent policy in the online
environment, we have two decoder heads on top of the latent policy whose logits are averaged per
action before applying softmax. One head is trained in a supervised manner on (at , zt ) tuples from
historical data, the other is trained via Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO, Schulman et al., 2017).
We keep all convolutional layers frozen and found that a much larger learning rate of 0.01 can be
stably used when only training these final few layers. We similarly tuned the learning rate for train-
ing the full network from scratch, but found no improvement compared to the original value of 5e-4.
Other hyperparameters are given in Appendix A.4.

6     R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
6.1   D ECODING THE LATENT POLICY ONLINE

We now discuss our results for decoding the latent policy in the online environment. Recall, that
this is the third stage of our approach, after first training a latent IDM, followed by obtaining a latent
policy via behavior cloning. In this experiment, we compare how decoding the latent policy (via
supervised learning and RL) compares to learning a policy from scratch purely from environment
interaction via PPO. Since our work focuses on the setting where large amounts of observation-only
data are freely available, but environment interaction is limited or expensive, we run PPO for 4M
steps rather than the 25M steps suggested by Cobbe et al. (2020). Experiments are performed sepa-
rately per environment. As can be seen in Figure 3, using LAPO’s latent policy we are able to fully
recover expert performance within only 4M frames, while PPO from scratch reaches only 44% of
expert performance in the same period. We highlight that in 9 of 16 tasks, our approach exceeds the
performance of the expert (which was trained for 25M frames) within only 4M frames. We also pro-
vide results for two ablations. The “RL, no-SL” ablation trains the decoder only using reinforcement
learning. In this setting, LAPO can be viewed as an RL-pretraining step that produces an initial pol-
icy representation that is useful for downstream RL. The “RL, no-SL, no-VQ” ablation additionally
removes vector-quantization, showing that VQ is an important component of our method.


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Left: Mean episodic returns (over the course of training) for decoding LAPO’s latent policy and PPO
from scratch (averaged across 3 seeds). Right: Mean test returns relative to per-environment expert policies
averaged across all 16 Procgen environments. Error bars indicate standard deviation across seeds.


We use ILPO as our primary baseline, but found that its policy immediately collapses in several
Procgen tasks. When it does not collapse, online decoding of the ILPO policy did not perform
better than PPO from scratch. While Edwards et al. (2019) do provide positive results for CoinRun
(which we reproduce in Appendix A.5), their experiments target only individual levels of this single
task. We thus hypothesize that ILPO’s policy collapse is in part due to the modeling challenge posed
by the visually diverse levels in the full, procedurally-generated setting. By using an IDM rather
than a policy, plus a high-dimensional, continuous latent space, LAPO can capture stochasticity and
unobserved information (such as off-screen parts of the game). In contrast, it is likely difficult for
ILPO to model the full distribution of possible transitions using only a few discrete latents.

6.2   D ECODING THE LATENT POLICY OFFLINE

Next, we consider training a latent action decoder
fully-offline using only a small action-labeled
dataset and no access to the online environment.
The trained decoder is then composed with the la-
tent policy to map the policy’s actions into the true
action space. As we will see in Section 6.3, the
latent and true action spaces share similar struc-
ture. This similarity allows an effective decoder to
be trained on only a miniscule amount of action-
labeled data. Figure 4 shows that a decoder trained
on less than 256 labeled transitions matches the
performance of a policy trained from scratch for
4M steps. However, we observe that with increas-
ing dataset size, performance eventually plateaus
below the level of online decoder training. This is
likely because, as previously noted, latent actions
are not necessarily state-invariant. A decoder that
only has access to a latent action, but not the state
in which that action is being taken, may not always
be able to successfully decode it. We provide per- Figure 4: Offline decoding performance vs. # la-
environment results in Appendix A.1.                  beled transitions (Mean and std across 3 seeds).


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: UMAP projection of the learned latent action space for all 16 procgen games. Each point represents
the continuous (pre-quantization) latent action generated by the IDM for a transition in the observation-only
dataset. Each point is color-coded by the true action taken by the agent at that transition (true action labels are
only for visualization, not used for training). Arrows in the legend correspond to movement directions. NOOP
actions are omitted for clarity.


6.3    I NSPECTING THE L ATENT ACTION S PACE

To better understand what LAPO learns, we generate a UMAP projection (McInnes et al., 2018)
of the latent action space for each of the 16 Procgen environments, shown in Figure 5. For most
games, the structure of the latent action space is highly interpretable, with distinct clusters of latent
actions closely corresponding to the true discrete actions. We also observe that the structure of
the latent space varies greatly across environments. In BigFish, Chaser, Dodgeball, Maze,
Miner, Plunder, and StarPilot, latent actions aggregate together in well-defined clusters
aligned with the true actions. In other environments, including Climber, CoinRun, FruitBot,
Jumper and Ninja, the latent action space exhibits more fragmented structure. This split roughly
corresponds to environments with higher or lower degrees of partial observability. In the latter group
of environments, the pixel observation shows only part of the level, cropped locally to the player
character. Thus, when the player is moving, most observations will show parts of the level that were


                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


hidden in previous observations. In order for the FDM to accurately predict the next observation,
the IDM needs to encode this off-screen information into the latent action, which we hypothesize
leads to more complex structures in the latent space. However, as demonstrated in Section 6.1, the
latent-space policy still performs well downstream even on environments with greater degrees of
partial observability. Moreso, we find that vector quantization has a large impact in simplifying
the structure of the latent action space. We generate the same UMAP projection for an ablation of
our method without vector quantization in Appendix A.2. We note that for several environments,
including those with and without partial observability, latent action clusters corresponding to distinct
true actions are at times duplicated. For example, in BigFish, each true action sees four latent
action clusters—likely reflecting how taking the same true action in different parts of the state-space
can have differing effects. These results strongly support our hypothesis that vector quantization
leads to simpler latent representations with less fragmentation within actions.

6.4   L IMITATIONS

A few factors can adversely impact the performance of LAPO. First, actions that have a delayed ef-
fect in observations will be predicted to take place with the same delay, i.e. the latent policy actually
models the visible effects of an action, not the action itself. Nevertheless, in most environments,
actions that have any impact on the state of the environment will elicit some degree of immediate
change in the observation. Moreover, delayed actions can be partially addressed by extending the
IDM and FDM architecture to consider multiple timesteps into the past and future, e.g. by using a
Transformer-based architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017). Second, significant stochasticity can make
it difficult for the IDM to compress the useful bits of information among the noise, degrading the
quality of the latent representation. This issue can potentially be mitigated by training on much
larger datasets. Lastly, training on much larger datasets—as would be required for modeling more
complex domains like web-scale video—would require scaling up the model architecture, which
introduces new challenges in balancing the strength of the FDM and the capacity of latent actions
representations, as is often the case in autoencoding architectures (Chen et al., 2016).

7     C ONCLUSION
This work introduced LAPO, a method for training policies over a learned latent action space, in-
ferred from purely observational data. Unlike prior work on imitation learning from observation,
LAPO does not rely on access to the true action space or a predefined set of discrete latent actions
to learn a useful, pretrained policy. Instead, LAPO learns a latent action space end-to-end, by opti-
mizing an unsupervised objective based on predictive consistency between an inverse and a forward
dynamics model. Vector quantization of the continuous latent actions induces an information bot-
tleneck that forces the quantized actions to capture state-invariant transition information. Across all
16 games of the challenging Procgen Benchmark, we show that this approach can learn latent action
spaces that reflect the structure of the true action spaces, despite LAPO never having access to the
latter. We then demonstrate that latent action policies, obtained through behavior cloning of latent
actions, can serve as useful pretrained models that can be rapidly adapted to recover or even exceed
the performance of the expert that generated the original action-free dataset.
Our results thus suggest that LAPO can serve as a useful approach for obtaining rapidly-adaptable
pretrained policies from web-scale action-free demonstration data, e.g. in the form of videos. We
believe LAPO could serve as an important step in unlocking the web-scale unsupervised pretraining
paradigm that has proven effective in other domains like language and vision (Brown et al., 2020;
Radford et al., 2021; Ramesh et al., 2021a). Toward this goal, we are excited about future work
aimed at scaling up the world model and policy to more powerful architectures that can consider
multiple timesteps and richer observations. Such models may enable efficient learning of general-
ist latent action policies in complex, multi-task settings, all within a single LAPO instance, while
enabling more effective generalization to tasks unseen during training.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Karl Johan Åström. Optimal control of Markov processes with incomplete state information. Jour-
  nal of Mathematical Analysis and Applications, 10(1):174–205, 1965.
Yusuf Aytar, Tobias Pfaff, David Budden, Tom Le Paine, Ziyu Wang, and Nando de Fre-
  itas. Playing hard exploration games by watching youtube. In Samy Bengio, Hanna M.
  Wallach, Hugo Larochelle, Kristen Grauman, Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, and Roman Garnett
  (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 31: Annual Conference on
  Neural Information Processing Systems 2018, NeurIPS 2018, December 3-8, 2018, Mon-
  tréal, Canada, pp. 2935–2945, 2018. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2018/hash/
  35309226eb45ec366ca86a4329a2b7c3-Abstract.html.
Bowen Baker, Ilge Akkaya, Peter Zhokov, Joost Huizinga, Jie Tang, Adrien Ecoffet, Brandon
  Houghton, Raul Sampedro, and Jeff Clune. Video pretraining (VPT): learning to act by watching
  unlabeled online videos. In NeurIPS, 2022. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/
  hash/9c7008aff45b5d8f0973b23e1a22ada0-Abstract-Conference.html.
Marc G Bellemare, Yavar Naddaf, Joel Veness, and Michael Bowling. The arcade learning environ-
 ment: An evaluation platform for general agents. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 47:
 253–279, 2013.
Yoshua Bengio, Nicholas Léonard, and Aaron C. Courville. Estimating or propagating gradients
  through stochastic neurons for conditional computation. CoRR, abs/1308.3432, 2013. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1308.3432.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Hervé Jégou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and
 Armand Joulin. Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers. In 2021 IEEE/CVF
 International Conference on Computer Vision, ICCV 2021, Montreal, QC, Canada, October 10-
 17, 2021, pp. 9630–9640. IEEE, 2021. doi: 10.1109/ICCV48922.2021.00951. URL https://doi.
 org/10.1109/ICCV48922.2021.00951.
Xi Chen, Diederik P Kingma, Tim Salimans, Yan Duan, Prafulla Dhariwal, John Schulman, Ilya
  Sutskever, and Pieter Abbeel. Variational lossy autoencoder. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2016.
Karl Cobbe, Oleg Klimov, Chris Hesse, Taehoon Kim, and John Schulman. Quantifying generaliza-
  tion in reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1282–1289.
  PMLR, 2019.
Karl Cobbe, Christopher Hesse, Jacob Hilton, and John Schulman. Leveraging procedural genera-
  tion to benchmark reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference
  on Machine Learning, ICML 2020, 13-18 July 2020, Virtual Event, volume 119 of Proceedings
  of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2048–2056. PMLR, 2020. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/
  v119/cobbe20a.html.
Prafulla Dhariwal, Heewoo Jun, Christine Payne, Jong Wook Kim, Alec Radford, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Jukebox: A generative model for music. CoRR, abs/2005.00341, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2005.00341.
Ashley D. Edwards, Himanshu Sahni, Yannick Schroecker, and Charles L. Isbell Jr. Imitating latent
  policies from observation. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings
  of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2019, 9-15 June 2019, Long
  Beach, California, USA, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1755–
  1763. PMLR, 2019. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/edwards19a.html.
Lasse Espeholt, Hubert Soyer, Rémi Munos, Karen Simonyan, Volodymyr Mnih, Tom Ward, Yotam
  Doron, Vlad Firoiu, Tim Harley, Iain Dunning, Shane Legg, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. IM-
  PALA: scalable distributed deep-rl with importance weighted actor-learner architectures. In Jen-
  nifer G. Dy and Andreas Krause (eds.), Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Machine Learning, ICML 2018, Stockholmsmässan, Stockholm, Sweden, July 10-15, 2018, vol-
  ume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1406–1415. PMLR, 2018. URL
  http://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/espeholt18a.html.
Dibya Ghosh, Chethan Anand Bhateja, and Sergey Levine. Reinforcement learning from passive
  data via latent intentions. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engel-
  hardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), International Conference on Machine Learning,
  ICML 2023, 23-29 July 2023, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 11321–11339. PMLR, 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/
  ghosh23a.html.
R. Gray. Vector quantization. IEEE ASSP Magazine, 1(2):4–29, 1984. doi: 10.1109/MASSP.1984.
  1162229.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.
Minyoung Huh, Brian Cheung, Pulkit Agrawal, and Phillip Isola. Straightening out the straight-
 through estimator: Overcoming optimization challenges in vector quantized networks. In An-
 dreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan
 Scarlett (eds.), International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2023, 23-29 July 2023,
 Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 14096–
 14113. PMLR, 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/huh23a.html.
Marcus Hutter. On the existence and convergence of computable universal priors. In International
 Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory, pp. 298–312. Springer, 2003.
Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Michael L Littman, and Anthony R Cassandra. Planning and acting in
  partially observable stochastic domains. Artificial intelligence, 101(1-2):99–134, 1998.
Aviral Kumar, Aurick Zhou, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Conservative q-learning for offline
  reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:1179–1191,
  2020.
Sergey Levine, Aviral Kumar, George Tucker, and Justin Fu. Offline reinforcement learning: Tuto-
  rial, review, and perspectives on open problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.01643, 2020.
Leland McInnes, John Healy, and James Melville. Umap: Uniform manifold approximation and
  projection for dimension reduction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03426, 2018.
Willi Menapace, Stéphane Lathuilière, Sergey Tulyakov, Aliaksandr Siarohin, and Elisa Ricci.
 Playable video generation. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
 tion, CVPR 2021, virtual, June 19-25, 2021, pp. 10061–10070. Computer Vision Foundation /
 IEEE, 2021. doi: 10.1109/CVPR46437.2021.00993. URL https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content/
 CVPR2021/html/Menapace_Playable_Video_Generation_CVPR_2021_paper.html.
Vincent Micheli, Eloi Alonso, and François Fleuret. Transformers are sample-efficient world
  models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023,
  Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023. OpenReview.net, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/pdf?id=
  vhFu1Acb0xb.
Boris T Polyak and Anatoli B Juditsky. Acceleration of stochastic approximation by averaging.
  SIAM journal on control and optimization, 30(4):838–855, 1992.
Dean Pomerleau. ALVINN: an autonomous land vehicle in a neural network. In David S. Touretzky
  (ed.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 1, [NIPS Conference, Denver, Col-
  orado, USA, 1988], pp. 305–313. Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. 2019.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 8821–8831. PMLR, 2021a.
Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2021, 18-24 July
  2021, Virtual Event, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 8821–8831.
  PMLR, 2021b. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/ramesh21a.html.
Scott E. Reed, Konrad Zolna, Emilio Parisotto, Sergio Gómez Colmenarejo, Alexander Novikov,
  Gabriel Barth-Maron, Mai Gimenez, Yury Sulsky, Jackie Kay, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Tom
  Eccles, Jake Bruce, Ali Razavi, Ashley Edwards, Nicolas Heess, Raia Hadsell, Oriol Vinyals,
  Mahyar Bordbar, and Nando de Freitas. A generalist agent. Trans. Mach. Learn. Res., 2022,
  2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=1ikK0kHjvj.
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomed-
  ical image segmentation. In Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention–
  MICCAI 2015: 18th International Conference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, Proceed-
  ings, Part III 18, pp. 234–241. Springer, 2015.
Stéphane Ross and Drew Bagnell. Efficient reductions for imitation learning. In Proceedings of the
  thirteenth international conference on artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 661–668. JMLR
  Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2010.
Karl Schmeckpeper, Oleh Rybkin, Kostas Daniilidis, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Reinforce-
  ment learning with videos: Combining offline observations with interaction. In Jens Kober,
  Fabio Ramos, and Claire J. Tomlin (eds.), 4th Conference on Robot Learning, CoRL 2020, 16-
  18 November 2020, Virtual Event / Cambridge, MA, USA, volume 155 of Proceedings of Ma-
  chine Learning Research, pp. 339–354. PMLR, 2020. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v155/
  schmeckpeper21a.html.
Jürgen Schmidhuber. Discovering neural nets with low kolmogorov complexity and high general-
  ization capability. Neural Networks, 10(5):857–873, 1997.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. CoRR, abs/1707.06347, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1707.06347.
RJ Solmonoff. A formal theory of inductive inference. i. II Information and Control, 7:224–254,
  1964.
Oliver Struckmeier and Ville Kyrki. Preventing mode collapse when imitating latent policies from
  observations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Mf9fQ0OgMzo.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Naftali Tishby, Fernando C Pereira, and William Bialek. The information bottleneck method. arXiv
  preprint physics/0004057, 2000.
Faraz Torabi, Garrett Warnell, and Peter Stone. Behavioral cloning from observation. In Jérôme
  Lang (ed.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artificial Intel-
  ligence, IJCAI 2018, July 13-19, 2018, Stockholm, Sweden, pp. 4950–4957. ijcai.org, 2018. doi:
  10.24963/ijcai.2018/687. URL https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2018/687.
Faraz Torabi, Garrett Warnell, and Peter Stone. Recent advances in imitation learning from obser-
  vation. In Sarit Kraus (ed.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI 2019, Macao, China, August 10-16, 2019, pp. 6325–6331. ijcai.org,
  2019a. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2019/882. URL https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2019/882.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Faraz Torabi, Garrett Warnell, and Peter Stone. Generative adversarial imitation from observation.
  ICML Workshop on Imitation, Intent, and Interaction (I3), 2019b.
Aäron van den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Neural discrete representation learn-
  ing. In Isabelle Guyon, Ulrike von Luxburg, Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Rob Fergus,
  S. V. N. Vishwanathan, and Roman Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems 30: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2017, December 4-9,
  2017, Long Beach, CA, USA, pp. 6306–6315, 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/
  2017/hash/7a98af17e63a0ac09ce2e96d03992fbc-Abstract.html.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
Chao Yang, Xiaojian Ma, Wenbing Huang, Fuchun Sun, Huaping Liu, Junzhou Huang, and Chuang
  Gan. Imitation learning from observations by minimizing inverse dynamics disagreement. Ad-
  vances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Weirui Ye, Yunsheng Zhang, Pieter Abbeel, and Yang Gao. Become a proficient player with lim-
 ited data through watching pure videos. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learn-
 ing Representations, ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023. OpenReview.net, 2023. URL
 https://openreview.net/pdf?id=Sy-o2N0hF4f.
Neil Zeghidour, Alejandro Luebs, Ahmed Omran, Jan Skoglund, and Marco Tagliasacchi. Sound-
  stream: An end-to-end neural audio codec. IEEE ACM Trans. Audio Speech Lang. Process., 30:
  495–507, 2022. doi: 10.1109/TASLP.2021.3129994. URL https://doi.org/10.1109/TASLP.2021.
  3129994.
Qihang Zhang, Zhenghao Peng, and Bolei Zhou. Learning to drive by watching youtube videos:
  Action-conditioned contrastive policy pretraining. In Shai Avidan, Gabriel J. Brostow, Moustapha
  Cissé, Giovanni Maria Farinella, and Tal Hassner (eds.), Computer Vision - ECCV 2022 -
  17th European Conference, Tel Aviv, Israel, October 23-27, 2022, Proceedings, Part XXVI,
  volume 13686 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 111–128. Springer, 2022. doi:
  10.1007/978-3-031-19809-0\_7. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-19809-0_7.
Qinqing Zheng, Mikael Henaff, Brandon Amos, and Aditya Grover. Semi-supervised offline rein-
  forcement learning with action-free trajectories. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun
  Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), International Confer-
  ence on Machine Learning, ICML 2023, 23-29 July 2023, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, volume
  202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 42339–42362. PMLR, 2023. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/zheng23b.html.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX
A.1    O FFLINE DECODING RESULTS


Figure 6: Test performance of the latent policy combined with a latent action decoder that is trained on an
action-labelled offline dataset of a certain size, consisting of (zt , at ) tuples. An effective decoder can be trained
with only a few hundred samples although performance generally plateaus before reaching the performance of
our proposed online (RL) decoding approach.


                                                          14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.2    L ATENT SPACE ANALYSIS FOR NO -VQ ABLATION


Figure 7: UMAP projection of the learned latent action space for all 16 procgen games, generated by IDMs
trained without vector-quantization. Each point represents the continuous latent action generated by the IDM
for a transition in the observation-only dataset. Each point is color-coded by the true action taken by the agent
at that transition (true action labels are only used for visualization, not for training). Arrows in the legend
correspond to movement directions. NOOP actions are omitted for clarity.
We note that although the No-VQ ablation performs worse in terms of online performance, its FDM loss was
significantly lower. This indicates that VQ indeed acts as a bottleneck that constrains the amount of information
passed from the IDM to the FDM. By forcing the IDM to compress transition information, this leads to a better
latent representation for downstream policy learning.


                                                       15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.3    C ONTINUOUS CONTROL EXPERIMENTS


Figure 8: Mean test returns over the course of training for online decoding of a LAPO latent policy compared
to PPO from scratch (averaged across 2 seeds) on continuous control tasks. These experiments used the same
hyperparameters for training the latent IDM and for behavior cloning as in Procgen experiments.


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.4    H YPERPARAMETERS

Table 1: Hyperparameters for the three stages of our method. Latent actions are 128-dimensional continuous
vectors and are split and quantized into 8 discrete latents with 16-dimensional embeddings. We use Procgen
distribution mode easy.

  Stage                          Parameter                                     Value
                                 Pre-transition additional context k           1
                                 VQ # of codebooks                             2
                                 VQ # of discrete latents per codebook         4
                                 VQ # of embeddings                            64
                                 VQ embedding dimension                        16
  Latent IDM training            VQ commitment cost                            0.05
                                 VQ EMA decay                                  0.999
                                 Learning rate                                 2e-4
                                 Batch size                                    128
                                 Total update steps                            70,000
                                 IMPALA-CNN channel multiplier                 4
                                 Learning rate                                 2e-4
                                 Batch size                                    128
  Latent behavior cloning
                                 Total update steps                            60,000
                                 IMPALA-CNN channel multiplier                 4
                                 Total environment interactions                4,000,000
  RL online fine-tuning
                                 PPO hyperparameters                           As in (Cobbe et al., 2020).


A.5    ILPO REPRODUCTION


Figure 9: Reproduction of Figure 5.a from Edwards et al. (2019) for a single level from coinrun. When
applied to data from the full distribution of levels, rather than just a single level, the ILPO FDM consistently
collapsed in terms of which discrete latent achieves the minimum of Lmin , leading to collapse of the policy too.
Results here are not exactly comparable to results from Edwards et al. (2019) since it is unknown to us which
specific coinrun level was used by the authors.


                                                       17
