Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I S I NVERSE R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING H ARDER
THAN S TANDARD R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING ?

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL)—the problem of learning reward func-
         tions from demonstrations of an expert policy—plays a critical role in developing
         intelligent systems, such as those that understand and imitate human behavior.
         While widely used in applications, theoretical understandings of IRL admit unique
         challenges and remain less developed compared with standard RL theory. For
         example, it remains open how to do IRL efficiently in standard offline settings with
         pre-collected data, where states are obtained from a behavior policy (which could
         be the expert policy itself), and actions are sampled from the expert policy.
         This paper provides the first line of results for efficient IRL in vanilla offline and
         online settings using polynomial samples and runtime. We first design a new IRL
         algorithm for the offline setting, Reward Learning with Pessimism (RLP), and show
         that it achieves polynomial sample complexity in terms of the size of the MDP, a
         concentrability coefficient between the behavior policy and the expert policy, and
         the desired accuracy. Building on RLP, we further design an algorithm Reward
         Learning with Exploration (RLE), which operates in a natural online setting where
         the learner can both actively explore the environment and query the expert policy,
         and obtain a stronger notion of IRL guarantee from polynomial samples. We
         establish sample complexity lower bounds for both settings showing that RLP and
         RLE are nearly optimal. Finally, as an application, we show that the learned reward
         functions can transfer to another target MDP with suitable guarantees when the
         target MDP satisfies certain similarity assumptions with the original (source) MDP.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) aims to recover reward functions from demonstrations of
an expert policy (Ng & Russell, 2000; Abbeel & Ng, 2004), in contrast to standard reinforcement
learning which aims to learn optimal policies for a given reward function. IRL has applications in
numerous domains such as robotics (Argall et al., 2009; Finn et al., 2016), target-driven navigation
tasks (Ziebart et al., 2008; Sadigh et al., 2017; Kuderer et al., 2015; Pan et al., 2020; Barnes et al.,
2023), game AI (Ibarz et al., 2018; Vinyals et al., 2019), and medical decision-making (Woodworth
et al., 2018; Hantous et al., 2022). The learned reward functions in these applications are typically
used for replicating the expert behaviors in similar or varying downstream environments. Broadly, the
problem of learning reward functions from data is of rising importance beyond the scope of IRL—For
example, it is a main step in Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) (Christiano
et al., 2017), a widely adopted paradigm for aligning modern large-scale systems such as Large
Language Models (Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023).
Despite the significant success that IRL has achieved in practical applications (Agarwal et al., 2020;
Finn et al., 2016; Sadigh et al., 2017; Kuderer et al., 2015; Woodworth et al., 2018; Wu et al., 2020;
Ravichandar et al., 2020; Vasquez et al., 2014), theoretical understanding is still in an early stage,
especially when compared with standard RL (finding optimal policy under a given reward) where the
theory is more established. The main challenge in IRL: (i) Non-uniqueness of reward for any IRL
problem, for example, 0 is always a solution. Therefore, it is not sufficient to merely recover one
reward. The recent literature considers recovering a set of feasible rewards, defined as the rewards
that enable the expert policy to achieve optimality (Metelli et al., 2021; Lindner et al., 2023; Metelli
et al., 2023). (ii) As far as we know, there are no results for more standard settings in RL theory, such
as learning from interactive online access to the environment (known as online RL), or from offline


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


demonstrations (referred to as offline RL). (iii) A more nuanced issue in IRL, relating to both (i)
and (ii), concerns the selection of a distance metric between the estimated reward set and the ground
truth reward set. Literature has various choices, such as reward that leads to uniformly accurate Q/V
functions over all states and actions. However, these are predominantly suitable for simulator settings
and are less sensible for the online or offline settings. Recently, Lindner et al. (2023) proposes a
metric for measuring the accuracy of Q-function merely at initial states in an online setting. However,
this metric is notably weak, for instance, it fails to distinguish two IRL problems with completely
different transitions.

                             Is IRL more difficult than standard RL?

In this paper, we initiate the study of IRL in standard episodic tabular Markov Decision Processes
(MDPs) where we propose a suitable new metrics, and design learning algorithms that are efficient
in the sample complexity and runtime in both online and offline settings. Our contributions can be
summarized as follows.
 • We build metrics for both offline and online settings, based on the recovery of reward mapping,
   which converts a parameter set into solutions for an IRL problem, providing an answer to the
   longstanding non-uniqueness issue in IRL. Our new metrics not only extend the existing uniform
   accurate V -function metric from simulator settings to trajectory settings, but they also fully
   capture behavior of policies. As a result, IRL in trajectory settings becomes both learnable and
   practical (See Section 3).
 • Leveraging the estimation of an evaluation policy, we establish a performance metric for the
   offline setting. Informed by the pessimism principle, a common aspect in standard offline RL, we
   design an offline IRL algorithm, R  EWARD L EARNING WITH P ESSIMISM(RLP). This algorithm
   achieves a rate of Oe C ⋆ H 4 S 2 /ϵ2 (up to log factors) when ϵ is small, where C ⋆ is a single-policy
   concentrability coefficient between the behavior policy and the evaluation policy (See Section 4).
 • We establish a performance metric in online settings based on the estimation of all policies.
   Building on reward-free exploration techniques, as well as RLP, We develop an online IRL algo-
   rithm R EWARD L EARNING WITH E XPLORATION, which achieves a rate of O             e H 4 S 2 A/ϵ2 (up
   to log factors) for any online IRL problem (See Section 5).

 • We establish an O   e C ⋆ H 2 S min {S, A}/ϵ2 sample complexity for lower bound for any of-
   fline IRL problem. Turning  to online settings, we prove a sample complexity lower bound of
   Oe C ⋆ H 2 SA min {S, A}/ϵ2 for any online IRL problem. When S < A, our upper bounds for
   offline/online settings match the lower bounds except for the horizon factor (See Section 4-5).
 • We further provide results for a transfer learning setting, where the learned reward mapping is
   transferred to and evaluated in a target MDP\R(different from the original MDP\R). We provide
   theoretical guarantees for both RLP and RLE, under certain similarity assumptions between the
   original (source) and target MDP\Rs that are more relaxed compared to the constraints in existing
   work within this context (See Section 6).

1.1   R ELATED WORK
Inverse reinforcement learning Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) was first proposed by Ng &
Russell (2000). Since its introduction, IRL has been enhanced by numerous influential studies that
have made notable contributions to the field. These include feature matching (Abbeel & Ng, 2004),
maximum margin (Ratliff et al., 2006), maximum entropy (Ziebart et al., 2008), and two model-free
methods: relative entropy (Boularias et al., 2011), and generative adversarial imitation learning (Ho
& Ermon, 2016). Other significant works include Bayesian IRL (Ramachandran & Amir, 2007)
which subsume IRL and reduction method (Brantley et al., 2019).
IRL has been successfully applied in many domains including target-driven navigation tasks (Ziebart
et al., 2008; Sadigh et al., 2017; Kuderer et al., 2015; Pan et al., 2020), robotics (Argall et al., 2009;
Finn et al., 2016; Hadfield-Menell et al., 2016; Kretzschmar et al., 2016; Okal & Arras, 2016; Kumar
et al., 2023; Jara-Ettinger, 2019), medical decision-making (Woodworth et al., 2018; Hantous et al.,
2022; Gong et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2019; Chadi & Mousannif, 2022), and game play AI (Finn et al.,
2016; Fu et al., 2017; Qureshi et al., 2018; Brown et al., 2019).
Despite their successful applications, these methods offer limited theoretical guarantees. Recently,
Metelli et al. (2021) pioneered the investigation of the sample complexity of IRL within generative


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


models. Their work was expanded upon by Metelli et al. (2023), who introduced a framework based
on Hausdorff-based metrics for measuring distances between reward sets, examined relationships
between different metrics, and provided corresponding lower bounds. However, these results still
rely on the premise of generative models, which might not align with real-world situations. Dexter
et al. (2021) also contributed to the theoretical analysis in the generative setting, but their focus was
on MDP\R with continuous states and discrete actions. Subsequently, Lindner et al. (2023) ventured
into the exploration setting, thereby circumventing the need for generative models. Nonetheless, their
metric, which relies on rewards leading to accurate Q functions over the initial state, has a significant
weakness. Our work strives to address these limitations by introducing more suitable metrics and
extending IRL to both online and offline learning settings, which are more characteristic of real-world
applications.

Relationship with existing RL theory Our work builds upon various existing techniques from
the sample-efficient RL literature to design our algorithms and establish our theoretical results. For
the offline setting, we utilize the pessimism principle, a commonly adopted strategy in standard
offline RL, to construct our offline IRL algorithm, R EWARD L EARNING WITH P ESSIMISM (RLP).
Moreover, our assumption (Assumption 4.1) takes inspiration from the single-policy concentrability
assumption prevalent in offline RL (Kidambi et al., 2020; Jin et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2020; Kumar
et al., 2020; Rashidinejad et al., 2021; Xie et al., 2021; 2022). For online exploration, we rely on
the reward-free exploration techniques (Jin et al., 2020; Li et al., 2023) to find a desired behavior
policy. Specifically, we adopt the exploration scheme proposed by Li et al. (2023), allowing effective
exploration of the unknown environment and the identification of a desired behavior policy that fulfills
a certain coverage assumption with all policies. Furthermore, we extend the theoretical analysis of
this scheme to the online IRL setting. We note theoretical results on imitation learning (Abbeel & Ng,
2004; Ratliff et al., 2006; Ziebart et al., 2008; Levine et al., 2011; Fu et al., 2017) and reinforcement
learning from human feedback (Zhu et al., 2023a;b; Wang et al., 2023; Zhan et al., 2023); our setting
is related to these problems, though the techniques are different and the results do not directly imply
each other. Additional related work in Appendix A.

2    P RELIMINARIES
Markov Decision Processes without Reward. We consider episodic Markov Decision Processes
without Reward (MDP\R), specified by M = (S, A, H, P), where S is the state space with |S| = S,
A is the action space with |A| = A, H is the horizon length, P = {Ph }h∈[H] where Ph (·|s, a) ∈
∆(S) is the transition probability at step h.

Reward functions. A reward function r : [H] × S × A → [−1, 1] maps a state-action-time step
triplet (h, s, a) to a reward rh (s, a). Given an MDP\R M and a reward function r, we denote the
MDP induced by M and r as M ∪ r. A policy π = {πh (· | s)}h∈[H],s∈S , where πh : S → ∆(A)
maps a state to a acion distribution.

Values and visitation distributions. For any policy π and any reward function r, we define
the value function Vhπ (·;hr) : S → R at each time step   i h ∈ [H] by the expected cumulative
           π
                            PH
reward: Vh (s; r) = Eπ        h′ =h rh (sh , ah ) | sh = s , where Eπ denotes the expectation with
                                      ′   ′    ′


respect to the random trajectory induced by π in the MDP\R, that is, (s1 , a1 , s2 , a2 , ..., sH , aH ),
where ah ∼ πh (sh ), rh = rh (sh , ahh ), sh+1 ∼ Ph (· | sh , ah ). Similarly, we i denote the Q-function at
                                     PH
time step h as : Qπh (s, a; r) = Eπ            r
                                          h′ =h h
                                                 ′ (sh ′ , ah ′ ) | sh = s, ah = a . The advantage function
  π                                     π                   π                π
Ah (·; ) : S × A → R is defined as Ah (s, a; r) := Qh (s, a; r) − Vh (s; r) and we say a policy is an
optimal policy of M ∪ r if Aπh (s, a; r) ≤ 0 holds for all (h, s, a) ∈ [H] × S × A. Additionally, we
represent the set of all optimal policies for M ∪ r as Π⋆M∪r and denote the set of all deterministic
policies for M ∪ r as ΠdetM∪r .

We introduce dπh to denote the state(-action) visitation distributions associated with policy at time
step h ∈ [H]: dπh (s) := P(sh = s|π) and dπh (s, a) := P(sh = s, ah = a|π). Lastly, We define the
operators Ph and Vh by [Ph Vh+1 ](s, a) := E[Vh+1 (sh+1 )|sh = s, ah = a] and [Vh Vh+1 ](s, a) :=
Var[Vh+1 (sh+1 )|sh = s, ah = a] applying to any value function Vh+1 at time step h + 1. In this
paper, we will frequently employ Pbh and Vb h to represent empirical counterparts of these operators
constructed based on estimated models.

                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2.1   I NVERSE R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
An Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) problem is denoted as a pair (M, π E ), where M is an
MDP\R and π E is a policy called the expert policy. The goal of IRL is to interact with (M, π E ), and
recover reward function r that are feasible for (M, π E ), in the sense that π E an optimal policy for
MDP M ∪ r. Noting that learning one feasible reward function is trivial (the zero reward r ≡ 0 is
feasible for any π E ), we consider the stronger goal of recovering a set of feasible rewards. Concretely,
we focus on recovering a specific and diverse set of feasible rewards widely considered in the IRL
literature (Ng & Russell, 2000; Metelli et al., 2023; Lindner et al., 2023), which we restate through
the concept of a reward mapping.

Let V = V 1 × n · · · × V H and A = A1 × · · · × AH , owhere V h := Vh ∈ RS | ∥Vh ∥∞ ≤ H − h + 1
and Ah := Ah ∈ RS×A       ≥0 | ∥Ah ∥∞ ≤ H − h + 1 . Here, sets V and A serve as parameter sets,
representing the parameters of the V -functions and the advantage functions, respectively. Let Rall
denote the set of all possible reward functions on [H] × S × A.
Definition 2.1 (Reward mapping). The (ground truth) reward mapping R : V × A 7→ Rall for an IRL
problem (M, π E ) is the mapping that maps any (V, A) ∈ V × A to the following reward function r:
                                                   / supp πhE (· | s) + Vh (s) − [Ph Vh+1 ](s, a),

rh (s, a) = [R(V, A)]h (s, a) := −Ah (s, a) × 1 a ∈
                                                                                             (2.1)
where we recall that Ph is the transition probability of M at step h.

We will also use notation Rb to denote an estimated reward mapping, which is in general an arbitrary
mapping from V × A 7→ Rall . The importance of the ground truth reward mapping is that it always
produces feasible rewards, as stated in the following classical result (Ng & Russell, 2000) (see
also Lindner et al. (2023)).
Lemma 2.2 (Reward mapping produces a set of feasible rewards). Let R be the (ground truth) reward
mapping for (M, π E ). Then for any (V, A) ∈ V × A, the reward function r = R(V, A) in Eq.(2.1) is
feasible for (M, π E ). Further, if feasible reward r satisfies that sup(h,s,a)∈[H]×S×A |rh (s, a)| ≤ 1,
there exists a pair (V, A) ∈ V × A such that r = R(V, A).

Lemma 2.2 suggests the recovery of the reward mapping R itself as a natural learning goal for
IRL–an accurate estimator Rb ≈ R guarantees R(V,  b A) ≈ R(V, A) for any (V, A) ∈ V × A, and
thus imply accurate estimation of the entire set R(V × A) in precise ways which we specify in the
sequel.
We will frequently consider recovering the reward mapping on a subset Θ ⊂ V × A. We use the
following standard definition of covering numbers to measure the capacity of such Θ’s:
                                                                   Θ
Definition 2.3 (Covering number). For any Θ ⊂ V × A let V h := {Vh : (V, A) ∈ Θ} denote the
restriction of Θ onto V h for any h ∈ [H]. The ϵ-covering number of Θ is defined as
                                                              Θ
                                     N (Θ; ϵ) := max N (V h ; ϵ),
                                                  h∈[H]
            Θ                                     Θ
where N (V h ; ϵ) is the ϵ-covering number of V h w.r.t. ∥ · ∥∞ norm.

We always have log N (Θ; ϵ) ≤ min {log |Θ|, O(S log(H/ϵ))} by combining the (trivial) bound
for the finite case and the standard covering number bound for the “full set” case with Θ = V ×
A (Vershynin, 2018) respectively. Further, the left-hand side can be much smaller than the right-hand
                                                         Θ
side if Θ admits additional structure (for example, if V h lies in a low-dimensional subspace of RS ).

3     P ERFORMANCE METRICS FOR IRL
3.1   M ETRIC FOR IRL
Our metric for IRL is to recover the ground truth reward mapping R in a suitable distance. Given a
policy π, we first define a metric for rewards by measuring the difference between the V -functions of
π induced by two rewards. Then, when presented with a parameter set Θ ∈ V × A, we can naturally
define a metric for reward mappings based on the metric for rewards we defined before.


                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Definition 3.1. Given an MDP\R M and a policy π, We define the (pre)metric dπ for any pair
(r, r′ ) ∈ Rall × Rall by
                             dπ (r, r′ ) := sup Eπ |Vhπ (sh ; r) − Vhπ (sh ; r′ )|.                     (3.1)
                                           h∈[H]

We further define dall (r, r′ ) := supπ dπ (r, r′ ).
                                                                            π
Definition 3.2. Given an MDP\R M and a policy π, we define the (pre)metric DΘ for any pair
(R, R ′ ) by
                             π
                            DΘ (R, R ′ ) :=      sup dπ (R(V, A), R ′ (V, A)).                          (3.2)
                                              (V,A)∈Θ

                   all
We further define DΘ   (R, R ′ ) := supπ DΘ
                                          π
                                            (R, R ′ ) = sup(V,A)∈Θ dall (R(V, A), R ′ (V, A)) corre-
spondingly.

dπ is expressed via |Vhπ (· | r) − Vhπ (· | r′ )| over the visitation distributions at any horizon induced by
the policy π, which guarantees that this metric comprehensively captures the behavior of π across all
reachable states. In Section 3.3, we will see that our paper considers the trajectory setting in which
we can only interact with the environment through trajectories. As a result, we can only require
accurate recovery in frequently visitable states and do not care about accurate recovery in rarely
                   π
visitable states. DΘ is defined via the worst-case dπ over the parameter set Θ. Furthermore, taking
supremum over π, we obtain two stronger metircs dall and DΘ           all
                                                                          .

3.2   R ELATIONSHIP WITH EXISTING METRICS
Here we will mainly discuss the relationship between our metric defined in Section 3.1 and metrics in
the existing works (Metelli et al., 2021; 2023; Lindner et al., 2023). The main differences lie in two as-
pects: (i) Metrics between rewards(differences of d). (ii) Reward aggregation approaches(differences
of D).
Metrics between rewards. We compare our metric to the dG             V ⋆ ( Eq.(C.1)) metric proposed by
Metelli et al. (2023), specifically in regards to how they measure the difference between V -functions
associated with different rewards. We prove that our method is stronger than the one employed in
Metelli et al. (2023), and on the other hand, there exist specific counterexamples where our method is
able to make distinctions, while their approach fails to do so (Lemma C.1).
For metric dall , we show a significant characteristic that is not found in existing metrics: a small
dall distance between (r, rb) indicates that near-optimal policies under reward rb continue to be nearly
optimal in the environment induced by r (Proposition C.5). This reveals a crucial application of
learned rewards that exhibit small dall distances from the ground truth rewards: these learned rewards
can be utilized to execute standard RL algorithms that aim to find near-optimal policies. We defer the
detailed discussion of metrics between rewards to Appendix C.1.
Reward aggregation approaches. Given a metric d defined on Rall , our paper employs a reward
aggregation approach that relies on utilizing a (pre)metric DM between reward mappings, induced by
d. Contrarily, Metelli et al. (2021); Lindner et al. (2023); Metelli et al. (2023) utilized a Hausdorff
(pre)metric to derive a metric DH between reward sets, induced by d. It will be demonstrated that if
DM and DH are induced by the same reward metric, then DM is strictly stronger than DH . Broadly
speaking, our metric DM can capture more comprehensive information for a single parameter pair
(V, A). Additionally, in certain scenarios, applying the Hausdorff metric can trivialize the problem.
We defer the detailed discussion of the reward aggregation approaches to Appendix C.2. We also
consider merics used in Lindner et al. (2023) and show that this metric can’t fully capture transitions
of MDP\R (Proposition C.4).
3.3   L EARNING SETTINGS
In this paper, we consider two settings: the offline setting and the online setting. The latter is also
known as active exploration IRL, as proposed in Lindner et al. (2023). Next, we give detailed
definitions of the two settings.
Offline IRL. A learner only has access to a dataset D consisting of K trajectories without reward
{(sτh , aτh , eτh )}K,H                                                b
                    τ =1,h=1 . Here s1 is a fixed initial state, ah ∼ πh (·|sh ) and sh+1 ∼ Ph (· | sh , ah ),


                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where π b is a behavior policy (is unknown to the learner), and eh represents an expert feedback,
which is given by
                                 E
                                 ah ∼ πhE (·|sh )            in option 1,
                         eh =                     E
                                                                                             (3.3)
                                 1 ah ∈ supp πh (·|sh )      in option 2.

Option 1 is a commonly employed setting in the related literature (Metelli et al., 2021; Lindner
et al., 2023; Metelli et al., 2023). But we also consider Option 2, since Option 2 is simpler and more
fundamental for IRL problems when compared to Option 1, as indicated by Eq.(2.1). Furthermore, if
we opt for Option 1, we need to enforce the following well-posed assumption for the expert policy
πE .
Assumption 3.3 (Well-posedness). We assume that there exists a ∆ > 0 such that
                                           min             π E (a|s) ≥ ∆.                            (3.4)
                                              E (a|s)̸=0
                                     (h,s,a):πh


Assumption 3.3 is also made in the works of Metelli et al. (2023). We remark that Assumption 3.3 is
necessary: if an optimal action a at a frequently visited state is never
                                                                         returned (which might
                                                                                             occur
when πhE (a|s) is too small), we are consequently unable to determine 1 a ∈ supp πhE (·|s) , which
could result in a significant error as revealed in Eq.(2.1).
Constrained by the offline setting, our access is limited to the trajectories executed by the behavior
policy π b . Here, we cannot reach states with low visitation probabilities under π b and therefore
expect to recover a reward mapping Rb with a small DΘ    (R, R ⋆ ) for any π is unrealistic. Instead, our
                                                       π b
                                                                                  π val b
goal in the offline setting is to recover a reward mapping Rb attaining a small DΘ     (R, R ⋆ ). for π val
that exhibits concentrability (Assumption 4.1) with the behavior policy π , where R ⋆ denotes the
                                                                              b

ground truth reward mapping. In this paper, we utilize the notation (M, π E , π b , π val ) to denote an
offline IRL problem.
Online IRL       A learner can obtain a trajectory as follows. Each episode starts with a fixed initial
state s1 .
For each h, the learner observes sh , chooses an action ah to play, then receives a feedback eh and
transits to the next states sh+1 ∼ Ph (· | sh , ah ). In this case, when we receive the first type of
feedback, the well-posed condition described in Eq.(3.4) remains necessary.
In this setting, we possess the freedom to explore the environment unrestricted by a certain behavior
policy. Consequently, we can approximate the ground truth mapping on any policy within a given
parameter set Θ ⊂ V × A. In other words, our learning goal in the online learning setting is to recover
                                           all
a reward mapping that exhibits a small DΘ      distance compared to the ground truth reward mapping.

4      I NVERSE R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING IN THE O FFLINE S ETTING
In this section, we initially introduce our algorithm, referred to as R EWARD L EARNING WITH
P ESSIMISM (RLP). Subsequently, we provide the sample complexity of this algorithm and conclude
by presenting a lower bound result for the IRL problem in the offline setting.
4.1     A LGORITHM
In this section, we propose a meta-algorithm, termed R EWARD L EARNING WITH P ESSIMISM (full
description in Algorithm 1) to solve the offline IRL problem defined in Section 3.3. We also prove
that RLP is provably sample-efficient, i.e., RLP can recover ground truth reward mapping with small
learning error, within a polynomial number of samples.
At a high level, RLP simultaneously recovers the transition kernel of MDP\R and the expert policy,
integrating the imitation learning algorithm (Rajaraman et al., 2020) and the pessimistic algorithm
for offline RL (Li et al., 2023).
RLP utilizes empirical MDP and Pessimism frameworks, operating through two distinct phases.

    • (Empirical MDP): In this phase, we construct an estimated transition kernel P
                                                                                  bh and an estimated
                      E                                            bh Vh+1 : S × A → R approximates
      expert policy π
                    b according to Eq.(4.1) and  Eq.(4.2). So that P
      Ph Vh+1 : S × A → R and supp π   bhE (·|s) approximates supp πhE (·|s) .


                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 R EWARD L EARNING WITH P ESSIMISM
 1: Input: Dataset D = {(sτh , aτh , eτh )}K,H                                   b
                                            τ =1,h=1 collected by executing π in M, parameter set Θ ∈ V × A,
    confidence level δ and error tolerance ϵ.
 2: Initialization: R(V,
                      b A) = 0 for all θ = (V, A) ∈ Θ.
 3: for (h, s, a) ∈ [H] × S × A do
 4:    Compute the empirical transition kernel P    bh , the empirical expert policy π bE and the penalty term bθh for
       all θ ∈ Θ as follows:
       bh (s′ | s, a) =        1               X
                                                          1 (sh , ah , sh+1 ) = (s, a, s′ ) ,

       P                   b
                                                                                                                 (4.1)
                         Nh (s, a) ∨ 1
                                       (sh ,ah ,sh+1 )∈D
                     
                      b1
                                  P
                        Nh (s)∨1
                                 · (sh ,ah ,eh )∈D 1 {(sh , eh ) = (s, a)}             in option 1,
         E
       bh (a | s) =
       π                     1
                                    P                                                                            (4.2)
                      N b (s)∨1 · (sh ,ah ,eh )∈D 1 {(sh , ah , eh ) = (s, a, 1)} in option 2,
                         h,1

       bθh (s, a) =
                  (s                                                                               s                      ! )
                       log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι h b        i          H log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι   ϵ                     log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
        C · min                         V  h Vh+1   (s, a) +                   +              1+                           ,H ,
                         Nhb (s, a) ∨ 1                         Nhb (s, a) ∨ 1   H                       Nhb (s, a) ∨ 1
                                                                                                                    (4.3)

      where Nhb (s, a) :=                                                   b                    b            b
                                P                                                       P
                                  (sh ,ah )∈D 1 {(sh , ah ) = (s, a)}, Nh (s)
                                                                                  :=      a∈A Nh (s, a), Nh,1 (s)
                                                                                                                     :=
      P
        (sh ,ah ,eh ) 1 {(s ,
                           h he ) =  (s,  1)}, ι :=  log (HSA/δ)       and C  > 0 is an absolute constant.
 5: Compute Rb by
                                             n                         o
     [R(V,
      b A)]h (s, a) = −Ah (s, a) · 1 a ∈          / supp π  bhE (·|s)    + Vh (s) − [Pbh Vh+1 ](s, a) − bθh (s, a) (4.4)

 6: Output: Estimated reward mapping R.
                                     b


 • (Pessimism in face of uncertainty): In this phase, a penalty function bθh (s, a) is computed for
   any θ = (V, A) ∈ Θ, (h, s, a) ∈ [H] × S × A using Eq.(4.3). Here bθh serves as a measure of
   uncertainty arising from approximating Pbh Vh+1 with Ph Vh+1 . Finally, we compute estimated
   R(V,
    b A) for all θ = (V, A) ∈ Θ by Eq.(4.4), which incorporates the explicit form of reward
   mapping Eq.(2.1) with penalty terms.

4.2    T HEORETICAL GUARANTEE
Assumption 4.1 (Single-policy concentrability in the L1 form). We assume that evaluation policy
π val satisfies the following single-policy concentrability with behavior policy π b :
                                                     val
                                   X        X     dπh (s, a)
                                                    π b (s, a)
                                                               ≤ C ⋆ HS.,                 (4.5)
                                                  d
                                  h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A h

Here C ⋆ is a constant and we follow the convention: 0/0 = 0.
Assumption 4.1 characterizes the gap between the visitation distributions of the evaluation policy
π val and the behavior policy π b . The assumption of single-policy concentrability is common in the
literature of RL (Xie et al., 2021). Our L1 form single-policy concentrability assumption is milder
than the L∞ form typically adopted in most offline RL works (Xie et al., 2021; Rashidinejad et al.,
2021). This is due to the fact that every policy pair exhibiting C ⋆ single-policy concentrability in the
L∞ form also satisfies C ⋆ A single-policy concentrability in the L1 form. Now, we are already to
present the sample complexity of RLP (Algorithm 1).
Theorem 4.2 (Sample complexity of RLP). Suppose the single-policy concentrability between
π val and π b (Assumption 4.1). In addition, we assume π E is well-posed (Assumption 3.3) when
we receive feedback in option 1. hThen withiprobability at least 1 − δ, RLP (Algorithm 1) outputs
a reward mapping Rb such that R(V,       b A) (s, a) ≤ [R ⋆ (V, A)] (s, a) for all (V, A) ∈ Θ and
                                                                       h
                                     val
                                                    h
(h, s, a) ∈ [H] × S × A, and DΘ    π
                                           R ⋆ , Rb ≤ 2ϵ, within
                      ⋆ 4
                     C H S log N (Θ; ϵ/H) C ⋆ H 2 S(η + H log N (Θ; ϵ/H))

                 Oe                                  +                                              (4.6)
                                  ϵ2                                ϵ

                                                           7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


samples, where poly log (H, S, A, 1/δ) are omitted and η is defined as 1/∆ in option 1 and as 1 in
option 2 (∆ is specified in Definition 3.3).

The proof of Theorem 4.2 is deferred to Section E. To the best of our knowledge, this result is the
first theoretical guarantee for offline IRL algorithms. To highlight the main term of our results, we
further character the log-covering number log N (Θ; ϵ/H) in the following scenarios: (i) When Θ is a
finite parameter set, the log-covering number log N (Θ; ϵ/H) can be upper-bounded by its cardinality

|Θ|. As a result, our sample complexity becomes O   e C ⋆ H 4 S log |Θ|/ϵ2 when ϵ is small. (ii) When
Θ = V × A, the log-covering number log N (Θ; ϵ/H) can be upper-bounded by O(S),   e     resulting in a
                              ⋆ 4 2 2

sample complexity of O C H S /ϵ . And it’s worth noting that in the case where the feedback is
                         e
in option 1, 1/∆ brought by the well-posedness assumption only emerges in the burn-in term.
We highlight the scenario where π val = π E , as this setting is prevalent in cases where only expert
trajectories are available,i.e., π b = π E .
Corollary 4.3 (π val = π E ). Suppose the single-policy concentrability between π val and π b (As-
sumption 4.1) and sup(h,s,a)∈[H]×S×A |[R ⋆ (V, A)]h (s, a)| ≤ 1 for any (V, A) ∈ Θ, where R ⋆ is
the ground truth reward mapping.h Then with     i probability at least 1 − δ, RLP (Algorithm 1) outputs
a reward mapping R such that R(V, A) (s, a) ≤ [R ⋆ (V, A)]h (s, a) for all (V, A) ∈ Θ and
                     b                b
                                                 h
                                π val
(h, s, a) ∈ [H] × S × A, and DΘ         R ⋆ , Rb ≤ 2ϵ, within
                    ⋆ 3                   ⋆ 2

                e C H S log N (Θ; ϵ/H) + C H S(A + H log N (Θ; ϵ/H)) ,
                O                                                                                  (4.7)
                          ϵ2                        ϵ
samples, where poly log (H, S, A, 1/δ) are omitted.

When π val = π E , we can gain an additional H factor in the main term due to a total invariance property
(See Section E). Additionally, when π val = π E , the necessity of the well-posedness assumption is
alleviated, as demonstrated in Eq.(4.7). This stems from the concentrability between π E and π b ,
facilitating the learning of supp πhE (·|s) even without the well-posedness assumption. We remark
that Theorem 4.3 also provides sample complexity of a significant scenario where the data consists
of full trajectories drawn from π E , i.e., π E = π b . In this case, we have C ⋆ = 1, and therefore the
sample complexity can be further reduced to O(H  e 3 S log N (Θ; ϵ/H)/ϵ2 ).

Theoretical lower bound in the offline setting. We provide the following lower bound, for the
case where Θ = V × A. This lower bound shows that our rate is sharp when S ≤ A.
Theorem 4.4 (Informal version of Theorem H.2). Suppose Θ = V × A, then any algorithm that
returns a reward mapping up to ϵ distance with the ground truth reward mapping for all offline IRL
problems with probability at least 2/3 has to take at least Ω C ⋆ H 2 S min {S, A}/ϵ2 samples.

Additionally, in Section E.4, we provide a discussion about RLP through a unifying framework to
illustrate how pessimism can yield the IRL guarantee in a modular fashion.

5     IRL IN THE ONLINE SETTING
In this section, we extend IRL to the standard online learning setting. We present our online IRL
algorithm, referred to as R EWARD L EARNING WITH E XPLORATION (RLE), along with its theoretical
guarantee, and subsequently establish the lower bound for online IRL problems.

5.1   A LGORITHM
Building on RLP, we develop R EWARD L EARNING WITH E XPLORATION (RLE) to address online
IRL problems as specified in Section 3.3. RLE first uses the reward-free exploration strategy
(Algoeithm 2) to find a desired behavior policy π b with concentrability with all policies, then collects
K episodes generated by π b , and finally calls to compute an estimated reward mapping. Here, we
utilize N H episodes for computing π b , where N is specified in Algorithm 2. The total number of
episodes of our algorithm is K + N H. The full description of RLE is deferred to Section F.
In the following, we present the theoretical guarantees of RLE.


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 5.1 (Sample complexity of RLE). Suppose π E is well-posed (Assumption 3.3) when we
receive feedback in option 1. Then
                               h with probability
                                       i          at least 1 − δ, RLE (Algorithm 6) outputs
a reward mapping R such that R(V, A) (s, a) ≤ [R ⋆ (V, A)]h (s, a) for all (V, A) ∈ Θ and
                    b            b
                                                   h
                              all
(h, s, a) ∈ [H] × S × A, and DΘ   (R ⋆ , R)
                                         b ≤ 2ϵ, provided that
           4                           2
                                                                                                     √
       e H SA log N (Θ; ϵ/H) + H SA(η + log N (Θ; ϵ/H)) ,

K≥O                                                                               KH ≥ N ≥ O
                                                                                           e             H 9 S 7 A7 K ,
                    ϵ2                           ϵ
where η is specified in Theorem 4.2 and O e hides poly log (H, S, A, 1/δ).
                                                                √
Relation with the offline setting When taking N = O          e H 9 S 7 A7 K in Theorem 5.1, the

total number of sample episodes K + N H becomes O        e H 4 SA log N (Θ; ϵ/H)/ϵ2 (we hide the
burn-in term). Comparing this sample
                                        complexity with that of our offline algorithm, which achieves
      ⋆ 4                      2
O C H S log N (Θ; ϵ/H)/ϵ (we hide the burn-in term), we observe that the sample complexity of
 e
Algorithm 6 has one less C ⋆ factor but one additional A factor. We provide the following explanation
for this. As is shown in our interaction protocol, our algorithm finds a desired behavior policy π b
which can be considered to have O(A)e     single-policy concentrability1 (Eq.(B.3)) with all policies.
Subsequently, the offline algorithm RLP is executed to obtain the estimated reward mapping according
to the data collected by following the behavior policy. Therefore, in this case, we can roughly
                                                                                               see
C ⋆ = A, which yields the sample complexity of Algorithm 6 O     e H 4 SA log N (Θ; ϵ/H)/ϵ2 .

Comparison with the bound in Lindner et al. (2023) Lindner et al. (2023) achieves a sample
complexity of O(H 4 SA/ϵ2 ) in the special case where |Θ| = poly(S, A, H), which matches the
sample complexity of Algorithm 6. However, the metric proposed in Lindner et al. (2023) has a
significant weakness, as demonstrated in Appendix C.3.
Theoretical lower bound in the offline setting. We provide the following lower bound, for the
case where Θ = V × A. This lower bound shows that our rate is sharp when S ≤ A.
Theorem 5.2 (Informal version of Theorem G.2). Suppose Θ = V × A, then any algorithm that
returns a reward mapping up to ϵ distance with the ground truth reward mapping for  all online IRL
problems with probability at least 2/3 has to take at least Ω H 3 SA min {S, A}/ϵ2 samples.

6    T RANSFER L EARNING
As a further extension, we consider the transfer learning setting, where rewards learned in a source
MDP\R are transferred to a target MDP\R (possibly different from the source MDP\R). Inspired
by the single-policy concentrability assumption, we define two novel concepts: weak-transferability
(Definition I.2) and transferability (Definition I.3) serving as measures to ascertain the level of
similarity between two MDP\Rs.
We prove that our algorithms RLP and RLE still are applicable to transfer learning. When the
target MDP\R exhibits a low week-transferability (transferability), transfer learning is proven to
be implemented with a polynomial sample complexity in terms of the size of the MDP\R and the
week-transferability (transferability) coefficient under certain metrics (Theorem I.4 and I.5). We
provide guarantees for performing RL algorithms with learned rewards in different environments
(Corollary I.6, Corollary I.7). As a new application, we illustrate that our transfer learning approach
can be adapted to do transfer learning between two IRL problems sample-efficiently.

7    C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a novel algorithm for Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) in the offline
setting, using polynomial samples and runtime. Building upon our offline algorithm, we design an
algorithm for IRL in the online setting, employing the same complexity as prior work, but under
a stronger performance metric. We believe our work opens up many important questions, such
as designing better metrics for IRL problems, generalizing our IRL algorithms to the function
approximation setting, and developing more computationally efficient algorithms.
    1
      In this context, the notion of ”concentrability” is somewhat distinct from the definition provided in Assump-
tion 4.1. Nevertheless, it still yields a similar outcome, as demonstrated in the proof of Theorem 5.1.


                                                        9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Pieter Abbeel and Andrew Y Ng. Apprenticeship learning via inverse reinforcement learning. In
  Proceedings of the twenty-first international conference on Machine learning, pp. 1, 2004.
Alekh Agarwal, Nan Jiang, and Sham M Kakade. Reinforcement learning: Theory and algorithms.
  MIT, 2020.
Brenna D Argall, Sonia Chernova, Manuela Veloso, and Brett Browning. A survey of robot learning
  from demonstration. Robotics and autonomous systems, 57(5):469–483, 2009.
Sanjeev Arora, Simon Du, Sham Kakade, Yuping Luo, and Nikunj Saunshi. Provable representation
  learning for imitation learning via bi-level optimization. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 367–376. PMLR, 2020.
Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones, Anna
  Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, et al. Constitutional ai: Harmlessness
  from ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073, 2022.
Michael Bain and Claude Sammut. A framework for behavioural cloning. In Machine Intelligence
 15, pp. 103–129, 1995.
Matt Barnes, Matthew Abueg, Oliver F Lange, Matt Deeds, Jason Trader, Denali Molitor, Markus
 Wulfmeier, and Shawn O’Banion. Massively scalable inverse reinforcement learning in google
 maps. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.11290, 2023.
Abdeslam Boularias, Jens Kober, and Jan Peters. Relative entropy inverse reinforcement learning. In
  Proceedings of the fourteenth international conference on artificial intelligence and statistics, pp.
  182–189. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2011.
Kiante Brantley, Wen Sun, and Mikael Henaff. Disagreement-regularized imitation learning. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Daniel Brown, Wonjoon Goo, Prabhat Nagarajan, and Scott Niekum. Extrapolating beyond sub-
  optimal demonstrations via inverse reinforcement learning from observations. In International
  conference on machine learning, pp. 783–792. PMLR, 2019.
Mohamed-Amine Chadi and Hajar Mousannif. Inverse reinforcement learning for healthcare appli-
 cations: A survey. 2022.
Jonathan D Chang, Masatoshi Uehara, Dhruv Sreenivas, Rahul Kidambi, and Wen Sun. Mitigating
  covariate shift in imitation learning via offline data without great coverage. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.03207, 2021.
Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
  reinforcement learning from human preferences. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.
Gregory Dexter, Kevin Bello, and Jean Honorio. Inverse reinforcement learning in a continuous state
  space with formal guarantees. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:6972–6982,
  2021.
Zihan Ding, Yuanpei Chen, Allen Z Ren, Shixiang Shane Gu, Hao Dong, and Chi Jin. Learning
  a universal human prior for dexterous manipulation from human preference. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.04602, 2023.
Chelsea Finn, Sergey Levine, and Pieter Abbeel. Guided cost learning: Deep inverse optimal control
  via policy optimization. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 49–58. PMLR, 2016.
Justin Fu, Katie Luo, and Sergey Levine. Learning robust rewards with adversarial inverse reinforce-
  ment learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.11248, 2017.
Wei Gong, Linxiao Cao, Yifei Zhu, Fang Zuo, Xin He, and Haoquan Zhou. Federated inverse
 reinforcement learning for smart icus with differential privacy. IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
 2023.


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Dylan Hadfield-Menell, Stuart J Russell, Pieter Abbeel, and Anca Dragan. Cooperative inverse
  reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Khaoula Hantous, Lilia Rejeb, and Rahma Hellali. Detecting physiological needs using deep inverse
  reinforcement learning. Applied Artificial Intelligence, 36(1):2022340, 2022.
Jonathan Ho and Stefano Ermon. Generative adversarial imitation learning. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Borja Ibarz, Jan Leike, Tobias Pohlen, Geoffrey Irving, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Reward
  learning from human preferences and demonstrations in atari. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 31, 2018.
Ashesh Jain, Brian Wojcik, Thorsten Joachims, and Ashutosh Saxena. Learning trajectory preferences
  for manipulators via iterative improvement. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  26, 2013.
Julian Jara-Ettinger. Theory of mind as inverse reinforcement learning. Current Opinion in Behavioral
  Sciences, 29:105–110, 2019.
Chi Jin, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Max Simchowitz, and Tiancheng Yu. Reward-free exploration for
  reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4870–4879. PMLR,
  2020.
Ying Jin, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. Is pessimism provably efficient for offline rl? In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5084–5096. PMLR, 2021.
Rahul Kidambi, Aravind Rajeswaran, Praneeth Netrapalli, and Thorsten Joachims. MOReL: Model-
  based offline reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.05951, 2020.
Henrik Kretzschmar, Markus Spies, Christoph Sprunk, and Wolfram Burgard. Socially compliant
  mobile robot navigation via inverse reinforcement learning. The International Journal of Robotics
  Research, 35(11):1289–1307, 2016.
Markus Kuderer, Shilpa Gulati, and Wolfram Burgard. Learning driving styles for autonomous
 vehicles from demonstration. In 2015 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation
 (ICRA), pp. 2641–2646. IEEE, 2015.
Aviral Kumar, Aurick Zhou, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Conservative Q-learning for offline
  reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.04779, 2020.
Sateesh Kumar, Jonathan Zamora, Nicklas Hansen, Rishabh Jangir, and Xiaolong Wang. Graph
  inverse reinforcement learning from diverse videos. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 55–66.
  PMLR, 2023.
Sergey Levine, Zoran Popovic, and Vladlen Koltun. Nonlinear inverse reinforcement learning with
  gaussian processes. Advances in neural information processing systems, 24, 2011.
Gen Li, Yuling Yan, Yuxin Chen, and Jianqing Fan. Minimax-optimal reward-agnostic exploration in
  reinforcement learning, 2023.
David Lindner, Andreas Krause, and Giorgia Ramponi. Active exploration for inverse reinforcement
  learning, 2023.
Andreas Maurer and Massimiliano Pontil. Empirical bernstein bounds and sample variance penaliza-
  tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:0907.3740, 2009.
Alberto Maria Metelli, Giorgia Ramponi, Alessandro Concetti, and Marcello Restelli. Provably
  efficient learning of transferable rewards. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  7665–7676. PMLR, 2021.
Alberto Maria Metelli, Filippo Lazzati, and Marcello Restelli. Towards theoretical understanding of
  inverse reinforcement learning, 2023.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ofir Nachum and Mengjiao Yang. Provable representation learning for imitation with contrastive
  fourier features. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:30100–30112, 2021.

Andrew Y Ng and Stuart J Russell. Algorithms for inverse reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of
  the Seventeenth International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 663–670, 2000.

Ellen Novoseller, Yibing Wei, Yanan Sui, Yisong Yue, and Joel Burdick. Dueling posterior sam-
  pling for preference-based reinforcement learning. In Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial
  Intelligence, pp. 1029–1038. PMLR, 2020.

Billy Okal and Kai O Arras. Learning socially normative robot navigation behaviors with bayesian
  inverse reinforcement learning. In 2016 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation
  (ICRA), pp. 2889–2895. IEEE, 2016.

OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.

Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.

Aldo Pacchiano, Aadirupa Saha, and Jonathan Lee. Dueling rl: reinforcement learning with trajectory
  preferences. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.04850, 2021.

Yunpeng Pan, Ching-An Cheng, Kamil Saigol, Keuntaek Lee, Xinyan Yan, Evangelos Theodorou,
  and Byron Boots. Agile autonomous driving using end-to-end deep imitation learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1709.07174, 2017.

Yunpeng Pan, Ching-An Cheng, Kamil Saigol, Keuntaek Lee, Xinyan Yan, Evangelos A Theodorou,
  and Byron Boots. Imitation learning for agile autonomous driving. The International Journal of
  Robotics Research, 39(2-3):286–302, 2020.

Ahmed H Qureshi, Byron Boots, and Michael C Yip. Adversarial imitation via variational inverse
  reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.06404, 2018.

Nived Rajaraman, Lin Yang, Jiantao Jiao, and Kannan Ramchandran. Toward the fundamental limits
  of imitation learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:2914–2924, 2020.

Deepak Ramachandran and Eyal Amir. Bayesian inverse reinforcement learning. In IJCAI, volume 7,
  pp. 2586–2591, 2007.

Paria Rashidinejad, Banghua Zhu, Cong Ma, Jiantao Jiao, and Stuart Russell. Bridging offline rein-
  forcement learning and imitation learning: A tale of pessimism. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:11702–11716, 2021.

Nathan D Ratliff, J Andrew Bagnell, and Martin A Zinkevich. Maximum margin planning. In
  Proceedings of the 23rd international conference on Machine learning, pp. 729–736, 2006.

Harish Ravichandar, Athanasios S Polydoros, Sonia Chernova, and Aude Billard. Recent advances in
  robot learning from demonstration. Annual review of control, robotics, and autonomous systems,
  3:297–330, 2020.

Stephane Ross and J Andrew Bagnell. Reinforcement and imitation learning via interactive no-regret
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1406.5979, 2014.

Stéphane Ross, Geoffrey Gordon, and Drew Bagnell. A reduction of imitation learning and structured
   prediction to no-regret online learning. In Proceedings of the fourteenth international conference
   on artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 627–635. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings,
   2011.

Dorsa Sadigh, Anca D Dragan, Shankar Sastry, and Sanjit A Seshia. Active preference-based learning
  of reward functions. 2017.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Wen Sun, Arun Venkatraman, Geoffrey J Gordon, Byron Boots, and J Andrew Bagnell. Deeply
 aggrevated: Differentiable imitation learning for sequential prediction. In International conference
 on machine learning, pp. 3309–3318. PMLR, 2017.
Umar Syed and Robert E Schapire. A game-theoretic approach to apprenticeship learning. Advances
 in neural information processing systems, 20, 2007.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
  Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open foundation
  and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
Dizan Vasquez, Billy Okal, and Kai O Arras. Inverse reinforcement learning algorithms and features
  for robot navigation in crowds: an experimental comparison. In 2014 IEEE/RSJ International
  Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 1341–1346. IEEE, 2014.
Roman Vershynin. High-dimensional probability: An introduction with applications in data science,
  volume 47. Cambridge university press, 2018.
Oriol Vinyals, Igor Babuschkin, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Michaël Mathieu, Andrew Dudzik, Junyoung
  Chung, David H Choi, Richard Powell, Timo Ewalds, Petko Georgiev, et al. Grandmaster level in
  starcraft ii using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature, 575(7782):350–354, 2019.
Yuanhao Wang, Qinghua Liu, and Chi Jin. Is rlhf more difficult than standard rl? arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.14111, 2023.
Bryce Woodworth, Francesco Ferrari, Teofilo E Zosa, and Laurel D Riek. Preference learning in
  assistive robotics: Observational repeated inverse reinforcement learning. In Machine learning for
  healthcare conference, pp. 420–439. PMLR, 2018.
Zheng Wu, Liting Sun, Wei Zhan, Chenyu Yang, and Masayoshi Tomizuka. Efficient sampling-based
  maximum entropy inverse reinforcement learning with application to autonomous driving. IEEE
  Robotics and Automation Letters, 5(4):5355–5362, 2020.
Tengyang Xie, Nan Jiang, Huan Wang, Caiming Xiong, and Yu Bai. Policy finetuning: Bridg-
  ing sample-efficient offline and online reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 34:27395–27407, 2021.
Tengyang Xie, Dylan J Foster, Yu Bai, Nan Jiang, and Sham M Kakade. The role of coverage in
  online reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.04157, 2022.
Tian Xu, Ziniu Li, and Yang Yu. Error bounds of imitating policies and environments. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:15737–15749, 2020a.
Yichong Xu, Ruosong Wang, Lin Yang, Aarti Singh, and Artur Dubrawski. Preference-based
  reinforcement learning with finite-time guarantees. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 33:18784–18794, 2020b.
Chao Yu, Guoqi Ren, and Jiming Liu. Deep inverse reinforcement learning for sepsis treatment. In
  2019 IEEE international conference on healthcare informatics (ICHI), pp. 1–3. IEEE, 2019.
Tianhe Yu, Garrett Thomas, Lantao Yu, Stefano Ermon, James Zou, Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn, and
  Tengyu Ma. MOPO: Model-based offline policy optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.13239,
  2020.
Wenhao Zhan, Masatoshi Uehara, Nathan Kallus, Jason D Lee, and Wen Sun. Provable offline
 reinforcement learning with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14816, 2023.
Banghua Zhu, Jiantao Jiao, and Michael I Jordan. Principled reinforcement learning with human
  feedback from pairwise or k-wise comparisons. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.11270, 2023a.
Banghua Zhu, Hiteshi Sharma, Felipe Vieira Frujeri, Shi Dong, Chenguang Zhu, Michael I Jordan,
  and Jiantao Jiao. Fine-tuning language models with advantage-induced policy alignment. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2306.02231, 2023b.
Brian D Ziebart, Andrew L Maas, J Andrew Bagnell, Anind K Dey, et al. Maximum entropy inverse
  reinforcement learning. In Aaai, volume 8, pp. 1433–1438. Chicago, IL, USA, 2008.


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A DDITIONAL RELATED WORK
Imitation learning A closely related field to IRL is Imitation Learning, which focuses on learning
policies from demonstrations, in contrast to IRL’s emphasis on learning rewards from expert demon-
strations (Bain & Sammut, 1995; Abbeel & Ng, 2004; Ratliff et al., 2006; Ziebart et al., 2008; Pan
et al., 2017; Finn et al., 2016). Imitation learning has been extensively studied in the active setting
(Ross et al., 2011; Ross & Bagnell, 2014; Sun et al., 2017), and theoretical analyses for Imitation
Learning have been provided by (Rajaraman et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2020a; Chang et al., 2021). More
recently, the concept of Representation Learning for Imitation Learning has gained considerable
attention (Arora et al., 2020; Nachum & Yang, 2021). While Imitation can be implemented by IRL
(Abbeel & Ng, 2004; Ratliff et al., 2006; Ziebart et al., 2008), it is important to note that IRL has
wider capabilities than Imitation Learning since the rewards learned through IRL can be transferred
across different environments (Levine et al., 2011; Fu et al., 2017).

Reinforcement learning from human feedback Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback
(RLHF) bears a close relation to IRL, particularly because the process of learning rewards is a crucial
aspect of both approaches (Zhu et al., 2023a;b; Wang et al., 2023; Zhan et al., 2023). RLHF has been
successfully applied in various domains, including robotics (Jain et al., 2013; Sadigh et al., 2017;
Ding et al., 2023) and game playing (Ibarz et al., 2018). Recently, RLHF has attracted considerable
attention due to its remarkable capability to integrate human knowledge with large language models
(Ouyang et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2023). Furthermore, the theoretical foundations of RLHF have been
extensively developed in both tabular and function approximation settings (Zhan et al., 2023; Xu
et al., 2020b; Pacchiano et al., 2021; Novoseller et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2023a; Wang et al., 2023).

B     U SEFUL ALGORITHMIC SUBROUTINES FROM PRIOR WORKS
In this section, we give the algorithm procedures of finding behavior policy π b in Algorithm 6. The
algorithm procedures are directly quoted from Li et al. (2023), with slight modification.

B.1   A LGORITHM : FINDING BEHAVIOR POLICY π b

Algorithm 2, a component of Li et al. (2023, Algorithm 1), aims to identify a suitable behavior
policy. This is achieved by estimating the occupancy distribution dπ , which is induced by any
deterministic policy π, through a meticulously designed exploration strategy. At each stage h,
Algorithm2 invokes Algorithm procedure 3 to compute an appropriate exploration policy, denoted
as π explore,h , and subsequently collects N sample trajectories by executing π explore,h . These steps
facilitate the estimation of the occupancy distribution dπh+1 for the next stage, h + 1. Finally, the
behavior policy π b ∼ µb is computed by invoking Algorithm 4.
We highlight that the behavior policy π output by Algorithm 2 has following property Li et al. (2023)
                              X       X         dbπh (s, a)
                                                    h            i ≲ HSA,                            (B.3)
                                            E ′       dπ ′ (s, a)
                             h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A π ∼µb
                                                      b
                                                       h

for any deterministic policy π ∈ Πdet .

B.2   S UBROUTINE : COMPUTING EXPLORATION POLICY π explore,h

We proceed to describe Algorithm 3, originally proposed in Li et al. (2023, Algorithm 3), which is
designed to compute the desired exploration policy π explore,h . At a high level, this algorithm calculates
the exploration policy by approximately solving the subsequent optimization sub-problem, utilizing
the Frank-Wolfe algorithm:


                                            X                    1
                      bh ≈ arg max                                 + E dbπh (s, a) ,

                      µ                               log                                            (B.4)
                                 µ∈∆(Π)                         KH π∼µ
                                          (s,a)∈S×A


                                                      14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 2 Subroutine for computing behavior policy (Li et al., 2023)
 1: Input: state space S, action space A, horizon length H, initial state distribution ρ, target success
    probability 1 − δ, threshold ξ = cξ H 3 S 3 A3 log(HSA/δ).
                                          n,0 i.i.d.
 2: Draw N i.i.d. initial states s1               ∼ ρ (1 ≤ n ≤ N ), and define the following functions
                                          N
                                        1 X
                         dbπ1 (s) =               1{sn,0
                                                     1   = s},           dbπ1 (s, a) = dbπ1 (s) · π1 (a|s)        (B.1)
                                        N n=1
       for any deterministic policy π : [H] × S → ∆(A) and any (s, a) ∈ S × A.
 3: for h = 1, ..., H − 1 do
 4:   Call Algorithm 3 to compute an exploration policy π explore,h .
 5:   Draw N independent trajectories {sn,h    n,h         n,h
                                         1 , a1 , . . . , sh+1 }1≤n≤N using policy π
                                                                                     explore,h
                                                                                               and
          compute
                                            N
               ′         1 {Nh (s, a) > ξ} X n n,h                         ′
                                                                             o
          Ph (s |s, a) =
          b                                    1 sh = s, an,h
                                                          h   = a, sn,h
                                                                    h+1 = s    ,                             ∀(s, a, s′ ) ∈ S×A×S,
                         max Nh (s, a), 1 n=1
                            PN        n                o
          where Nh (s, a) = n=1 1 sn,h  h  = s, an,h
                                                 h   =a .
 6:   For any deterministic policy π : S × [H] → ∆(A) and any (s, a) ∈ S × A, define
             dbπh+1 (s) = P
                          bh (s|·, ·), dbπ (·, ·) ,
                                         h          dbπh+1 (s, a) = dbπh+1 (s) · πh+1 (a|s).                      (B.2)
      .
 7: Call Algorithm 4 to compute a behavior policy π b .
 8: Output: the behavior policy π b .



Algorithm 3 Subroutine for solving Eq.(B.4) (Li et al., 2023).
 1: Initialize: µ(0) = δπinit for an arbitrary policy πinit ∈ Π, Tmax = ⌊50SA log(KH)⌋.
 2: for t = 0, 1..., Tmax do
 3:   Compute the optimal deterministic policy π (t),b of the MDP Mhb =                                 (S ∪
          {saug }, A, H, P baug,h , rh ), where rh is defined in Eq.(B.5), and P
                                                                               baug,h is defined in Eq.(B.6);
                                      b           b
          let π (t) be the corresponding optimal deterministic policy of π (t),b in the original state space.
 4:       Compute
                     1                                                                  1
                        g(π (t) , d,
                                   b µ(t) ) − 1                            X                  bπ
                                                                                       KH + dh (s, a)
            αt = SA                             , where g(π, d, b µ) =
                                                                                    1
                                                                                                            .
                      g(π (t) , d,
                                b µ(t) ) − 1                                            + Eπ∼µ [dbπ (s, a)]
                                                                                 (s,a)∈S×A KH                h
     Here, dbπh (s, a) is computed via Eq.(B.1) for h = 1, and Eq.(B.2) for h ≥ 2.
 5:  If g(π (t) , d,
                  b µ(t) ) ≤ 2SA then exit for-loop.
 6:  Update
                                    µ(t+1) = (1 − αt ) µ(t) + αt 1π(t) .
 7: Output: the exploration policy π explore,h = Eπ∼µ(t) [π] and the weight µ
                                                                            bh = µ(t) .


Here Mhb = (S ∪ {saug }, A, H, Pbaug,h , rh ), where saug is an augmented state as before, and the
                                          b
reward function is chosen to be
                              (               1                  ∈ [0, KH], if (s, a, j) ∈ S × A × {h};
                                    1
               h
              rb,j (s, a) =        KH +Eπ∼µ(t)     dbπ
                                                     h (s,a)                                                      (B.5)
                                  0,                                           if s = saug or j ̸= h.

                                                         baug,h is constructed based on P
In addition, the augmented probability transition kernel P                              b as follows:

                             (
                                 bj (s′ | s, a),
                                 P
                                                                    ′
                                                                if s ∈ S
      baug,h (s′ | s, a) =
      P                                                                             for all (s, a, j) ∈ S × A × [h];
       j                              P
                                 1 − s′ ∈S P    bj (s′ | s, a), if s′ = saug
                                                                                                                 (B.6a)
      baug,h (s′ | s, a) = 1(s′ = saug )
      P                                                                             if s = saug or j > h.        (B.6b)
       j


                                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.3       S UBROUTINE : COMPUTING FINAL BEHAVIOR POLICY π b

We proceed to describe Algorithm 4, originally proposed in (Li et al., 2023, Algorithm 2), which
is designed to compute the final behavior policy π b π explore,h , based on the estimated occupancy
distributions specified in Algorithm 2. Algorithm 4 follows a similar fashion of Algorithm 3.
Algorithm 4 computes the behavior policy by approximately solving the subsequent optimization
sub-problem, utilizing the Frank-Wolfe algorithm:
                                                                                  
                                   H                                               
                                 X       X              1
                bb ≈ arg max                                  + Eπ∼µ dbπh (s, a)

                µ                               log                                  .         (B.7)
                          µ∈∆(Π)                      KH                          
                                         h=1 (s,a)∈S×A


Algorithm 4 Subroutine for solving Eq.(B.7) (Li et al., 2023).
                     (0)
 1: Initialize: µb = δπinit for an arbitrary policy πinit ∈ Π, Tmax = ⌊50SAH log(KH)⌋.
 2: for t = 0, 1..., Tmax do
 3:   Compute the optimal deterministic policy π (t),b of the MDP Mb =                                   (S ∪
                               aug                                               aug
           {saug }, A, H, P , rb ), where rb is defined in Eq.(B.8), and P
                            b                                                  b      is defined in Eq.(B.9);
           let π (t) be the corresponding optimal deterministic policy of π (t),b in the original state space.
 4:        Compute
                     1             b µ(t) ) − 1
                         g(π (t) , d,
                                                                      H                      1      bπ
                                                                                            KH + dh (s, a)
                                                                     X        X
                                       b
           αt = SAH                             , where g(π, d,
                                                             b µ) =                                             .
                                b µ(t) ) − 1                                             1

                      g(π (t) , d,
                                b                                     h=1 (s,a)∈S×A KH       + Eπ∼µ dbπ (s, a)
                                                                                                       h

           Here, dbπh (s, a) is computed via Eq.(B.1) for h = 1, and Eq.(B.2) for h ≥ 2.
 5:                     b µ(t) ) ≤ 2HSA then exit for-loop. Update
           If g(π (t) , d, b
                                           (t+1)                (t)
                                   µb    = (1 − αt ) µb + αt 1π(t) .
                                                                                  (t)
 6: Output: the behavior policy π b = Eπ∼µ(t) [π] and the associated weight µ
                                                                            bb = µb .
                                                    b


Here, Mb = (S ∪ {saug }, A, H, Pbaug , rb ), where saug is an augmented state and the reward function
is chosen to be
                   
                            1              ∈ [0, KH], if (s, a, h) ∈ S × A × [H];
                    1           bπ
      rb,h (s, a) = KH π∼µb dh (s,a)
                        +E  (t)
                                                                                                (B.8)
                     0,                                   if (s, a, h) ∈ {saug } × A × [H].
                   

In addition, the augmented probability transition kernel P   baug is constructed based on Pb as follows:
                       (
         aug ′          Pbh (s′ | s, a),                   ′
                                                       if s ∈ S
       Ph (s | s, a) =
       b                     P         bh (s′ | s, a), if s′ = saug for all (s, a, h) ∈ S × A × [H];
                        1 − s′ ∈S P
                                                                                                    (B.9a)
     aug   ′              ′
   b (s | saug , a) = 1(s = saug )
   P                                                                   for all (a, h) ∈ A × [H]. (B.9b)
      h


It’s evident that the augmented state behaves as an absorbing state, associated with zero immediate
rewards.


C         R ELATIONSHIP WITH EXISTING METRICS

C.1       M ETRICS BETWEEN REWARDS

Here we will mainly discuss the relationship between our metric defined in Section 3.1 and metrics in
the existing works (Metelli et al., 2021; 2023; Lindner et al., 2023). Metelli et al. (2023) consider the


                                                        16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


following metric2

                          dG
                           V ⋆ (r, r
                                   b) = max
                                         ⋆
                                                      max         Vh⋆ (s; r) − Vhπb (s; r) .                 (C.1)
                                         b∈ΠM∪b
                                         π    r (h,s)∈[H]×S


We remark that dGV ⋆ (r, r
                         b) is utilized in the simulator setting (Metelli et al., 2023) and is not directly
comparable with our metrics since dG     V ⋆ takes maximum over all (h, s). However, we can compare
the following aspect: Metelli et al. (2023) considers V ⋆ − V π , whereas we consider V π on r vs rb. It
can be shown that our method that considers V π on r vs rb subsumes theirs when we consider optimal
policies.
Lemma C.1. For any M, (r, rb) and (h, s) ∈ [H] × S, we have
                   sup         |Vh⋆ (s; r) − Vhπ (s; r)| ≤ 2        sup        |Vhπ (s; r) − Vhπ (s; rb)|.
          π∈Π⋆     ⋆
             M∪r ∪ΠM∪b
                     r
                                                               π∈Π⋆     ⋆
                                                                  M∪r ∪ΠM∪b
                                                                          r


Conversely, there exist a M with S = A = 2, H = 2, (h, s, a) ∈ [H] × S × A and a pair (r, rb) such
that supπ∈Π⋆M∪r ∪Π⋆      |Vh⋆ (s; r)−Vhπ (s; r)| = 0, but supπ∈Π⋆M∪r ∪Π⋆ |Vhπ (s; r)−Vhπ (s; rb)| ≥ 1.
                         M∪b
                           r                                                     M∪b
                                                                                   r


C.2    R EWARD AGGREGATION METHODS

Since we have defined the metric between rewards and characterized the relationship with metrics
in Metelli et al. (2023). This naturally leads to the following question: given a metric for rewards,
how to measure IRL algorithms? Our method is to use the reward mapping metric induced by the
metric for rewards. But the metric for IRL algorithms used in Metelli et al. (2023) is a bit different
from ours. Before presenting the performance metric for IRL algorithms used in Metelli et al. (2023),
we first define the feasible reward set. Given a reward mapping R : V × A 7→ Rall , we say a
reward set R ⊂ Rall is a feasible reward set induced by R, if R = image(R). They used the
Hausdorff (pre)metric DH (R, R) b between the exact feasible reward set R and the estimated feasible
           all
set R ⊂ R which is defined by
    b

                       DH (R, R)

                               b := max sup inf d(r, rb), sup inf d(r, rb) ,
                                                       b∈R
                                                   r∈R r                     r∈R
                                                                       b∈R
                                                                       r
                                                         b               b

where d is a given metric between rewards. Their learning goal is to find an estimated feasible set
 b attaining a small DH (R, R).
R,                           b Different from our mapping-based metric, the Hausdorff metric
measures only the gap between the exact feasible set R and the estimated feasible set R, b but can’t
measure the gap between rewards for every parameter (V, A). In fact, given a metric between rewards,
our mapping-based metric is stronger than the Hausdorff metric.
Lemma C.2 (DM is stronger than DH ). Given an IRL problem (M, π E ) and a (pre)metric d :
Rall × Rall 7→ R≥0 between rewards. We define the corresponding Hausdorff metric DH for any pair
(R, R′ ) by

                   DH (R, R′ ) := max sup ′inf ′ d(r, r′ ), sup inf d(r, r′ ) ,
                                                 r∈R r ∈R              r ′ ∈R′ r∈R

and the mapping-based metric is defined for any pair (R, R ′ ) by
                               DM (R, R ′ ) :=     sup        d(R(V, A), R ′ (V, A)),
                                                 V ∈V,A∈A

Let R and R are feasible reward set induced by R and R ′ , then we have
               ′


                                          DH (R, R′ ) ≤ DM (R, R ′ ).

We then present the following lemma which demonstrates that for some d, DM is strictly stronger
than DH .
    2
      Technically, the metric defined in Metelli et al. (2023) considers the value function difference overall
(h, s) ∈ [H] × S, which is more suitable for the generative model setting, and clearly cannot be minimized in
the online setting in general, due to the potential existence of unreachable states; We have adapted their metric to
look at the initial value function only, which is more suitable for the online setting.


                                                         17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma C.3. There exists a metric d which is a metric between rewards such that for any IRL
problem (M, π E ), there exists another IRL problem (M, c π bE ) such that DH (R⋆ , R)
                                                                                     b = 0, but
D (R , R) ≥ 1/2, where D and D are the Hausdorff metric and mapping-based metric
  M   ⋆ b                      H        M

induced by d, respectively; R⋆ and R
                                   b are the feasible sets of (M, π E ) and (M,
                                                                             c πbE ), respectively;
R and R are the reward mappings induced by (M, π ) and (M, π
  ⋆      b                                           E         c    E
                                                                  b ), respectively.

C.3    D ISSCUSSION OF EXISTING METRIC FOR ONLINE IRL

We also consider the performance metric proposed in Lindner et al. (2023). They consider the
metric between IRL problems τ = (M, π E ) and τb = (M,
                                                    c πbE ), where (M,c π bE ) is the recovered IRL
problem. We then present the performance metric of Lindner et al. (2023):
                   (
                                                          ⋆                      ⋆
  DL (τ, τb) := max      sup inf       sup      max Qπ1 (s1 , a; M ∪ r) − Qπ1b (s1 , a; M ∪ r) , (C.2)
                             b∈Rτb π
                        r∈Rτ r     b⋆ ∈Π⋆        a
                                          M∪b
                                          c r
                                                                                                  )
                                                          ⋆                     ⋆
                        sup inf       sup     max Qπ1 (s1 , a; M ∪ r) − Qπ1b (s1 , a; M ∪ r)        , (C.3)
                       b∈Rτb r∈Rτ π ⋆ ∈Π⋆
                       r                        a
                                        M∪r

where the Rτ , Rτb the set of all feasible rewards set for IRL problems τ, τb, respectively, π ⋆ ∈
Π⋆M∪r , πb⋆ ∈ Π⋆M∪b          π
                  c r , and Q1 (·|M ∪ r) represent the Q-function induced by M ∪ r. The following
proposition demonstrates that if π E = π  bE , then DL (τ, τb) = 0, indicating that D solely measures
                           E      E
the closeness between π and π    b without capturing the closeness between M and M.     c However, in
contrast to imitation learning, where the recovery of the expert policy suffices, IRL necessitates the
retrieval of transition dynamics. This becomes especially crucial when leveraging learned rewards for
transfer learning. Merely recovering the expert policy is insufficient for performing RL algorithms
with learned rewards in a different environment.
Proposition C.4. For any τ = (M, π E ) and τb = (M,  c π bE ), if π E = π
                                                                        bE , then DL (τ, τb) = 0.

C.4    G UARANTEE FOR PERFORMING RL ALGORITHM WITH LEARNED REWARDS

Significantly, the metric dall possesses a substantial advantage: a policy that is near-optimal under a
certain reward remains near-optimal under a reward that is close to the original one as per dall . This
is a crucial feature that was lacking in the previously established metrics. Specifically, the metrics
presented in the works of Metelli et al. (2023); Lindner et al. (2023) only took into consideration the
optimal policy, without providing for the evaluation of near-optimal policies.
Proposition C.5 (dall suffices for recovering π E ). Given an MDP\R M, let (r, rb) be a pair of
rewards such that dall (r, rb) ≤ ϵ. Suppose that π  b is a ϵ′ -optimal policy in the MDP M ∪ rb, i.e,
   ⋆             π             ′
V1 (s1 ; rb) − V1 (s1 ; rb) ≤ ϵ , then
                 b

                                   V1⋆ (s1 ; r) − V1πb (s1 ; r) ≤ 3ϵ + ϵ′ .

Proposition C.5 provides a guarantee for performing standard RL algorithms aiming to find near-
optimal policies with learned rewards (having a small dall error).
Proposition C.6. Given an MDP\R M, let (r, rb) be a pair of reward such that dπ (r, rb) ≤ ϵ, where
π is an ϵ̄-optimal policy in the MDP M ∪ r. Suppose that rbh (s, a) ≤ rh (s, a) for any (h, s, a) ∈
[H] × S × A. Let π  b be an ϵ′ -optimal policy in the MDP M ∪ rb, i.e, V1⋆ (s1 ; rb) − V1πb (s1 ; rb) ≤ ϵ′ ,
then we have
                                V1⋆ (s1 ; r) − V1πb (s1 ; r) ≤ ϵ + ϵ′ + 2ϵ̄.

Proposition C.6 illustrates that when the monotonicity condition: rbh (s, a) ≤ rh (s, a) is satisfied,
the performance of performing RL algorithms with learned rewards (having small dπ error) can be
guaranteed. This proposition is applicable to our offline IRL algorithm, and in the algorithm design,
we employ pessimism techniques to ensure that the recovered rewards satisfy the monotonicity
condition. Later, we will observe that Proposition C.6 is applicable to our offline and online IRL
algorithms. It is important to note that Proposition C.6 also provides a guarantee for performing
standard RL algorithms with learned rewards (with a small dπ error) in different environments (see
Corollary I.6, Corollary I.7).


                                                     18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.5   P ROOFS FOR S ECTION C

proof of Lemma C.1. When π ∈ Π⋆M∪r , we have
   |Vh⋆ (s; r) − Vhπ (s; r)| = |Vh⋆ (s; r) − Vh⋆ (s; r)| = 0 ≤                  sup       |Vhπ (s; r) − Vhπ (s; rb)|.
                                                                       π∈Π⋆     ⋆
                                                                          M∪r ∪ΠM∪b
                                                                                  r
                                                                                                                  (C.4)
Let π ⋆ ∈ Π⋆M∪r , and then we directly have
                                              ⋆
                                           V π (s; r) = V ⋆ (s; r).
When π ∈ Π⋆M∪br , we have
                                               ⋆                                                ⋆
           0 ≤ Vh⋆ (s; r) − Vhπ (s; r) ≤ Vhπ (s; r) − Vhπ (s; r) + Vhπ (s; rb) − Vhπ (s; rb)
                                               ⋆                  ⋆
                                         = Vhπ (s; r) − Vhπ (s; rb) + Vhπ (s; rb) − Vhπ (s; r)
                                                  ⋆                ⋆
                                         ≤ Vhπ (s; r) − Vhπ (s; rb) + |Vhπ (s; rb) − Vhπ (s; r)|
                                         ≤2           sup             |Vhπ (s; r) − Vhπ (s; rb)|.                 (C.5)
                                              π∈Π⋆     ⋆
                                                 M∪r ∪ΠM∪b
                                                         r

                                                                            ⋆
where the first line comes from π ∈ Π⋆M∪br : Vhπ (s; rb) − Vhπ (s; rb) ≥ 0 and the second line uses
triangle inequality. Combining Eq.(C.4) and Eq.(C.5), we complete the proof. For the second part
of Lemma C.1, we consider an MDP\R M with H = 1, S = 2 and A = 2, which is specified by
S = {sa , sb }, A = ag , ab . The transition dynamics are given by
       P1 (sa |sa , ag ) = 1,     P1 (sa |sa , ab ) = P1 (sb |sa , ab ) = 1/2, and P(s1 = sg ) = 1,
which implies that the initial state is sg . We then construct rewards r and rb as follows:
                                  r1 (sa , ag ) = 1,           r1 (sa , ab ) = 1,
                                  rb1 (sa , ag ) = 1,          rb1 (sa , ab ) = 0.
By the construction of r, for any policy π, we have π ∈ Π⋆M∪r , which means Π⋆M∪br Π⋆M∪r . Hence,
we obtain that
         sup       |V1⋆ (sa ; r) − V1π (sa ; r)| =           sup            |V1⋆ (sa ; r) − V1⋆ (sa ; r)| = 0.    (C.6)
   π∈Π⋆     ⋆
      M∪r ∪ΠM∪b
              r
                                                      π∈Π⋆     ⋆
                                                         M∪r ∪ΠM∪b
                                                                 r


On the other hand, we consider the policy π bad which is given by π1bad (ab |sa ) = 1. Then, we have
                                                            bad                 bad
            sup        |Vhπ (s; r) − Vhπ (s; rb)| ≥ |Vhπ (s; r) − Vhπ (s; rb)| = |1 − 0| = 1.                     (C.7)
      π∈Π⋆     ⋆
         M∪r ∪ΠM∪b
                 r


Proof of Lemma C.2. Since R and R′ are induced by R and R ′ , then for any r ∈ R and r′ ∈ R,
there exist V , V ′ ∈ V, A, A ∈ A such that
                                 r = R(V, A),               r′ = R ′ (V ′ , A′ ).
Then, we have
                sup ′inf ′ d(r, r′ ) =     sup           inf          d(R(V, A), R ′ (V ′ , A′ ))
                r∈R r ∈R                           ′    ′
                                         V ∈V,A∈A V ∈V,A ∈A

                                   ≤       sup        d(R(V, A), R ′ (V, A)) = DM (R, R ′ ).
                                         V ∈V,A∈A

Similarly, we obtain
                                    sup inf d(r, r′ ) ≤ DM (R, R ′ ).
                                   r ′ ∈R′ r∈R
Hence, we conclude that
                                         DH (R, R′ ) ≤ DM (R, R ′ ).



                                                        19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof of Lemma C.3. Fix a (s̄, ā) ∈ S × A, we define metric d by
                                   d(r, r′ ) := |r1 (s̄, ā) − r1′ (s̄, ā)|.                    (C.8)

Give an IRL problem (M, π E ), let P be the transition dynamics of (M, π E ). Let s⋆ :=
arg mins∈S P1 (s|s̄, ā). By the Pigeonhole Principle, we have P1 (s⋆ |s̄, ā) ≤ 1/S ≤ 1/2. We
construct transition P′ by
                                             P′1 (s⋆ |s̄, ā) = 1.                               (C.9)

Let Mc = (S, A, H, P′ ), πbE = π E , and Rb be the reward mapping induced by (M,     bE ). For any
                                                                                   c π
(V, A) ∈ V̄ × Ā, we define (V ′ , A′ ) ∈ V̄ × Ā by

                     V2 (s⋆ ) = [P1 V2 ](s̄, ā)

                                                                           A′ = A.          (C.10)
                     Vh (s) = Vh (s)             (h, s, a) ̸= (1, s̄, ā),
Then we have

   d R(V, A), R(V
              b ′ , A′ ) = |[R(V, A)] (s̄, ā) − [R(V, A)] (s̄, ā)|
                                        1                    1                                  (C.11)

                          = − A1 (s̄, ā) · 1 ā ∈ supp π1E (·|s̄) + V1 (s) − [P1 V2 ](s̄, ā)



                          − −A′1 (s̄, ā) · 1 ā ∈ supp π
                                                        b1E (·|s̄) + V1′ (s) − [P′1 V2′ ](s̄, ā)


                              = |[P′1 V2′ ](s̄, ā) − [P1 V2 ](s̄, ā)|
                              = |V2 (s⋆ ) − [P1 V2 ](s̄, ā)| = 0                               (C.12)

On the other hand, for any (V ′ , A′ ) ∈ V̄ × Ā, we define (V, A) ∈ V̄ × Ā by

                                        V2 (s) = V2′ (s⋆ ), s ∈ S,

                                                                                                (C.13)
                                        Vh (s) = Vh′ (s)    h ̸= 2,
which implies that
                               [P1 V2 ](s̄, ā) = V2′ (s⋆ ) = [P′1 V2′ ](s̄, ā).               (C.14)

Hence, we have

   d R(V, A), R(V
               b ′ , A′ ) = |[R(V, A)] (s̄, ā) − [R(V, A)] (s̄, ā)|
                                         1                    1                                  (C.15)

                           = − A1 (s̄, ā) · 1 ā ∈ supp π1E (·|s̄) + V1 (s) − [P1 V2 ](s̄, ā)



                           − −A′1 (s̄, ā) · 1 ā ∈ supp π
                                                         b1E (·|s̄) + V1′ (s) − [P′1 V2′ ](s̄, ā)


                              = |[P′1 V2′ ](s̄, ā) − [P1 V2 ](s̄, ā)| = 0                     (C.16)

Combining Eq.(C.11) and Eq.(C.15), we have DH (R, R)
                                                  b = 0.
                                   e ∈ V̄ × Ā as follows:
On the other hand, we define (Ve , A)
                       (
                         Ve2 (s⋆ ) = H − 1,                                     e ≡ 0.
                                                                                A               (C.17)
                         Veh (s) = 0,         (h, s) ̸= (2, s⋆ ),

Then we have
                                                 h     i          h      i
             DM (R, R)
                    b ≥ d R(Ve , A),
                                 e R(       e = P′1 Ve2 (s̄, ā) − P1 Ve2 (s̄, ā)
                                     b Ve , A)

                                                                     H −1  1
                          = |(H − 1)(P1 (s⋆ |s̄, ā) − 1)| ≥              ≥ .                   (C.18)
                                                                       2   2


                                                      20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof of Proposition C.4. Let R τ and R τb be the reward mappings induced by τ and τb, respectively.
For any θ = (V, A), we define rθ = R τ (V, A) and rbθ = R τb(V, A). By construction of reward
mapping and definition of optimal policy, we have π ∈ Π⋆M∪r is equivalent to
                  Ah (s, a) · 1 πhE (a|s) = 0 = 0,

                                                         ∀(h, s, a) s.t. πh (a|s) ̸= 0.            (C.19)
Similarly, π ∈ Π⋆M∪b
                  c θ    is equivalent to
                 E r
                bh (a|s) = 0 = Ah (s, a) · 1 πhE (a|s) = 0 = 0,

  Ah (s, a) · 1 π                                                          ∀(h, s, a) s.t. πh (a|s) ̸= 0.
                                                                                                   (C.20)
                                  ⋆          ⋆
                                                                            θ
Hence, we can conclude that ΠM∪rθ = ΠM∪b
  θ                                          c r θ . Notice that Rτ = r | θ = (V, A) and Rτ =
 rb | θ = (V, A) , we further obtain that DL (τ, τb) = 0.Then we have
                                                        ⋆                       ⋆
            sup inf         sup           max Qπ1 (s1 , a; M ∪ r) − Qπ1b (s1 , a; M ∪ r)
                b∈Rτb π
           r∈Rτ r     b⋆ ∈Π⋆c              a
                                M∪b
                                  r
                                                            ⋆                       ⋆
            = sup inf
                  ′
                                sup            max Qπ1 (s1 , a; M ∪ rθ ) − Qπ1b (s1 , a; M ∪ rθ )
               θ∈Θ θ ∈Θ π
                        b⋆ ∈Π⋆                  a
                                  c rθ′
                                  M∪b
                                                    ⋆                       ⋆
            = inf       sup       max Qπ1 (s1 , a; M ∪ rθ ) − Qπ1b (s1 , a; M ∪ rθ ) = 0,                      (C.21)
               θ∈Θ π
                   b⋆ ∈Π⋆c θ          a
                        M∪br

where the last line is due to Π⋆M∪rθ = Π⋆M∪b
                                         c r θ . Follow the same proof of Eq.(C.21), we have
                                                        ⋆                       ⋆
            sup inf         sup       max Qπ1 (s1 , a; M ∪ r) − Qπ1b (s1 , a; M ∪ r) = 0.                      (C.22)
           b∈Rτb r∈Rτ π ⋆ ∈Π⋆
           r                               a
                            M∪r

Combining Eq.(C.21) and Eq.(C.22), we conclude that DL (τ, τb) = 0.


proof of Proposition C.5. Let π be an optimal policy of M ∪ rb, then we have
V ⋆ (s1 ; r) − V πb (s1 ; r) = V ⋆ (s1 ; r) − V π (s1 ; r) + V π (s1 ; r) − V π (s1 ; rb) + V π (s1 ; rb) − V πb (s1 ; r)
                            ≤ |V ⋆ (s1 ; r) − V π (s1 ; r)| + |V π (s1 ; r) − V π (s1 ; rb)| + V π (s1 ; rb) − V πb (s1 ; r)
                         ≤ 2dall (r, rb) + dall (r, rb) + ϵ′ = 3ϵ + ϵ′ ,
where the last line is valid since
                      |V ⋆ (s1 ; r) − V π (s1 ; r)| ≤ 2dall (r, rb)                                (by Lemma C.5.)
                            π                       π            all
                         |V (s1 ; r) − V (s1 ; rb)| ≤ d (r, rb)                               (by definition of dall .)
                          V π (s1 ; rb) − V πb (s1 ; r) ≤ ϵ′ .                                 (by definition of π
                                                                                                                 b.)



                                b is an ϵ-optiaml policy in M ∪ rb, we have
Proof of Proposition C.6. Since π
                                    ϵ′ + V πb (s1 ; rb) ≥ V π (s1 ; rb).                                       (C.23)
In the same way, π is an ϵ̄-optiaml policy in M ∪ r, and therefore, we obtain that
                                       ϵ̄ + V π (s1 ; r) ≥ V πb (s1 ; r).                                      (C.24)
And by rbh (s, a) ≤ rh (s, a) for all (h, s, a) ∈ [H] × S × A, we have
                     V π (s1 ; r) ≥ V π (s1 ; rb), V πb (s1 ; r) ≥ V πb (s1 ; rb).                             (C.25)
Combining Eq.(C.23), Eq.(C.24) and Eq.(C.25), we conclude that
                ϵ′ + ϵ̄ + V π (s1 ; r) ≥ ϵ′ + V πb (s1 ; r) ≥ ϵ′ + V πb (s1 ; rb) ≥ V π (s1 ; rb).             (C.26)
Hence, we have
       |V π (s1 ; r) − V πb (s1 ; r)| ≤ |ϵ′ + ϵ̄ + V π (s1 ; r) − ϵ′ + V πb (s1 ; r)| + ϵ̄
                                            ≤ |ϵ′ + ϵ̄ + V π (s1 ; r) − V π (s1 ; rb)| + ϵ̄
                                    ≤ 2ϵ̄ + ϵ′ + |V π (s1 ; r) − V π (s1 ; rb)| ≤ ϵ + ϵ′ + 2ϵ̄,                (C.27)
where the first and last line is by triangle inequality and the second is by Eq.(C.26).


                                                                21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D     T ECHNICAL TOOLS
Lemma D.1 (Xie et al. (2021)). Suppose N ∼ Bin(n, p) where n ≥ 1 and p ∈ [0, 1]. Then with
probability at least 1 − δ, we have
                                         p     8 log(1/δ)
                                             ≤            .
                                      N ∨1          n
Theorem D.2 (Metelli et al. (2023)). Let P and Q be probability measures on the same measurable
space (Ω, F), and let A ∈ F be an arbitrary event. Then,
                                                    1
                                P(A) + Q(Ac ) ≥       exp (−DKL (P, Q)) ,
                                                    2
where Ac = Ω \ A is the complement of A.
Theorem D.3 (Metelli et al. (2023)). Let P0 , P1 , . . . , PM be probability measures on the same
measurable space (Ω, F), and let A1 , . . . , AM ∈ F be a partition of Ω. Then,
                         M                      1
                                                  PM
                      1 X         c             M   i=1 DKL (Pi , P0 ) − log 2
                            Pi (Ai ) ≥ 1 −                                     ,
                     M i=1                                  log M

where Ac = Ω \ A is the complement of A.

E     P ROOFS FOR S ECTION 4
E.1   S OME LEMMAS

Lemma E.1 (Concentration event ). Under the setting of Theorem 4.2, there exists an absolute
constant C1 , C2 such that the concentration event E holds with probability at least 1 − δ, where
       (
              h                 i
  E := (i): (Ph − P   bh )Vh+1 (s, a) ≤ bθ (s, a) ∀ θ = (V, A) ∈ Θ, (h, s, a) ∈ [H] × S × A,
                                               h

                                                                                                         (E.1)
                     1           C1 ι
         (ii):               ≤     b      ∀(h, s, a) ∈ [H] × S × A,                                      (E.2)
               Nh (s, a) ∨ 1     π
                               Kdh (s, a)
                                                                                                     )
                                                        b         C2 ηι
        (iii): Nhe (s, a) ≥ 1   ∀(s, a) ∈ S × A s.t. dπh (s, a) ≥                    πhE (·|s)

                                                                        , a ∈ supp                   ,   (E.3)
                                                                    K

where bh (s, a) is defined in Eq.(4.3), C ⋆ is specified in Definition 4.1, and Nhe (s), η are given by
                (P                                                                    1
   e                 (sh ,ah ,eh )∈D 1 {(sh , eh ) = (s, a)} in option 1,              ∆    in option 1,
 Nh (s, a) :=                                                                 η :=
                  Nhb (s, a)                                 in option 2,             1 in option 2.

Proof. When Nh (s, a) = 0, then P  bh (·|s, a) = 0, as a result, claim (i) holds trivially. We then
consider the case where Nh (s, a) ≥ 1.
                                                                                      Θ
For any h ∈ [H], we define Nϵ,h as an ϵ/H-net with respect to ∥ · ∥∞ norm for V h . By definition of
N (Θ; ϵ/H), we have
                                  log |Nϵ,h | ≤ log N (Θ; ϵ/H).

For fixed Veh+1 ∈ Nϵ,h+1 , (h, s, a) ∈ [H] × S × A, by the empirical Bernstein inequality (Maurer &
Pontil, 2009, Theorem 4), there exists some absolute constant c > 0 such that

                                    s
                                               c         b h Veh+1 (s, a) log 3HSA · |Nϵ,h+1 |
      h               i                                h          i
       (Ph − P
             bh )Veh+1 (s, a) ≤                         V
                                        Nhb (s, a) ∨ 1                              δ


                                                    22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                      cH            3HSA · |Nϵ,h+1 |
                              +                 log
                                Nhb (s, a) ∨ 1            δ
                                s
                                   c log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι h b e i            cH log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
                              ≲                        Vh Vh+1 (s, a) +
                                       Nhb (s, a) ∨ 1                      Nhb (s, a) ∨ 1

with probability at least 1 − δ/(3HSA|Nϵ,h |). Here ≲ hides absolute constants. Taking the union
bound over all Veh+1 ∈ Nϵ,h+1 and (h, s, a) ∈ [H] × S × A, we know that with probability at least
1 − δ/3,
                                  s
             bh )Veh+1 (s, a) ≲ c log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι V    b h Veh+1 (s, a) + cH log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
     h                 i                             h          i
      (Ph − P
                                     Nhb (s, a) ∨ 1                          Nhb (s, a) ∨ 1

hold simultaneously for all Ve ∈ Nϵ,h and (h, s, a) ∈ [H] × S × A.
For any (V, A) ∈ Θ and h ∈ [H], there exists a Veh such that ∥Vh − Veh ∥∞ ≤ ϵ/H. Denote
(Ve1 , . . . , VeH ) as Ve . By applying the triangle inequality, we deduce that
 h                        i           h                  i
   (Ph − P     bh )Vh+1 (s, a) ≤        bh − Ph Veh+1 (s, a) + 2 Ve − V
                                        P                                     ∞
    s
          c log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι b e  h        i          cH log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι       ϵ
 ≲               b
                                  Vh Vh+1 (s, a) +          b
                                                                          +
              Nh (s, a) ∨ 1                               Nh (s, a) ∨ 1      H
    s                                               s
          c log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι h b           i             c log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι h b   e         i
 ≤               b
                                  Vh Vh+1 (s, a) +            b
                                                                           Vh Vh+1 − Vh+1 (s, a)
              Nh (s, a) ∨ 1                                Nh (s, a) ∨ 1
  cH log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι      ϵ
+       b
                      +
     N (s, a) ∨ 1         H
  s h                                   s
    c log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι b
                      h       i           c log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ιϵ2    cH log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι       ϵ
≤         b
                       Vh Vh+1 (s, a) +       2     b
                                                              +       b
                                                                                       +
       Nh (s, a) ∨ 1                       H · Nh (s, a) ∨ 1        Nh (s, a) ∨ 1        H
  s                                                                    s                     !
    c log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι h b     i         cH log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι     ϵ         c log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
=                      Vh Vh+1 (s, a) +                     +      1+
       Nhb (s, a) ∨ 1                      Nhb (s, a) ∨ 1     H             Nhb (s, a) ∨ 1
                                                                                         (E.4)
holds with probability
                    h at leasti 1 − δ/3h for all θ i= (V, A)h∈ Θ and (h, s, a) ∈
                                                                                i[H] × S × A. Here
                     b h Veh+1 (s, a) ≤ V
the third line is by V                   b h Vh+1 (s, a) + V b h Veh+1 − Vh+1 (s, a). On the other
hand, by |Vh |∞ ≤ H − h + 1, we obtain that
                      h                 i
                         Ph − P
                              bh Vh+1 (s, a) ≤ 2(H − h + 1) ≤ 2H,                             (E.5)

for all V ∈ Θ and (h, s, a) ∈ [H] × S × A. Recall that, bθh (s, a) is given by
                              (s
           θ                      log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι h b        i           H log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
          bh (s, a) = C · min         b
                                                    Vh Vh+1 (s, a) +
                                    Nh (s, a) ∨ 1                           Nhb (s, a) ∨ 1
                              s                   ! )
                      ϵ         log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
                    +     1+                       ,H ,                                       (E.6)
                      H           Nhb (s, a) ∨ 1

for some absolute constant C. Combining Eq.(E.4) and Eq.(E.5), it turns out that Claims (ii) holds.

                                                b
For claim (ii), notice that Nh (s, a) ∼ Bin(K, dπh (s, a)). Applying Lemma D.1 yields that
                        1                  8                3HSA       C1 ι
                                ≤        b           · log(      )≤   π b (s, a)
                  Nh (s, a) ∨ 1   K · dπh (sh , aE
                                                 h )          δ     Kdh



                                                23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


for some absolute constant C1 , with probability at least 1 − δ/(3HSA). Taking the union bound
yields claim (ii) over all (h, s, a) with probability at least 1 − δ/3.

For claim (iii), in option 2, for any (h, s, a)  ∈ [H] × S × A such  that a ∈ supp πhE (·|s) and
  b                                                         b
dπh (s, a) ≥ CK2 ηι
                    , we have Nhe (s, a) ∼ Bin K, dπh (s, a) · πhE (a|s) . By direct computing, we
obtain that
                                        b
                                                                          b
                                                                                  K
           P[Nhe (s, a) = 0] = (1 − dπh (s, a) · πhE (a|s))K ≤ 1 − ∆ · dπh (s, a)
                               "                 1/K              1/K                   #K
                                          δ                   δ                 πb
                             = 1−                       +               − ∆ · dh (s, a)
                                        3HSA                3HSA
                                                                                       K
                                 δ  1/K
                                                 δ
                                                     1/K
                                                                  b
                                                                         
                              ≤         +1−             − ∆ · dπh (s, a)
                                                                        
                                3HSA          3HSA                      
                                          |           {z                }
                                                                         ≤0
                                              1/K·K
                                        δ                    δ
                              ≤                       =         ,
                                      3HSA                 3HSA

where the second line follows from the well-posedness condition: π E (a|s) ≥ ∆ and the last inequality
is valid since
                1/K
             δ                        1        δ         Ce2          δ      C2 ι           b
   1−                  = 1 − exp(− log             )≤−        log          ≤      ≤ ∆ · dπh (s, a),
          3HSA                       K      3HSA          K       3HSA        K
                                                                                    b
      e2 and C2 are absolute constants and the last inequality comes from dπ (s, a) ≥ C2 ηι = C2 ι .
where C                                                                    h           K      ∆·K
Hence, it holds that
                                               Nhe (s, a) ≥ 1,
with probability at least 1 − δ/(3HSA). Taking the union bound over all (h, s, a) ∈ [H] × S × A
yields that
                                              Nhe (s, a) ≥ 1
                                                                        b
holds with probability at least 1−δ/3 for all (s, a) ∈ S ×A s.t. dπh (s, a) ≥ CK   2 ηι

                                                                                        , a ∈ supp πhE (·|s) ,
which implies that claim (iii) holds.
                                                                        K
                                                       π b (s,a)

In option 1, notice that P[Nhe (s, a) = 0] = 1 − dh              (s, a) , with a similar argument, we can
prove the claim (iii) in option 1.
Further, we can conclude that the concentration event E holds with probability at least 1 − δ.
Lemma E.2 (Performance decomposition for RLE). For any θ = (V, A) ∈ Θ, let rθ = R ⋆ (V, A)
and rbθ = R(V,
          b A), where R ⋆ is the ground truth reward mapping and Rb is the estimated reward
mapping output by RLP. On the event defined in Lemma E.1, for all θ ∈ Θ, h ∈ [H], we have
                  val        C ⋆ H 2 Sηι      X     X          val
                dπ rθ , rbθ ≲             +                 dπh (s, a)bθh (s, a),
                                  K
                                                    h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
         ⋆
where C is defined in Assumption 4.1 and η is specified in Lemma E.1

Proof. Consider a tuple (h, s, a) ∈ [H]×S ×A. When a ∈         / supp πhE (·|s) , by definition of Nhe (s, a),
we have Nhe (s, a) = 0 By construction of π    bhE (a|s) of Algorithm 1, we deduce that π bhE (a|s) = 0, and
therefore
                                bhE (·|s) − 1 a ∈     / supp πhE (·|s)

                  1 a∈ / supp π                                            = |0 − 0| = 0.
                                  πb             C2 ηι
                    E

 When a ∈ supp πh (·|s) and dh (s, a) < K , then
                                       bhE (·|s) − 1 a ∈     / supp πhE (·|s)

                      1 a∈  / supp π                                              ≤ 2.


                                                      24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             b
If a ∈ supp πhE (·|s) and dπh (s, a) ≥ CK 2 ηι

                                               , then by concentration event E (iii), Nhe (s, a) ≥ 1 which
               E
implies that π
             bh (a|s) > 0. Hence, we obtain that
                               bhE (·|s) − 1 a ∈     / supp πhE (·|s)

                 1 a∈  / supp π                                          = |1 − 1| = 0.
Thus We can conclude that

                                                                                         b         C2 ηι
             bhE (·|s) − 1 a ∈
                             / supp πhE (·|s)                                         dπh (s, a) <                     πhE (·|s)

 1 a∈/ supp π                                                         ≤2·1                               , a ∈ supp                        .
                                                                                                       K
                                                                                                (E.7)
                      θ
We then bound the rh − rbhθ (s, a) for all (h, s, a) ∈ [H] × S × A:
  θ
 rh − rbhθ (s, a) = − Ah (s, a) · 1 a ∈   / supp πhE (·|s) + Vh (s) − [Ph Vh+1 ](s, a)

                                                    h        i
                            bhE (·|s) − Vh (s) + P    bh Vh+1 (s, a) + bθ (s, a)

 + Ah (s, a) · 1 a ∈/ supp π                                             h
                                                                         h                i
                             bhE (·|s) − 1 a ∈   / supp πhE (·|s)                bh )Vh+1 (s, a) + bθ (s, a)

≤ Ah (s, a) · 1 a ∈ / supp π                                          + (Ph − P                     h

                b        C2 ηι                             h                i
≤ 2H · 1 dπh (s, a) <          , a ∈ supp πhE (·|s) + (Ph − P       bh )Vh+1 (s, a) + bθ (s, a)

                                                                                       h
                          K

                b        C2 ηι
≤ 2H · 1 dπh (s, a) <          , a ∈ supp πhE (·|s) + 2bθh (s, a),

                                                                                                (E.8)
                          K
where the second line follows from the triangle inequality, the third line comes from Eq.(E.7), the
second last line follows from ∥Ah ∥∞ ≤ H, the last line comes from the concentration event E (i).
                                        val            val
Finally, we give the bound of Eπval |Vhπ (s; rθ ) − Vhπ (s; rbθ )|. By definition of the V function we
have
           val            val          X val               val           val
  Eπval Vhπ (s; rθ ) − Vhπ (s; rbθ ) =      dπh (s) · Vhπ (s; rθ ) − Vhπ (s; rbθ )
                                                      s∈S

       X          val           X           X         val
               dπh (s′ ) ·                         dπh′ (sh′ = s, ah′ = a|sh = s′ ) · rhθ ′ − rbhθ ′ (s, a)

  =
       s′ ∈S                    h′ ≥h (s,a)∈S×A
                                (                                        )
       X              X             X        val       val
                                          dπh (s) · dπh′ (s, a|sh = s)       · rhθ ′ − rbhθ ′ (s, a)

  ≤
       h′ ≥h (s,a)∈S×A              s∈S
  (i) X               X            val
                                dπh′ (s, a) · rhθ ′ − rbhθ ′ (s, a)

  ≤
       h′ ≥h (s,a)∈S×A
  (ii) X

                        X          val
                                                         πb         C2 ηι
                                dπh′ (s, a) ·                                         E           θ

   ≤                                             2H · 1 dh (s, a) <       , a ∈ supp πh (·|s) + 2bh (s, a)
                                                                     K
        h′ ≥h (s,a)∈S×A
                            val
                    2Hdπh (s, a) πb

        X               X
                                                  πb         C2 ηι             E

  ≤                       b        dh (s, a) · 1 dh (s, a) <       , a ∈ supp πh (·|s)
    h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
                       dπh (s, a)                             K
    X X               val
  +               2dπh (s, a)bθh (s, a)
      h≥1 (s,a)∈S×A
                                              val
                C2 ηι X                   Xdπh (s, a) X X                val
  ≤ 2H ·             ·                       π b     +               2dπh (s, a)bθh (s, a)
                 K                         d (s, a)
                            h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A h          h≥1 (s,a)∈S×A
  (iii) C ⋆ H 2 Sηι              X           X         val
   ≲                        +                        dπh (s, a)bθh (s, a),
                  K
                                h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A

          π val                                                                                                  val
where d (sh′ = s, ah′ = a|sh = s) = Ph (sh′ = s, ah′ = a|sh = s), (i) is due to dπh′ (s, a) =
          h′
           val
         π        π val
P
  s∈S dh (s) · dh′ (sh = s, ah = a|sh = s), (ii) follows from Eq.(E.8) and (iii) comes from
                        ′         ′
               ⋆
definition of C -concentrability. This completes the proof.


                                                                 25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.2    P ROOFS OF T HEOREM 4.2

Proof. By Lemma E.2, we have
                                    ⋆ 2
                  π val        b ≲ C H Sηι + sup                     val
                                                  X        X
                 DΘ     (R ⋆ , R)                                 dπh (s, a)bθh (s, a) .                                (E.9)
                                     K       θ∈Θ
                                                 h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
                                             |                 {z                    }
                                                                                         (I)

Plugging Eq.(E.6) into Eq.(E.9), we obtain that
                X        X          val
         (I) =                   dπh (s, a)bh (s, a)
                    h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
                                                             (s
                        X     X             val     log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι h b          i
                ≲                        dπh (s, a) ·                   V h h+1 (s, a)
                                                                           V                                           (E.10)
                                                      Nhb (s, a) ∨ 1
                  h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
                                                   s                    !)
                  H log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι        ϵ          log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
                +                        +     1+
                     Nhb (s, a) ∨ 1        H            Nhb (s, a) ∨ 1
                                                s
                   X        X
                                     π val        log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
                ≤                   dh (s, a) ·                      [Vh Vh+1 ](s, a)
                                                    Nhb (s, a) ∨ 1
                  h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
                  |                              {z                                 }
                                                               (I.a)
                                                             s
                    X        X             val                     log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι h  b                i
                +                        dπh (s, a) ·                                V  h − V h  V h+1  (s, a)
                                                                     Nhb (s, a) ∨ 1
                    h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
                    |                                                   {z                                   }
                                                                       (I.b)
                    X        X             val               H log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
                +                        dπh (s, a) ·
                                                                Nhb (s, a) ∨ 1
                    h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
                    |                               {z                         }
                                                  (I.c)
                                                                               s                          !
                        X       X                 val                 1            log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
                +ϵ·                         dπh         (s, a) ·        +                                              (E.11)
                                                                      H            H 2 · Nhb (s, a) ∨ 1
                        h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
                    |                                          {z                                         }
                                                              (I.d)

where the last inequality comes from the triangle inequality. We study the four terms separately.
For the term (I.a), on the concentration event E, we have

                                                         s
                 X          X            val                 log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
      (I.a) =                         dπh (s, a) ·                            [Vh Vh+1 ](s, a)
                                                               Nhb (s, a) ∨ 1
                h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
                                                 s
           X            X       val  log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
       ≲                      dπh (s, a) ·               [Vh Vh+1 ](s, a)
                                         Kdπb (s, a)
         h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
         r                                                         s
                                                                        val
           H 2 log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι X          X q val
                                                     π               dπh (s, a)
       ≤                      ·                    dh (s, a) ·           b
                     K
                                h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
                                                                     dπh (s, a)
         r                      v
                                                        val
           H 2 log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι u X                  dπh (s, a)
                                u           X                       sX          X       val
       ≤                      ·t                       π b        ·                  dπh (s, a)
                     K                               d     (s, a)
                                  h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A h                  h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
                                                                                               (by Cauchy-Schwarz inequality)
           r
               C ⋆ H 4 S log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
       ≤                                 ,                                                                             (E.12)
                            K

                                                                    26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where the second line comes from concentration event E(ii), the third line is valid since ∥Vh+1 ∥∞ ≤
H and the last is by thw definition of C ⋆ -concentrability.
Next, we study the term (I.b). For any (h, s, a), we have
           h                   i
              b h − Vh Vh+1 (s, a)
              V
             h                                                         i
           = (P bh Vh+1 )2 − (Pbh Vh+1 )2 − Ph (Vh+1 )2 − (Ph Vh+1 )2 (s, a)
              h                     i           h                               i
           ≤ (P  bh − Ph )(Vh+1 )2 (s, a) + (P    bh + Ph )Vh+1 · (P
                                                                   bh − Ph )Vh+1 (s, a)
              h                    i              h                i
           ≤ (P  bh − Ph )(Vh+1 ) (s, a) + 2H (P    bh − Ph )Vh+1 (s, a)
               s
                       H 4ι
           ≲ c       b
                                 ,                                                                        (E.13)
                  Nh (s, a) ∨ 1
where the second last inequality is by ∥Vh+1 ∥∞ ≤ H and the last inequality follows from the
Azuma-Hoeffding inequality. By applying Eq.(E.13), we can obtain the bound for the term (I.b):
                                               s
                X        X           val         log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι h  b              i
       (I.b) =                    dπh (s, a) ·         b
                                                                      Vh − Vh Vh+1 (s, a)
                                                    Nh (s, a) ∨ 1
               h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
                                          v                       s
                                          u
            X      X
                            π val         u log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι              H 4ι
        ≤                  dh (s, a) ·    t                     ·
                                               Nhb (s, a) ∨ 1       b b (s, a) ∨ 1
                                                                    Nh
              h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A

                                  1/2
                                               X       X             val                Hι3/4
           = (log N (Θ; ϵ/H))              ·                       dπh (s, a) ·                     3/4
                                               h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A Nhb (s, a) ∨ 1
                                                              s
                             1/2
                                  X        X        val                1
           ≤ (log N (Θ; ϵ/H)) ·                  dπh (s, a) ·
                                                                Nhb (s, a) ∨ 1
                                 h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
             |                              {z                                }
                                                      (I.b.1)

                                 1/2
                                               X      X             val             H 2 ι3/2
          + (log N (Θ; ϵ/H))           ·                        dπh (s, a) ·                    ,         (E.14)
                                                                               Nhb (s, a) ∨ 1
                                           h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
             |                                        {z                                       }
                                                    (I.b.2)

where the last line is from AM-GM inequality. For the term (I.b.1), on the concentration event E, we
have
                                                                         s
                               1/2
                                      X        X
                                                        π val                         1
  (I.b.1) = (log N (Θ; ϵ/H)) ·                         dh (s, a) ·                b
                                                                             Nh (s, a) ∨ 1
                                     h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
                                                                     s
                                                                            val
                          1/2
                               X        X q val                          dπh (s, a)
    ≤ (log N (Θ; ϵ/H)) ·                           dπh (s, a) ·                 b

                              h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
                                                                         Kdπh (s, a)
                              r       v
                                                                  val
                                 1                          dπh (s, a)
                                      uX           X                            sX            X
                          1/2                                                                          val
                                                                                                    dπh (s, a)
                                      u
    ≤ (log N (Θ; ϵ/H)) ·             ·t                         π  b         ·
                                K                             d      (s, a)
                                         h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A h                          h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
      r
         C ⋆ HS log N (Θ; ϵ/H)
                                    s   X        X            val
    ≤                             ·                     dπh (s, a)
                      K
                                       h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
      r
            ⋆   2
         C H S log N (Θ; ϵ/H)
    =                              ,                                                                       (E.15)
                      K
where the second line is directly from concentration event E(ii), the third line follows from Cauchy-
Schwarz inequality and the second last line comes from the definition of C ⋆ -concentrability. For the


                                                              27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


term (I.b.2), on the concentration event E, we obtain

                                                   1/2
                                                              X          X           val                H 2 ι3/2
             (I.b.2) = (log N (Θ; ϵ/H))                  ·                         dπh (s, a) ·
                                                                                                     Nhb (s, a) ∨ 1
                                                             h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A

                                      1/2
                                                  X            X             val             H 2 ι5/2
              ≤ (log N (Θ; ϵ/H))            ·                             dπh (s, a) ·          b

                                                  h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
                                                                                            Kdπh (s, a)
                                                                                           val
                                      1/2     H 2 ι5/2 X                   X  dπh (s, a)
              ≤ (log N (Θ; ϵ/H))            ·                                    b
                                                K                             dπ (s, a)
                                                               h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A h

                   C ⋆ H 3 S log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι5/2
              =                                 ,                                                                     (E.16)
                                 K
where the second line comes from concentration event E(ii), the third line follows from the definition
of C ⋆ -concentrability.
Combining Eq.(E.15) and Eq.(E.16), the term (I.b) can be bounded as follows:
                         r
                           C ⋆ H 2 S log N (Θ; ϵ/H) C ⋆ H 3 S log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι5/2
                (I.b) ≲                            +                                 .         (E.17)
                                       K                            K
For the term (I.c), observe that
                                            (I.c) = (I.b.2)/(Hι3/2 ).
Hence, by Eq.(E.16), we deduce that
                                                    C ⋆ H 2 S log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
                                     (I.c) ≤                                                                          (E.18)
                                                                 K
For the term (I.d),
                                                                    s                             !
                 X         X          val                    1          log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
   (I.d) = ϵ ·                     dπh (s, a) ·                 +
                                                             H          H 2 · Nhb (s, a) ∨ 1
                 h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
                                                               s
                       X       X            val                   log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
         =ϵ+ϵ·                          dπh (s, a) ·
                                                                  H 2 · Nhb (s, a) ∨ 1
                      h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
                                                              s
                       X       X           val                    log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
         =ϵ+ϵ·                          dπh (s, a) ·                       b

                      h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
                                                                   H 2 Kdπh (s, a)
                   r                                                                       s
                                                                                                   val
                       log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι X                                                         dπh (s, a)
                                                              X          q
                                                                             val
         =ϵ+ϵ                         ·                                   dπh (s, a)                b
                            H 2K                                                                 dπh (s, a)
                                             h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
                   r                                                    v
                                                                                           val
                    log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι X                                                   dπh (s, a)
                                     s            X                     uX         X
                                                         π val (s, a) · t
                                                                        u
         ≤ϵ+ϵ                                           dh                                  b
                         H 2K                                                           dπ (s, a)
                                        h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A                  h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A h
                    r
                       C ⋆ S log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
         ≤ ϵ · (1 +                           ),                                               (E.19)
                                 K
where the second last line is by Cauchy-Schwarz inequality and the last line is by definition of
C ⋆ -concentrablity.
Combining Eq.(E.12), Eq.(E.17), Eq.(E.18) and Eq.(E.19), we deduce that
 (I) ≲ (I.a) + (I.b) + (I.c) + (I.d)
       r                                r
          C ⋆ H 4 S log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι        C ⋆ H 2 S log N (Θ; ϵ/H) C ⋆ H 3 S log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι5/2
     ≲                               +                             +
                       K                               K                          K
                                              r
         ⋆ 2                                        ⋆
       C H S log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι                     C S log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
     +                            + ϵ · (1 +                         )
                    K                                      K

                                                                28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



          r
              C ⋆ H 4 S log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι C ⋆ H 3 S log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι5/2
      ≲                                +                             + ϵ.
                           K                          K
Finally, plugging into Eq.(E.9), the final bound is given by
                                   r
    π val           C ⋆ H 2 Sηι       C ⋆ H 4 S log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι C ⋆ H 3 S log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι5/2
  DΘ (R , R) ≲
           ⋆ b
                                +                              +                             +ϵ
                        K                          K                          K


The right-hand-side is upper bounded by 2ϵ as long as
                      ⋆ 4                           ⋆ 2

            K≥O    e C H S log N (Θ; ϵ/H) + C H S(η + H log N (Θ; ϵ/H)) .
                                 ϵ2                     ϵ
Here poly log (H, S, A, 1/δ) are omitted.



E.3   P ROOF OF C OROLLARY 4.3

Proof of Corollary 4.3. In this section, we will consider the case that π val = π E .
Lemma E.3 (Concentration event ). Under the setting of Theorem 4.2, there exists an absolute
constant C1 , C2 such that the concentration event E holds with probability at least 1 − δ, where
       (
              h                 i
  E := (i): (Ph − P   bh )Vh+1 (s, a) ≤ bθ (s, a) ∀ θ = (V, A) ∈ Θ, (h, s, a) ∈ [H] × S × A,
                                                   h

                                                                                                   (E.20)
                        1            C1 ι
          (ii):                 ≤     b       , ∀(h, s, a) ∈ [H] × S × A,                          (E.21)
                  Nh (s, a) ∨ 1   Kdπh (s, a)
                                                                                                  )
                                                                       C 2 ι
          (iii): Nhe (s, a) ≥ 1   ∀(h, s, a) ∈ S × A s.t. d¯h (s, a) ≥                   E

                                                                             , a ∈ supp πh (·|s) , (E.22)
                                                                       K

where bh (s, a) is defined in Eq.(4.3), C ⋆ is specified in Definition 4.1, and Nhe (s) is given by
                                (P
                                      (sh ,ah ,eh )∈D 1 {(sh , eh ) = (s, a)} in option 1,
                  Nhe (s, a) :=
                                  Nhb (s, a)                                  in option 2,
                                ( b
                                 dπh (s) · π E (a|s) in option 1,
                  d¯h (s, a) :=     b                                                               (E.23)
                                 dπh (s, a)              in option 2.

Proof. Repeating the arguments in the proof of Lemma E.1, we prove that claim (i), (ii) holds with
probability at least 1 − 2δ   3 .
For claim (iii), in option 2, for any (h, s, a) ∈ [H] × S × A such that a ∈ supp πhE ·|s and
d¯h (s, a) ≥ CK2 ι , Nhe (s, a) ∼ Bin K, d¯h (s, a) . By direct computing, we obtain that


                                                "                1/K              1/K              #K
         e                        ¯
                                        K                  δ                δ             ¯
    P[Nh (s, a) = 0] = 1 − dh (s, a)         = 1−                    +                  − dh (s, a)
                                                        3HSA              3HSA
                                                                             K
                          δ  1/K
                                          δ
                                              1/K             
                       ≤         +1−             − d¯h (s, a)
                                                             
                         3HSA          3HSA                  
                                   |         {z              }
                                                              ≤0
                                       1/K·K
                                 δ                   δ
                       ≤                       =        ,
                               3HSA                3HSA


                                                       29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where the last inequality is valid since
                    1/K
              δ                          1   δ      C
                                                    e2       δ    C2 ι
    1−                    = 1 − exp(− log       )≤−    log      ≤      ≤ d¯h (s, a),
           3HSA                          K 3HSA     K      3HSA   K

where C
      e2 and C2 are absolute constants. Hence, it holds that

                                                    Nhe (s, a) ≥ 1,
with probability at least 1 − δ/(3HSA). Taking the union bound over all (h, s, a) ∈ [H] × S × A
yields that
                                              Nhe (s, a) ≥ 1
holds with probability at least 1−δ/3 for all (h, s, a) ∈ S×A s.t. d¯h (s, a) ≥ CK2 ι , a ∈ supp πhE (·|s) ,


which implies that claim (iii) holds. In option 2, it is crucial to observe that: that P[Nhe (s, a)] =
        b
(1 − dπh (s, a))K = (1 − d¯h (s, a))K . By repeating similar arguments utilized in the proof of the case
of option 2, we can prove the claim (iii) holds. Further, we can conclude that the concentration event
E holds with probability at least 1 − δ.

Recall that rθ = R ⋆ (V, A) and rbθ = R(V,b A) for any θ = (V, A) ∈ Θ. When π val = π E , repeating
the arguments in Lemma E.2, we have following decomposition:

   val                 X        X           E                        C2 ι
dπ rθ , rbθ ≤ 2H ·                       dπh (s, a) · 1 d¯h (s, a) <      , a ∈ supp πhE (·|s)

                                                                     K
                      h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
                X        X           val
              +                  2dπh (s, a)bθh (s, a)
                  h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
                                                 E
                                              dπh (s, a) ¯

                        X       X
                                                                          ¯          C2 ι             E

              ≤ 2H ·                                     · dh (s, a) · 1 dh (s, a) <      , a ∈ supp πh (·|s)
                                              d¯h (s, a)                             K
                        h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
                  X         X           val
              +                     2dπh (s, a)bθh (s, a)
                  h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
                                                E
                  Hι X           X            dπh (s, a)   X          X               val
              ≲     ·                          ¯         +                       dπh (s, a)bθh (s, a)
                  K                           dh (s, a)
                        h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A                     h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
                    ⋆   2
                  C H SAι        X             X          val
              ≤           +                             dπh (s, a)bθh (s, a).
                     K
                                 h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A

where the second last line is valid since
                                          E                                      E
                    X        X        dπh (s, a)   X                X  dπh (s) · πhE (s, a)
                                                 =
                                      d¯h (s, a)                          b
                                                                       dπ (s) · πhE (s, a)
                    h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A                     h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A h

                                                                X X dπE (s)
                                                                         h
                                                     =A·                     b
                                                                   dπ (s)
                                                         h∈[H] s∈S h
                                                                          πE
                                                                   P
                                                                     a∈A dh (s, a)
                                                          X X
                                                     =A·           P      πb
                                                         h∈[H] s∈S   a∈A dh (s, a)
                                                                                            E
                                                                X       X       dπh (s, a)
                                                     ≤A·                            bmax
                                                                            a∈A dπ (s, a)
                                                            h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A       h
                                                                                       E
                                                                X       X  dπh (s, a)
                                                     ≤A·                      b
                                                                           dπ (s, a)
                                                            h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A h

                                                     ≤ C ⋆ HSA.


                                                          30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                             val
                                       π
Similar as Eq.(E.9), we can decompose DΘ (R ⋆ , R)
                                                b as follows:
                                             ⋆ 2
                              πE        b ≲ C H Sηι + sup              val
                                                              X
                             DΘ  (R ⋆ , R)                          dπh (s, a)bθh (s, a)                             (E.24)
                                              K       θ∈Θ
                                                          (s,a)∈S×A
                                                      |             {z                 }
                                                                                       (I)

We can decompose terms (I) into four terms (I.a), (I.b), (I.c), and (I.d) as in Eq.(E.11). Since we don’t
use claim (iii) in the proof of bounding (I.b), (I.c), and (I.d), Eq.(E.17), Eq.(E.18) and Eq.(E.19) still
holds on the concentration event E defined in Lemma E.1. In the following, we give an improved
bound of the term (I.a):
                                       s
         X         X
                            πE            log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
(I.a) =                   dh (s, a) ·                         [Vh Vh+1 ](s, a)
                                            Nhb (s, a) ∨ 1
        h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
                                       s
         X         X
                            πE            log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
      ≤                   dh (s, a) ·                         [Vh Vh+1 ](s, a)
                                             Kdπb (s, a)
        h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
        r                                                                             s
                                                                                            E
            log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι X              X q E                                         dπh (s, a)
      =                        ·                     dπh (s, a) · [Vh Vh+1 ](s, a) ·        b
                    K
                                 h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
                                                                                         dπh (s, a)
        r                                                                             v
                                                                                                            E
            log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι                                                                              dπh (s, a)
                                 sX          X                                        uX           X
                                                       π E                            u
      ≤                        ·                     dh (s, a) · [Vh Vh+1 ](s, a) · t                       b
                    K
                                   h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
                                                                                                         dπ (s, a)
                                                                                         h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A h
     r
        C ⋆ HS log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
                                      sX          X           E
                                    ·                      dπh (s, a) · [Vh Vh+1 ](s, a)               (E.25)
                     K
                                                      h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A

                                                 E
We then give a sharp bound of h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A dπh (s, a) · [Vh Vh+1 ] (s, a).
                                P         P

 X       X         E
                dπh (s, a) · [Vh Vh+1 ] (s, a)
h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
        H
        X
=             EπE [VarπE [Vh+1 (sh+1 )|sh , ah ]]
        h=1
    H            h h                                                                                           ii
(i) X                                                                                                  2
                                                        / supp π E (·|sh ) + rhθ (sh , ah ) − Vh (sh ) sh , ah

=             EπE E Vh+1 (sh+1 ) + Ah (sh , ah ) · 1 ah ∈
        h=1
    H             h
    X                                                                                                    2 i
                                                          / supp π E (·|sh ) + rhθ (sh , ah ) − Vh (sh )

=         EπE         Vh+1 (sh+1 ) + Ah (sh , ah ) · 1 ah ∈
    h=1
     H              h
(ii) X                                                               2 i
=             EπE       Vh+1 (sh+1 ) + rhθ (sh , ah ) − Vh (sh )
        h=1
              
                    H
                                                                            !2 
                    X
                           Vh+1 (sh+1 ) + rhθ (sh , ah ) − Vh (sh )

= EπE                                                                        
                    h=1
              X
                                    Vh+1 (sh+1 ) + rhθ (sh , ah ) − Vh (sh ) · Vh′ +1 (sh′ +1 ) + rθ (s′h , a′h ) − Vh (s′h )

+2                        EπE
        1≤h<h′ ≤H
              
                      H
                                                                            !2 
(iii)                 X
                            Vh+1 (sh+1 ) + rhθ (sh , ah ) − Vh (sh )

 = EπE                                                                        
                    h=1
              
                    H                        H
                                                                               !2 
                    X                        X
= EπE                    rhθ (sh , ah ) +         (Vh+1 (sh+1 ) − Vh (sh ))       
                    h=1                      h=1



                                                                   31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



        
            H
                                              !2 
            X
= EπE            rhθ (sh , ah ) − V1 (s1 )        
            h=1
             H
                                    !
(iv)         X
= VarπE            rhθ (sh , ah )       ≤ H 2 .,                                                        (E.26)
             h=1

where (i) is by definition of reward mapping Ph Vh+1 (s, a) = −Ah (s, a) · 1 a ∈ supp πhE (·|s) −
rhθ (s, a) + Vh (s), (ii) comes from
                                     1 ah ∈ supp πhE (·|sh ) = 0

                              E
for any (sh , ah ) ∈ supp dπh (·) , (iii) is valid since

  Vh+1 (sh+1 ) + rhθ (sh , ah ) − Vh (sh ) EdπE [Vh′ +1 (sh′ +1 ) − Vh′ (sh′ ) + rhθ ′ (sh′ , ah′ )|Fh+1 ] = 0,


and (iv) is by Θ ∈ Θ. Plugging Eq.(E.26) into Eq.(E.25), we deduce that
                                      r
                                         C ⋆ H 3 S log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
                              (I.a) ≤                              .                                    (E.27)
                                                      K
Combining Eq.(E.27), Eq.(E.17), Eq.(E.18) and Eq.(E.19), we have


 (I) ≲ (I.a) + (I.b) + (I.c) + (I.d)
       r                                r
          C ⋆ H 3 S log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι        C ⋆ H 2 S log N (Θ; ϵ/H) C ⋆ H 3 S log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι5/2
     ≲                               +                             +
                       K                               K                          K
                                               r
         ⋆ 2                                        ⋆
       C H S log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι                      C S log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
     +                            + ϵ · (1 + ϵ                        )
                    K                                       K
       r
          C ⋆ H 3 S log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι C ⋆ H 3 S log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι5/2
     ≲                               +                              + ϵ.
                       K                               K
Pligging into Eq.(E.24), the final bound is given by
                                   r
    π val          C ⋆ H 2 SAι       C ⋆ H 3 S log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι C ⋆ H 3 S log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι5/2
 DΘ (R , R) ≲
          ⋆ b
                                +                             +                             +ϵ
                        K                         K                          K

The right-hand-side is upper bounded by 2ϵ as long as
                      ⋆ 3
                       C H S log N (Θ; ϵ/H) C ⋆ H 2 S(A + H log N (Θ; ϵ/H))

            K≥O   e                            +                              .
                                 ϵ2                        ϵ
Here poly log (H, S, A, 1/δ) are omitted.



E.4    F RAMEWORK FOR OFFLINE INVERSE REINFORCEMENT LEARNING

Pessimism As shown in Eq.(E.28), that estimator reward mapping involves a penalty term bθh (s, a).
                                             θ
The reason for introducing
                    h                     h bh (s, a)iis to ensure that our reward satisfies the mono-
                           theipenalty term
tonicity condition: R(V,
                      b A) (s, a) ≤ R(V,    b A) (s, a), which is crucial for the guarantee of
                                         h                  h
the performance of RL algorithms with learned rewards, as demonstrated in Proposition C.6 and
Corollary I.6.
                                                                         h                i
Condition E.4 . With probability at least 1 − δ, we have sup(V,A)∈Θ (Ph − P       bh )Vh+1 (s, a) ≤

bθh (s, a) and supp π
                    bhE (·|s) ⊂ supp πhE (·|s) for all (h, s) ∈ [H] × S and all (V, A) ∈ Θ.


                                                       32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 5 F RAMEWORK FOR OFFLINE INVERSE REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
1: Input: Dataset D collected by executing π b in M.
                                                                                 bE = π
                                                                                        E
                                   b : [H] × S × A → ∆S and expert policy π
2: Recover the transition dynamics P                                                    bh : S × ∆(S) and
   design the bonus b : [H] × S × A × Θ → R≥0 .
3: Compute Rb by
                                         n                        o
       [R(V,
        b A)]h (s, a) = −Ah (s, a) · 1 a ∈    / supp π bhE (·|s)                bh Vh+1 ](s, a) − bθh (s, a)
                                                                    + Vh (s) − [P
                                                                                                            (E.28)
4: Output: Estimated reward mapping R.
                                    b


Theorem E.5 (Learningh bound fori Algorithm 5). Suppose that Condition E.4 holds. With probability
at least 1 − δ, we have R(V,
                        b A) (s, a) ≤ [R ⋆ (V, A)] (s, a) for all (h, s, a) ∈ [H] × S × A, and
                                                        h
                                 h
                         (
        val
                                X
    Dπ R ⋆ , Rb ≤ sup H ·                             a ∈ supp π E (·|s) , a ∈      bE (·|s)

     Θ                               E       π val 1(s,a)∼dh
                                                                             / supp π  h           h
                       θ∈Θ
                                           h∈[H]
                                                                          )
                                            X                    θ
                                   +2              E(s,a)∼dπval bh (s, a) .                                 (E.29)
                                                            h
                                           h∈[H]

                               h                 i
Proof. When sup(V,A)∈Θ                   bh )Vh+1 (s, a) ≤ bθ (s, a) and supp π
                                   (Ph − P                                    bhE (·|s) ⊂ supp πhE (·|s)
                                                            h
holds for all (h, s) ∈ [H] × S and all (V, A) ∈ Θ hold, we have
h         i
  R(V,
  b h) (s, a) − [R ⋆ (V, h)] (s, a)
                                h
            h

                               bhE (·|s) − 1 a ∈  / supp πhE (·|s)          bh − Ph Vh+1 ](s, a) − bθ (s, a)

 = −Ah (s, a) · 1 a ∈   / supp π                                       −[ P                          h

 = −Ah (s, a) · 1 a ∈ supp πhE (·|s) , a ∈         bhE (·|s) −[ P  bh − Ph Vh+1 ](s, a) − bθ (s, a) ≤ 0,

                                           / supp π                                        h
   |                           {z                             }|               {z                 }
                                    ≤0                                                     ≤0
                                                                                                            (E.30)

where     theh     second    line
                                i    is by   supp               ⊂    bhE (·|s)
                                                                     π   supp            and    πhE (·|s)
                                           θ
sup(V,A)∈Θ       (Ph − P
                       bh )Vh+1 (s, a) ≤ b (s, a). Further, by triangle inequality, we obtain
                                           h
that
  h       i
    R(V,
     b h) (s, a) − [R ⋆ (V, h)] (s, a)
                                           h
            h

 ≤ Ah (s, a) · 1 a ∈ supp πhE (·|s) , a ∈          bhE (·|s) + [ P  bh − Ph Vh+1 ](s, a) + bθ (s, a)

                                          / supp π                                          h
                         E                   E                θ

 ≤ H · 1 a ∈ supp πh (·|s) , a ∈    / supp πbh (·|s) + 2bh (s, a),                            (E.31)

where the last line is due to Ah (s, a) ≤ H and [ P  bh − Ph Vh+1 ](s, a) ≤ bθ (s, a). Similar to the
                                                                              h
proof of Lemma E.2, we have
       val
                                      X                hh         i                           i
    dπ R(V,   b A), R ⋆ (V, A) ≤          E(s,a)∼dπval R(V, b h) (s, a) − [R ⋆ (V, h)] (s, a) .
                                                                                       h
                                                                h                  h
                                               h∈[H]
                                                                                                            (E.32)
Combining Eq.(E.31) and Eq.(E.32), we obtain that
  val
                                 X
dπ R(V, b A), R ⋆ (V, A) ≤ H ·        E(s,a)∼dπval 1 a ∈ supp πhE (·|s) , a ∈      bhE (·|s)

                                                                            / supp π
                                                                h
                                                h∈[H]
                                            X
                                                   E(s,a)∼dπval bθh (s, a) .

                               +2                                                                           (E.33)
                                                            h
                                           h∈[H]
                         val         val
                                                                   val

                      π
By the definition of DΘ    π
                        : DΘ                   R ⋆ , Rb = supθ∈Θ dπ R(V, b A), R ⋆ (V, A) , we complete the
proof.


                                                                33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


By Theorem E.5, all we need to do is design bθh and learn P,
                                                          b πbE from the data to satisfy Condition E.4,
thereby obtaining an IRL algorithm. The crux of the problem lies in the design of bθh , P b and πbE . In
                                                                                        θ       E
RLP, we employ the pessimism technique from offline RL, and the construction of bh and π      b using
pessimism in RLP satisfies Condition E.4, as illustrated in the proof of Theorem 4.2.


F     P ROOFS FOR S ECTION 5

F.1    F ULL DESCRIPTION OF R EWARD L EARNING WITH E XPLORATION

We propose a meta-algorithm, named R EWARD L EARNING WITH E XPLORATION(RLE). The pseu-
docode of RLE is presented in Algorithm 6, where the algorithm contains the following three main
component

        • (Exploring the unknown environment:) This segment involves computing a desired behavior
          policy π b = Eπ∼µb [π], which takes the form of a finite mixture of deterministic policies. To
          achieve this, we need to collect N H episodes of samples. We then execute this policy to
          gather a total of K episodes worth of samples. Our exploration approach is based on lever-
          aging the exploration scheme outlined in (Li et al., 2023, Algorithm 1). A comprehensive
          description of this exploration method is postponed and will be provided in Section B. (cf.
          line 2-3).
        • (Subsampling:) For the sake of theoretical simplicity, we apply subsampling.
                                                                                     n           For eacho
                                                                                         b
          (h, s, a) ∈ [H] × S × A, we populate the new dataset with min Nh (s, a), Nh (s, a)
                                                                                       b
          sample transitions. Here, Nb b (s, a), as defined in Eq.(F.1), acts as a lower bound on the total
                                      h
          number of visits to (h, s, a) among these K sample episodes, with high probability. (cf.
          line 4).
        • (Computing estimated reward mapping:) With the previously collected dataset at hand, we
          then utilize the offline IRL algorithm RLP to compute the desired reward mapping.


Algorithm 6 R EWARD L EARNING WITH E XPLORATION
 1: Input: threshold ξ = cξ H 3 S 3 A3 ι, confidence level δ.
 2: Call Algorithm 2 to compute the explore policy π b .
                                              K,H
 3: Collect a dataset D = {(sτh , aτh , eτh )}τ =1,h=1 by executing π b in M.
                                                   trim                                        trim
 4: Subsampling:nsubsample D to obtain     o D , such that for each (h, s, a) ∈ [H] × S × A, D
                      b
                    b (s, a), Nh (s, a) sample transitions randomly drawn from D, where N  b
    contains min N          h
                                                                                          b (s, a)
                                                                                                   h
      and Nh (s, a) are defined by
                     K
                                                      bhb (s, a) := K , E [dbπh (s, a)] − Kξ − 3 log HSA ,
                     X
      Nh (s, a) :=          1 {(sτh , aτh = (s, a)}   N
                     τ =1
                                                                     4 π∼µb               8N           δ    +
                                                                                                      (F.1)

    where dbπh (s, a) is specified in Algorithm 2.
 5: Call Algorithm 1 to compute the recovered reward mapping R.
                                                             b
 6: Output: estimated reward mapping R.      b



We remark that our algorithm RLE follows a similar approach to that of Li et al. (2023, Algorithm 1).
We begin by computing a desired behavior policy, then proceed to collect data, and finally compute
results through the invocation of an offline algorithm. In contrast to the offline setting, we have the
flexibility to select the desired behavior. In the following, we will observe that the behavior policy π b
exhibits concentrability with any deterministic policy, as shown in Eq.(B.3). This property enables us
to achieve our learning goal within the online setting.


                                                         34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.2     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5.1

Lemma F.1 (Li et al. (2023)). Recall that ξ = cξ H 3 S 3 A3 log HSA
                                                                  δ  for some large enough constant
cξ > 0 (see line 1 in Algorithm 2). Then, with probability at least 1 − δ, the estimated occupancy
distributions specified in Eq.(B.1) and (B.2) of Algorithm 2 satisfy
                       1 bπ         ξ                                              ξ
                        d (s, a) −    ≤ dπh (s, a) ≤ 2dbπh (s, a) + 2eπh (s, a) +                      (F.2)
                       2 h         4N                                             4N
simultaneously for all (h, s, a) ∈ [H] × S × A and all deterministic Markov policy π ∈ Πdet ,
provided that
                                √             HSA
              KH ≥ N ≥ CN H 9 S 7 A7 K log                 and     K ≥ CK HSA          (F.3)
                                                 δ
for some large enough constants CN , CK > 0, where, {eπh (s, a) ∈ R+ } satisfies that
                                                    r
              X
                      π           2SA 13SAHξ             SA
                     eh (s, a) ≤      +           ≲               ∀h ∈ [H], π ∈ Πdet   (F.4)
                                   K       N            HK
             (s,a)∈S×A


Notice that Eq.(F.2) only holds for π ∈ Πdet , however, we will show similar results also hold for any
stochastic policy.
For any stochastic policy π = Eπ′ ∼µ [π ′ ], dπ can be expressed as
                                      h ′         i
                   dπh (s, a) = Eπ′ ∼µ dbπh (s, a) ,     ∀(h, s, a) ∈ [H] × S × A,

where µ ∈ ∆(Πdet ). Hence, we can define dbπ as
                                    h ′         i
                dbπh (s, a) = Eπ′ ∼µ dbπh (s, a) ,              ∀(h, s, a) ∈ [H] × S × A.

our definition of We remark that although µ is not unique,our definition of dbπ necessitates the
selection of a specific µ ∈ ∆(Πdet ).
By Eq.(F.2), we have
      1 bπ           ξ                      h ′        i                          h ′       i    ξ
        dh (s, a) −    ≤ dπh (s, a) = Eπ′ ∼µ dπh (s, a) ≤ 2dbπh (s, a) + 2Eπ′ ∼µ eπh (s, a) +
      2             4N                                                                          4N
      1 bπ           ξ                      h ′        i                          h ′       i    ξ
        dh (s, a) −    ≤ dπh (s, a) = Eπ′ ∼µ dπh (s, a) ≤ 2dbπh (s, a) + 2Eπ′ ∼µ eπh (s, a) +       .
      2             4N                                                                       h ′4N    i
                                                                          π                   π
                                                                        (eh (s, a) := Eπ′ ∼µ eh (s, a) )

We also have
                                                                                            r
          X                            X               h   ′
                                                                  i     2SA 13SAHξ              SA
                      eπh (s, a) =               Eπ′ ∼µ eπh (s, a)    ≤    +       ≲               ,
                                                                         K     N                HK
          (s,a)∈S×A                  (s,a)∈S×A

provided Eq.(F.3).
Lemma F.2 (Concentration event). Suppose Eq.(F.3). Under the setting of Theorem 5.1, there exists
an absolute constants C1 , C2 ≥ 2 such that the concentration event E holds with probability at least
1 − δ, where
     (
            h                i
E := (i): (Ph − P   bh )Vh+1 (s, a) ≤ bθ (s, a) ∀ θ = (V, A) ∈ Θ, (h, s, a) ∈ [H] × S × A,
                                         h

               1              ξ                                                ξ
         (ii): dbπh (s, a) −      ≤ dπh (s, a) ≤ 2dbπh (s, a) + 2eπh (s, a) +      ∀(h, s, a) ∈ [H] × S × A, π ∈ Π,
               2             4N                                               4N
               bhb (s, a) ≤ Nhb (s, a) ∀(h, s, a) ∈ [H] × S × A,
        (iii): N
                                                                                    )
        (iv): Nbhe (s, a) ≥ 1 ∀(s, a) ∈ S × A s.t. N    bhb (s, a) ≥ max {C2 ηι, 1}



                                                           35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where bθh (s, a) is defined in Eq.(4.3), Nhb (s, a) N  b b (s, a) is defined in Eq.(F.1), η are specified in
                                                        h
                     e
Lemma E.1 and Nh (s, a) is given by
                   b
                              (P
                    e                            trim 1 {(sh , eh ) = (s, a)}   in option 1,
                 Nh (s, a) := b b(sh ,ah ,eh )∈D
                  b
                                Nh (s, a)                                       in option 2,

Proof. First, we observe that Claim (i) can be obtained by repeating a similar argument as in
Lemma E.1 and Claim (ii) can also be directly derived from Lemma F.1. And claim (iii) has been
shown in the proof of (Li et al., 2023, Theorem 2).
Next, we focus on (iv). For claim (iv), in option 1, we have
                                                 bb
           P Nb e (s, a) = 0 = 1 − π E (a|s) Nh (s,a) ≤ exp N  b b (s, a) log (1 − η)
               h                         h                      h

                                                                        δ            δ
                                                        ≤ exp log              =       ,
                                                                    4HSA          4HSA
for all (h, s, a) ∈ [H] × S × A. The last line is valid since

                  bhb (s, a) log (1 − η) ≤ C2 log        δ    log (1 − η)         δ
                  N                                         ·             ≤ log      ,
                                                        HSA        η            4HSA
holds for sufficiently large constant C2 . In option 2, we have
                                bhe (s, a) = N
                                N            bhb (s, a) ≥ max {C2 ηι, 1} ≥ 1,

for all (h, s, a) ∈ [H] × S × A. This completes the proof.



F.3    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5.1

Define

                                                     h ′         i  ξ   4(C2 η + 3)ι
                Ih =         (s, a) ∈ S × A | Eπ′ ∼µb dbπh (s, a) ≥   +                ,                            (F.5)
                                                                    N        K
for all h ∈ [H]. Then for (s, a) ∈ Ih , we have

                       bhb (s, a) ≥ K Eπ′ ∼µ dbπh′ (s, a) − Kξ − 3ι ≥ C2 ηι.
                                               h         i
                      N                      b
                                                                                                                    (F.6)
                                    4                       8N
By concentration event E (iv), we have
                                                  bhe (s, a) ≥ 1,
                                                  N
                   bE in Algorithm 1, we deduce that
By construction of π
                     1 a ∈ supp πhE (·|s) − 1 a ∈ supp π
                                                       bhE (·|s)

                                                                                           = 0.                     (F.7)
for all (s, a) ∈ Ih .
With Ih at hand, we can decompose the dπ rθ , rbθ for any π and θ ∈ Θ as follows:
                      X
  dπ rhθ , rbhθ ≤             dπh (s, a) · rhθ (s, a) − rbhθ (s, a)


                 (h,s,a)∈[H]×S×A
      X       X                                                  X       X
  ≤                    dπh (s, a) · rhθ (s, a) − rbhθ (s, a) +                    dπh (s, a) · rθ (s, a) − rbhθ (s, a) ,
      h∈[H] (s,a)∈I
                 / h                                             h∈[H] (s,a)∈Ih
      |                        {z                        }       |                        {z                         }
                               (I)                                                        (II)
                                                                                                                    (F.8)
where the first line follows the same argument in the proof of Lemma E.2. We then study the terms
(I) and (II) separately. For the term (I), by the construction of Algorithm 1, we obtain that


                                                         36
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            X       X
(I) =                         dπh (s, a) · rθ (s, a) − rbθ (s, a)
            h∈[H] (s,a)∈I
                       / h
        X        X                                                                                  h            i
                         dπh (s, a) · | − Ah (s, a) 1 a ∈ supp πhE (·|s) − 1 a ∈ supp π
                                                                                      bhE (·|s)           bh Vh+1 (s, a) − bθ (

=                                                                                                  − Ph − P                 h
       h∈[H] (s,a)∈I
                  / h
        X        X
                         dπh (s, a) · Ah (s, a) · 1 a ∈ supp π
                                                             bhE (·|s) − ·1 a ∈ supp πhE (·|s)

≤
       h∈[H] (s,a)∈I
                  / h
       h                 i
+                bh )Vh+1 (s, a) + bθ (s, a)
           (Ph − P                                                                                      (by triangle inequality)
                                    h
(i)           X      X
≲H·                            dπh (s, a)
             h∈[H] (s,a)∈I
                        / h
(ii)

              X      X
                                 π                 π            ξ
 ≲H·                          2dh (s, a) + 2eh (s, a) +
                                b
                                                               4N
          h∈[H] (s,a)∈I
                      / h
                                                           r
 (iii)      X X                              ξH 2 SA          HSA
  ≲ H·                     dbπh (s, a) +               +
                                                 N              K
           h∈[H] (s,a)∈I
                       / h
                                                                                                            r
                                       dbπh (s, a)                                                ξH 2 SA

            X X                                                             h ′
                                                                                π
                                                                                         i  1                  HSA
 =H·                                 h              i          · Eπ′ ∼µb dh (s, a) +
                                                                              b                 +         +
                                       bπ  ′              1                                KH         N           K
                     / h Eπ ′ ∼µb dh (s, a) + KH
          h∈[H] (s,a)∈I
                                                                                                          r
                                                                             dbπh (s, a)        ξH 2 SA
 (iv)
                                               X X
         ξH     4H(C2 η + 3)ι             1                                                                 HSA
 ≲           +                       +                                     h             i    +         +
          N             K                K                                   bπ  ′         1      N           K
                                                             / h Eπ ′ ∼µb dh (s, a) + KH
                                                 h∈[H] (s,a)∈I
                                                                           r
                                                            ξH 2 SA

         Hξ    4H(C2 η + 3)ι             1                                     HSA
 ≲          +                       +           · HSA +                 +
         N              K               K                       N                  K
                                                  r
          2           2
       ξH SA H SAηι HSA                              HSA
 ≍             +                 +            +             ,                                               (F.9)
         N              K             K               K
where (i) is by ∥Ah ∥∞ , ∥Vh+1 ∥∞ , bθh (s, a) ≤ H, (ii) comes from concentration E(ii), (iii) comes
from Eq.(F.2), and (iv) is by definition of Ih . For the term (I), conditioning on the concentration
event E, we have
                       X X
             (II) =                       dπh (s, a) · rhθ (s, a) − rbhθ (s, a)
                         h∈[H] (s,a)∈Ih
                          X         X                       h                 i
                     ≤                      dπh (s, a) ·              bh )Vh+1 (s, a) − bθ (s, a)
                                                                (Ph − P                  h
                         h∈[H] (s,a)∈Ih
                              X       X
                     ≤2                        dπh (s, a) · bθh (s, a)
                          h∈[H] (s,a)∈Ih

                          X         X                                            ξ
                     ≤                          4dbπh (s, a) + 4eπh (s, a) +             · bθh (s, a)
                                                                                2N
                         h∈[H] (s,a)∈Ih

                          X         X                                         X          X          ξ
                     ≲                      dbπh (s, a) · bθh (s, a) + H ·                            + eπh (s, a)
                                                                                                    N
                         h∈[H] (s,a)∈Ih                                      h∈[H] (s,a)∈Ih
                                           r
                               2
                         ξH SA                 HSA         X         X
                     ≲         +                   +                        dbπh (s, a) · bθh (s, a),                    (F.10)
                           N                    K
                                                           h∈[H] (s,a)∈Ih


where the second line is by construction of Algorithm 1, the second last line is by bθh (s, a) ≲ H, the
last follows from (F.2). Further, we decompose the second term of Eq.(F.10) for any θ ∈ Θ by
     X X
                 dbπ (s, a) · bθ (s, a)
                          h            h
       h∈[H] (s,a)∈Ih


                                                                    37
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                            (s
           X    X                                log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι h b     i         H log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
   =                    dbπh (s, a) · min                         Vh Vh+1 (s, a) +
                                                      b
                                                   Nh (s, a) ∨ 1
                                                    b                                 b b (s, a) ∨ 1
                                                                                      N
       h∈[H] (s,a)∈Ih                                                                  h
                 s                          !     )
     ϵ                 log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
   +   1+                                     ,H
     H                   b b (s, a) ∨ 1
                         N  h
                                        (      (s                                             )
   (i) X          X
                            π                        log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι h b           i
   ≤                     dh (s, a) · min
                          b                                                 Vh Vh+1 (s, a), H
                                                       Nb b (s, a) ∨ 1
         h∈[H] (s,a)∈Ih                                   h
                                               s                         !)
         H log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι             ϵ           log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
   +                               +       1+
            Nb b (s, a) ∨ 1
              h
                                      H               b b (s, a) ∨ 1
                                                      N h
                                          v                       h           i
                                        (u
                                          u log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι V       b h Vh+1 (s, a) + H
   (ii) X          X                                                                        H log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
   ≤                      dbπh (s, a) ·                                                  +
                                          t
                                                           b
                                                       Nh (s, a) ∨ 1 + 1/H
                                                        b                                      Nb b (s, a) ∨ 1
         h∈[H] (s,a)∈Ih                                                                          h
                   s                        !)
          ϵ            log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
   +          1+
         H               b b (s, a) ∨ 1
                         N  h
                                         v                      h           i
                                         u
                                         u log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι V      b h Vh+1 (s, a) + H
   (iii)   X       X
    =                      dbπh (s, a) · t
                                         u
                                                             h            i
                                                                  ′
          h∈[H] (s,a)∈Ih                        KEπ′ ∼µb dbπh (s, a) + 1/H
          |                                     {z                                    }
                                             (II.a)
       X       X                      H log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
   +                dbπh (s, a) ·         h
                                               ′
                                                      i
     h∈[H] (s,a)∈Ih               KEπ′ ∼µb dbπh (s, a) + 1/H
     |                             {z                       }
                                   (II.b)
                                                                                
                                              v
     ϵ X           X
                              π
                                              u       log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
   +                        dbh (s, a) · 1 + t                                                           (F.11)
                                             u           h        i      
     H                                                         ′
                                                                          
                                                             π
                                                 KEπ′ ∼µb dh (s, a) + 1/H
                                                            b
           h∈[H] (s,a)∈Ih
       |                                      {z                          }
                                             (II.c)

    n the (i)ois by inequality min {a + b, c} ≤ min {a, c}+b (a, b, c ≥ 0), (ii) comes from inequality
where
min xy , wz ≤ y+w x+z
                       and (iii) is valid since

     bhb (s, a) = K , E [dbπh (s, a)] − Kξ − 3 log HSA
                                                                             h ′        i
    N                                                          ≳ KEπ′ ∼µb dbπh (s, a) + 1/H
                      4 π∼µb                 8N          δ  +
holds for all (s, a) ∈ Ih according to definition of I. We then study the three terms separately. For
the term (II.a), by the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, we have
                                                                                         1/2
                   X           X                                                         
         (II.a) ≤                     dbπh (s, a) · [log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι[Vh Vh+1 ] (s, a) + H]
                                                                                         
                      h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
                   |                                       {z                                }
                                                                  (II.a.1)
                                                                  1/2
                                                 π
                     X            X           d (s, a)
                                                b                  
                  ×                            hh           i           .
                                     KE ′   b  d π ′ (s, a) + 1/H 
                                        π ∼µ
                      h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
                                                b
                                                  h
                    |                      {z                         }
                                                      (II.a.2)

Observe that ∥Vh+1 ∥∞ ≤ H, then the term (II.a.1) can be upper bounded by
            sX        X
 (II.a.1) =                 dbπh (s, a) · [log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι[Vh Vh+1 ] (s, a) + H]
                 h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A



                                                             38
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



             v                            sX
             u                                                      X                      p
           ≤ t[H 2 log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι + H] ·                                  dbπh (s, a) ≍       H 3 log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι.
             u
                                                     h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A

                                                                                                              (F.12)
For the term (II.a.2), we have
                              v
                                                                dbπ (s, a)
                              uX             X
                                                                hh
                              u
                   (II.a.2) = t                                               i
                                                                  bπ′
                                 h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A KEπ ′ ∼µb dh (s, a) + 1/H
                              v
                              u1 X                                      dbπ (s, a)
                              u                   X
                           =t ·                                    h h           i
                                 K                                   bπ′
                                     h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A Eπ ′ ∼µb dh (s, a) + 1/KH
                              r
                                 HSA
                           ≲            ,                                                 (F.13)
                                   K
which the last line comes from Eq.(B.3). Combining Eq.(F.12) and (F.13), we conclude that
                                                      r
                                                         H 4 SA
                                          (II.a) ≲               .                        (F.14)
                                                           K
For the term (II.b), by Eq.(B.3), we have
                          X        X                         H log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
                (II.b) =                   dbπh (s, a) ·            h            i
                                                         KE   ′   b   dπ ′ (s, a) + 1/H
                                                            π ∼µ
                         h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
                                                                      b
                                                                       h

                            1 X            X                             H log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
                        =     ·                     dbπh (s, a) ·          h           i
                            K                                                   ′
                                                                    Eπ′ ∼µb dbπh (s, a) + 1/KH
                                  h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
                              2
                         H SA log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
                        ≲                      .                                                              (F.15)
                                  K
For the term (II.c), we have
                                                                      
                                               v
                ϵ X X bπ                       u     log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
      (II.c) =                dh (s, a) · 1 + t
                                              u         h        i    
               H                                              ′
                                                                       
                                                            π
                                                 KE ′ b d (s, a) + 1/H
                                                                    π ∼µ
                   h∈[H] (s,a)∈Ih
                                                           b
                                                                           h
                                                      v
                                                      u bπ
                   ϵ X X                              u d (s, a) log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
                                     q
           =ϵ+                          dbπh (s, a) · t h          h               i
                  H                                     KE   ′   b  d π ′ (s, a) + 1/H
                                                           π ∼µ
                      h∈[H] (s,a)∈Ih
                                                                     b
                                                                      h
                                                     v
                   ϵ                                                       dbπh (s, a) log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
                     sX X                            uX X
           ≤ϵ+                         dbπh (s, a) · t
                                                     u
                                                                                       h            i
                  H                                                      KE      ′   b  d π ′ (s, a) + 1/H
                                                                               π ∼µ
                        h∈[H] (s,a)∈Ih                 h∈[H] (s,a)∈Ih
                                                                                         b
                                                                                          h
                     r
                        SA log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
           ≤ ϵ(1 +                               ),                                                       (F.16)
                                  K
where the second last line is by the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality and the last line is due to Eq.(F.13).
Then combining Eq.(F.10), Eq.(F.14), Eq.(F.15), and Eq.(F.16), we obtain the bound for the term (II)
 (II) ≲ (II.a) + (II.b) + (II.c)
        r                                                                 r
            H 4 SA log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι H 2 SA log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι                   SA log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
      ≲                               +                          + ϵ(1 +                          )
                           K                         K                                 K
        r
            H 4 SA log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
      ≲                               + ϵ,                                                     (F.17)
                           K
where the last line is from ϵ < 1. Finally, combining Eq.(F.9) and (F.14), we get the final bound

                all
                      R ⋆ , Rb = sup dπ rhθ , rbhθ ≤ I + II

             DΘ
                                   π,θ∈Θ


                                                        39
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                     r
                             ξH 2 SA H 2 SAηι           H 4 SA log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
                         ≲             +           +                           + ϵ.
                               N            K                     K

                         all
Hence, we can guarantee DΘ    R ⋆ , Rb ≤ 2ϵ, provided that

     H SA log N (Θ; ϵ/H) H 2 SA(η + log N (Θ; ϵ/H))
      4                                                                                                     √
K≥O
  e                     +                             ,                                    KH ≥ N ≥ O
                                                                                                    e           H 9 S 7 A7 K .
             ϵ2                       ϵ
Here poly log (H, S, A, 1/δ) are omitted.


G     L OWER BOUND IN THE ONLINE SETTING

G.1   L OWER BOUND OF ONLINE IRL PROBLEMS

We focus on the cases where Θ = V × A. In this case log N (Θ; ϵ/H) = O(S),
                                                                     e     the upper bound of
                                                   4 2     2

the sample complexity of Algorithm 6 becomes O H S A/ϵ (we hide the burn-in term).
                                              e

Similar to the offline setting, we define (ϵ, δ)-PAC algorithm for online IRL problems for all ϵ, δ ∈
(0, 1) as follows.
Definition G.1. Fix a parameter set Θ, we say an online IRL algorithm A is a (ϵ, δ)-PAC algorithm
for online IRL problems, if for any IRL problem (M, π E ), with probability 1 − δ, A outputs a reward
mapping Rb such that
                                          Dall (R,
                                                b R ⋆ ) ≤ ϵ.
                                                       Θ

Theorem G.2 (Lower bound for online IRL problems). Fix parameter set Θ = V × A and let A be
an (ϵ, δ)-PAC algorithm for online IRL problems, where δ ≤ 1/3. Then, there exists an IRL problem
(M, π E ) such that, if H ≥ 4, S ≥ 130, A ≥ 2, there exists an absolute constant c0 such that the
expected sample complexity N is lower bounded by

                                                     c0 H 3 SA min {S, A}
                                             N≥                           ,
                                                               ϵ2
where 0 < ϵ ≤ (H − 2)/1024;

Note that when S ≤ A, the lower bound scales with Ω S 2 A , matching the S 2 A factor dependence
observed in the upper bound (Theorem 5.1).

G.2   H ARD INSTANCE CONSTRUCTION

Hard Instance Construction Our construction is a modification of the hard instance constructed
in the proof of Metelli et al. (2023, Theorem B.3). We construct the hard instance with 2S + 1 states,
A + 1 actions, and 2H + 2 stages for any H, S, A > 0. (This rescaling only affects S, H by at
most a multiplicative constant and thus does not affect our result). We then define an integer K by
                                  K := min {S, A}.

                                          (i,j,k)
Each MDP Mv is indexed by a vector w = wh                                                            ∈ RHSKA and is
                                                                           h∈[H],i∈[K],j∈[S],k∈[K]
specified as follows:

       • State space: S = {sstart , sroot , s1 , . . . , sS , s̄1 , . . . , s̄S }.
       • Action space: A = {a0 , a1 , ..., aA }.
       • Initial state: sstart , that is
                                                         P(s1 = sstart ) = 1.
       • Transitions:


                                                               40
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            – At stage 1, sstart can only transition to itself or si . The transition probabilities are given
              by
                           
                            P1 (sstart | sstart , a0 ) = 1
                                  P1 (si | sstart , ai ) = 1   for all i ∈ [K],
                                  P1 (sj | sstart , ak ) = S1    for all j ∈ [S], k ≥ K + 1,
                           

            – At each stage h ∈ {2, . . . , H + 1}, sstart can only transition to itself or si , si can only
              transition to absorbing state s̄j . The transition probabilities are given by
                  
                   Ph (sstart | sstart , a0 ) = 1,
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                      Ph (si | sstart , ai ) = 1      for all i ∈ [K],
                   Ph (sj | sstart , ak ) = 1
                  
                                                         for all j ∈ [S], k ≥ K + 1,
                                                 S
                       Ph (s̄j | si , a0 ) = S 1
                                                      for all i ≥ K + 1, j ∈ [S],                      (G.1)
                  
                                                  ′  (i,j,k)
                  
                                              1+ϵ ·wh−1
                       Ph (s̄j | si , ak ) =                      for all i ∈ [K], j ∈ [S], k ∈ [A],
                  
                  
                   P (s̄ | s̄ , a ) = 1 Sfor all j ∈ [S], k ≥ 0.
                  
                  
                  
                          h   j    j   k

            – At each stage h ∈ {H + 1, . . . , 2H + 2} and sstart can only transition to si and si can
              only transition to absorbing state s̄j . The transition probabilities are given by
                           
                                                          1
                            Ph (si | sstart , a0 ) = S
                           
                           
                                                               for all i ∈ [S],
                           
                           
                               P  (s
                                  h i   | s      ,
                                            start ia ) = 1    for i ∈ [K],
                                                          1
                                Ph (sj | sstart , ak ) = S     for all j ∈ [S], k ≥ K + 1,
                            Ph (s̄j | si , ak ) = S1        for all i ∈ [K], j ∈ [S], k ≥ 0,
                           
                           
                           
                           
                                Ph (s̄j | s̄j , ak ) = 1    for all i ∈ [S], k ≥ 0.
                           

       • Expert policy: expert policy π E plays action a0 at every stage h ∈ [H] and state s ∈ S. That
         is
                                  πhE (a0 |s) = 1,      for all h ∈ [2H + 2], s ∈ S.                     (G.2)

To ensure the definition of Mw is valid, we enforce the following condition:
                                         X (i,j,k)
                                             wh       = 0,
                                               j∈[S]

for any h ∈ [H], i ∈ [K], k ∈ [A]. We define a vector space W by
                                                                      
                                                           X          
                                                         S
                      W := w = (wj )j∈[S] ∈ {1, −1} :            wj = 0 .
                                                                      
                                                                    j∈[S]

Let I denote [H] × [K] × [A], the Eq.(G.2) is equivalent to
                                                     w ∈ WI.
                              n     o
                                (w)
 Further, we let P(w) =        Ph              to be the transition kernel of MDP\R Mw . In addition,
                                       h∈[H]
                                                                            a
Given w ∈ W I , w ∈ W and index a ∈ I, we use the notation w ← w to represent vector obtained
                                                                             (i,j,k)
by replacing a component of w with w. For example, let w = (wh                       )h∈[H],i∈[K],j∈[S],k∈[K] ,
                                                   a
w = (wj )j∈[S] , a = (ha , ia , ja ) and w = w ← w and then w can be expressed as follows:
                                          (
                                (i,j,k)     wj       (h, i, k) = (ha , ia , ka ),
                            wh          =    (i,j,k)                                                     (G.3)
                                            wh       otherwise.

By Metelli et al. (2023, Lemma E.6), there exists a W ⊆ W such that
                     X                S                              S
                         (wi − vi )2 ≥ ,       ∀v, w ∈ W̄,   log W ≥    .                                (G.4)
                                      8                              10
                      i∈[n]


                                                       41
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Notations. To distinguish with different MDP\Rs, we denote Vhπ ·; r, P(w) be the value function
of π in MDP Mw ∪ r. Given two rewards r r′ , we define dall (r, r′ ; P(w) ) to be the dall metric
evaluated in Mw :
                 dall (r, r′ ; P(w) ) := sup EP(w) ,π Vhπ (sh ; r, P(w) ) − Vhπ (sh ; r′ , P(w) ) .
                                       π,h∈[H]

Correspondingly, given a parameter set Θ, two reward mappings R, R ′ , we can define
 all
DΘ   (R, R ′ ; P(w) ) by

                     DΘall
                           (R, R ′ ; P(w) ) := sup dall R(V, A), R ′ (V, A); P(w) .
                                                    (V,A)∈Θ

In the following, we always assume that w ∈ W̄. We then present the following lemma which shows
                                                                          I
the difference between two MDP\Rs Mw←v    a  and Mw←w a   for any w ∈ W and v ̸= w ∈ W.
                               I                                                    a
Lemma G.3. Given any w ∈ W , w ̸= v ∈ W, and index a = (ha , ia , ka ) ∈ I, let R (w←w) ,
    a
R (w←v) be the ground truth reward mapping induced by M a , M a , respectively. Set
                                                                                 w←w       w←v
Θ = V × A. For any ϵ′ ∈ (0, 1/2] and any reward mapping R : V × A → Rall , we have
                            a           a
                                                         a           a
                                                                          Hϵ′
              7DΘ all
                        R (w←w) , R; P(w←w) + DΘ
                                               all
                                                     R (w←v) , R; P(w←v) ≥    ,
                                                                           16
where ϵ′ is specified in Eq.(G.1).

Proof. Step 1: Construct bad parameter (V bad , Abad ).                        We construct the bad parameter
(V bad , Abad ) ∈ V × A as follows:

       • We set Abad
                 h (s, a) = 0 for all (h, s, a) ∈ [2H + 2] × S × A.

       • We set Vhbad by
                                               (
                                                    (2H+2−h)·(wi −vi )
                                                                           if s = s̄i , h = ha + 2,
                               Vhbad (s) :=               2                                                   (G.5)
                                                    0                      other.

Directly by the construction of (V bad , Abad ), we obtain that
       X                                    X (2H − ha )(wi − vi )2              H (wi − vi )
                                                                                              2
                                                                                                HS
              (wi − vi ) · Vhbad (s̄i ) =                                    ≥                ≥    ,          (G.6)
                                                                2                     2         16
      i∈[S]                                 i∈[S]
                                                                                          a
                                                                       We then denote R (w←w) V bad , Abad ,

where the last inequality is due to Eq.(G.4).
    a
R (w←v) V bad , Abad as rbad , rbad , respectively.

                                w      v
          bad
Since A         ≡ 0, any policy π ∈ Π⋆M a                        ⋆
                                                          bad , ΠM a ∪r bad . More explicitly, any policy is optimal
                                                        ∪rw
                                              w←w                  w←v v
           bad
in Mw←w
     a  ∪ rw   and Mw←v
                     a  ∪ rvbad .
Step 2: Construct test policies π test,(1) , π test,(2) . Let r = R V bad , Abad . Let π g be the greedy


policy of Mw←w  a  ∪ r. By Lemma 2.2, there exist a pair (V, A) ∈ V × A such that
                                                                            a

                                               g                        (w←w   )
      rh (s, a) = −Ah (s, a) · 1 {a ∈
                                    / supp (πh (· | s))} + Vh (s) − Ph           Vh+1 (s, a),      (G.7)


We then construct test policy π test,(1) by
                               test,(1)
                              
                                πh         (a0 | sstart ) = 1           h ≤ ha − 1
                               test,(1)
                              
                                 πh         (aia | sstart ) = 1          h = ha
                                   test,(1)
                                π          (aka | sia ) = 1             h = ha + 1
                               htest,(1)
                              
                              
                                 πh          = πhg                       h ≥ ha + 2

                                                               42
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


which implies that at stage h ≤ ha − 1, π test,(1) always plays a0 , at stage ha , π test,(1) plays aia , then
transition to sia , at stage ha + 1, π test,(1) plays aka , then at stage h ≥ ha + 2, π test,(1) is equal to the
greedy policy π g . By construction, we can conclude that
                    test,(1)                 a                            test,(1)    a
                 dπha +1 (sia ; P(w←w) ) = 1,                     Vhπa +2 (·|r, P(w←w) ) = Vha +2 (·).,            (G.8)
                                       test,(1)
the second equality is due to πh                     = πhg for any h ≥ ha + 2.
Further, we have
                                                               a

        test,(1)               a                          (w←w     ) πtest,(1)    a
    Vhπa +1 (sia ; r, P(w←w) ) = rha +1 (sia , aka ) +  Pha +1 Vha +2 (·|r, P  ( w←w)
                                                                                      ) (sia , aka )

                                    / supp πhg a +1 (· | sia )

     = −Aha +1 (sia , aka ) · 1 aka ∈
                           a
                                                            a

                       (w←w    )                        (w←w     )
     + Vha +1 (s) − Pha +1 Vha +2 (sia , aka ) + Pha +1 Vha +2

     = Vha +1 (sia ) − gap,                                                                                        (G.9)
where the first line is by the Bellman equation, the second line is due to Eq.(G.7) and
Eq.(G.8). Here gap is the advantage function at (ha + 1, sia , aka ), i.e, gap := Aha +1 (sia , aka ) ·
                                                                    a           a
1 aka ∈ supp πhg a +1 (· | sia ) . Then by definition of DΘ   (R (w←w) , R; P(w←w) ), we can obtain
                                                          all

that
                        a             a

           DΘall
                   R (w←w) , R; P(w←w)
                            a                                      a

            ≥ dall R (w←w) V bad , Abad , R V bad , Abad ; P(w←w)


                                  a

            = dall rw bad
                          , r; P(w←w)
                                                 test,(1)          a           test,(1)      a
                ≥ E (w←w
                      a
                         )                   Vhπa +1 (s; rw
                                                          bad
                                                              , P(w←w) ) − Vhπa +1 (s; r, P(w←w) )
                    P          ,π test,(1)
                      test,(1)             a           test,(1)         a
                = Vhπa +1 (sia ; rw
                                  bad
                                      , P(w←w) ) − Vhπa +1 (sia ; r, P(w←w) )
                = Vhbad
                     a +1
                          (sia ) − Vha +1 (sia ) + gap ,                                                          (G.10)
where the second last line is due to Eq.(G.8) and the last line is by Eq.(G.9) and π test,(1) ∈
                                       a
                                  , P(w←w) ) = Vhbad
                  test,(1)
Π⋆M a ∪rbad : Vhπa +1 (sia ; rw
                              bad
                                                  a +1
                                                       (sia ).
    w←w     w


Next, we construct another test policy π test,(2) as follows:
                              test,(2)
                             πh
                                         (a0 | sstart ) = 1 h ≤ ha − 1
                                 test,(2)
                                πh        (aia | sstart ) = 1 h = ha
                              test,(2)
                                           = πhg
                             
                                πh                            h ≥ ha + 1.

The difference between π test,(2) and π test,(1) is that at stage ha π test,(2) play the πhg a +1 (sia ) instead
of aka . Similar to Eq.(G.8), we have
                  test,(2)             a                               test,(2)        a
                dπha +1 (sia ; P(w←w) ) = 1,                   Vhπa +1 (sia ; r, P(w←w) ) = Vha +1 (sia )         (G.11)
                                                          test,(2)
where the seconed equality is valid since πh                           = πhg for any h ≥ ha + 1.
Similar to Eq.(G.10), we have
            a           a                       a

DΘall
        R (w←w) , R; P(w←w) ≥ dall rw
                                    bad
                                        , r; P(w←w)
                                                                           test,(2)          a           test,(2)      a
                                       ≥ E (w←w
                                             a
                                                )                      Vhπa +1 (s; rw
                                                                                    bad
                                                                                        , P(w←w) ) − Vhπa +1 (s; r, P(w←w) )
                                                 P       ,π test,(2)
                                             test,(2)             a           test,(2)         a
                                       = Vhπa +1 (sia ; rw
                                                         bad
                                                             , P(w←w) ) − Vhπa +1 (sia ; r, P(w←w) )
                                       = Vhbad
                                            a +1
                                                 (sia ) − Vha +1 (sia ) ,                                         (G.12)


                                                                   43
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where the second last is due to Eq.(G.11), the last line follows from π test,(2) ∈ Π⋆M a                                   bad :
                                                                                                                         ∪rw
                                                                                                                   w←w
                                a
                      , P(w←w) ) = Vhbad
    test,(2)
Vhπa +1 (sia ; rw bad
                                       +1 (sia ). Combing Eq.(G.10) and Eq.(G.12), we have
                a            a
                                    a
 2DΘ  all
            R (w←w) , R; P(w←w) ≥ Vhbad    a +1
                                                (sia ) − Vha +1 (sia ) + Vhbad
                                                                            a
                                                                               (sia ) − Vha +1 (sia ) + gap
                                ≥ gap,                                                         (G.13)
where the second line comes  from the triangle inequality.
                                a            a

Step 3: lower bound DΘ all
                            R (w←v) , R; P(w←v) . We still use the test policy π test,(1) in M(w←v)
                                                                                                 a  .
              a               a
         (w←v     )       (w←w   )
Since Ph             = Ph           for any h ≥ ha + 2, we have
                              a                               a
      π test,(1)                 ) ) = V πtest,(1) (s̄ |r, P(w←w
    V ha +2      (s̄ |r, P(
                 i
                            w ←v
                                               ha +2   i
                                                                 )) = V
                                                                               ha +2 (s̄i ),    for all i ∈ [S],     (G.14)
where the second equality comes from Eq.(G.8).
                                   a          a

By the definition of DΘ all
                              R (w←v) , R; P(w←v) , we have
             a               a

 DΘall
         R (w←v) , R; P(w←v)
                       a

 ≥ dall rvbad , r; P(w←v)
                                    test,(1)               a        test,(1)               a
  ≥ E (w←v
        a
           )                  Vhπa +1 (s; rvbad , P(w←v) ) − Vhπa +1 (s; r, P(w←v) )
       P        ,π test,(1)
          test,(1)                         atest,(1)                     a
  =   Vhπa +1 (sia ; rvbad , P(w←v) ) − Vhπa +1 (sia ; r, P(w←v) )                  (by construction of policy π test,(1) .)
                           test,(1)                 a
 = Vhbada +1
             (sia ) − Vhπa +1 (sia ; r, P(w←v) )
                                                          a

 (i)                                                  (w←v   )
 = Vhbada +1
             (s ia ) −  r       (s
                         ha +1 ia     , aka  ) −   P  ha +1    V ha +2 (sia , aka )
                                                        a
                                                                                                  a              a

                                                    (w←w    )                                 (w←v    )      (w←w   )
 = Vhbad
      a +1
           (s ia ) −  r       (s
                       ha +1 ia     , a ka ) −   P  ha +1     V ha +2  (s  ia , a ka ) −    P ha +1     −  P ha +1       Vha +2 (sia , aka )
               a              a
                                                                                                                       a

           (w←v    )      (w←w    )                                                                                (w←w    )
 ≥       Pha +1 − Pha +1               Vha +2 (sia , aka ) − Vhbad      a +1
                                                                              (s ia ) − r      (s
                                                                                         ha +1 ia   , a ka ) −   P ha +1     Vha +2 (sia , aka )

                                                                                  (by triangle inequality)
                a
                                    a

  (ii)      (w←v)    (w←w)
  =        Pha +1 − Pha +1      Vha +2 (sia , aka ) − Vhbad
                                                         a +1
                                                               (sia ) − Vha +1 (sia ) + gap
                a        a

            (w←v   )  (w←w  )
  ≥        Pha +1 − Pha +1      Vha +2 (sia , aka ) − Vhbad
                                                         a +1
                                                               (sia ) − Vha +1 (sia ) − gap
                 a        a

  (iii)      (w←v   )  (w←w  )
                                                                      a             a

   ≥       Psa +1 − Pha +1       Vha +2 (sia , aka ) − 3DΘall
                                                                R (w←w) , R; P(w←w) ,              (G.15)
where (i) is by the Bellman equation, (ii) is valid since
                                        a

                                     (w←w   )
             rha +1 (sia , aka ) + Pha +1 Vha +2 (sia , aka )

              = −Aha +1 (sia , aka ) · 1 aka ∈ supp πhg a +1 (·|sia ) + Vha +1 (sia )

                       a
                                                       a

                   (w←w     )                      (w←w   )
              − Pha +1 Vha +2 (sia , aka ) + Pha +1 Vha +2 (sia , aka )                                     (by Eq.(G.7))

             = −gap + Vha +1 (sia )
and
    (iii)     is    due  to   Eq.(G.12)       and  Eq.(G.13).             We   next   analyse
         a         a
     (w←v  )     (w←w )                                         test,(1)
    Pha +1 − Pha +1     Vha +2 (sia , aka ) . We move back to π          . By the construction
of π test,(1) and the transition probabilities of Mw←w    a  , we have
                                     ′
       test,(1)        a        1 + ϵ wi            test,(1)          a
    dπha +2 (s̄i ; P(w←w) ) =            ,      Vhπa +2 (s̄i ; r, P(w←w) ) = Vha +2 (s̄i ),                  ∀i ∈ [S].
                                   S
                                                                                                                     (G.16)

                                                               44
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                             a            a
By definition of DΘ all
                        (R (w←w) , R; P(w←w) ), we have
                         a          a

            all
           DΘ     R (w←w) , R; P(w←w)
                                                              a                             a
                                    π test,(1)     bad    (w←w  ) ) − V πtest,(1) (s; r, P(w←w ))
            ≥ E (w←w
                  a
                      ) ,πtest,(1) Vha +2 (s; rw , P                   ha +2
               P
              X test,(1)                  test,(1)              a              test,(1)         a
            ≥     dhπa +2 (s̄i ) · Vhπa +2 (s̄i ; rw   bad
                                                           , P(w←w) ) − Vhπa +2 (s̄i ; r, P(w←w) )
                i∈[S]
                    X 1 + ϵ′ wi
            =                      · Vhbad
                                        a +2
                                             (s̄i ) − Vha +2 (s̄i )
                            S
                i∈[S]
                    X 1
            ≥            · Vhbad
                              a +2
                                   (s̄i ) − Vha +2 (s̄i ) ,                                          (G.17)
                      2S
                i∈[S]

where the last second is by Eq.(G.16) and the last line comes from ϵ′ ∈ (0, 1/2]. Applying Eq.(G.17),
we obtain that
                a          a
       h                               i
          P(w←v) − P(w←w) V              (s , a )
                                        ha +2      ia   ka


            ϵ′ X
        =     ·  Vha +2 (s̄i ) · (wi − vi )
            S
                    i∈[S]

            ϵ′ X bad                        ϵ′ X bad
        ≥     · Vha +2 (s̄i ) · (wi − vi ) − ·  Vha +2 (s̄i ) − Vha +2 (s̄i ) · |(wi − vi )|
            S                               S
                    i∈[S]                                     i∈[S]
                                                                                    (by triangle inequality)

            ϵ′ X bad                         2ϵ′ X bad
        ≥     · Vha +2 (s̄i ) · (wi − vi ) −    · Vha +2 (s̄i ) − Vha +2 (s̄i )
            S                                 S
                    i∈[S]                                      i∈[S]
                ′
          Hϵ                   a              a

        ≥      − 2DΘ all
                          R (w←w) , R; P(w←w) ,                                                  (G.18)
           16
where the second line is by the triangle inequality and the last line comes from Eq.(G.6)and Eq.(G.17).
Combining Eq.(G.15) and Eq.(G.18), we complete the proof.



G.3     P ROOF OF T HEOREM G.2

Proof of Theorem G.2. Our method is similar to the one used for the proof of Metelli et al. (2023,
Theorem B.3). For any ϵ ∈ (0, 1/2], δ ∈ (0, 1), We consider an online algorithm A such that for any
IRL problem (M, π E ), we have

                                P      DΘall
                                              R ⋆ , Rb ≤ ϵ ≥ 1 − δ,                          (G.19)
                                     (M,π E ),A

where       P         denotes the probability measure induced by executing the algorithm A in the IRL
        (M,π E ),A
problem (M, π E ), R ⋆ is the ground truth reward mapping and Rb is the estimated reward mapping
outputted by executing A in (M, π E ). We define the the identification function for any (a, w) ∈
       I
I × W by
                                                        a          a

                           Φa,w := arg min DΘ all
                                                    R (w←v) , R;
                                                              b P(w←v) ,
                                             v∈W

where R   (w)
             is the ground truth reward mapping induced by (Mw , π E ). Let v ⋆ = Φa,w . For any
v ̸= v ⋆ ∈ W, by definition of v ⋆ , we have
                              a ⋆            a              a            a

                  DΘall               b P(w←v⋆ ) ≤ Dall R (w←v) , R;
                          R (w←v ) , R;                           b P(w←v) .
                                                    Θ



                                                             45
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


By applying Lemma G.3, we obtain that
Hϵ′                a          a
                                              a
                         b P(w←v) + 7Dall R (w←v⋆ ) , R;
                                                           a
                                                                             a
                                                      b P(w←v⋆ ) ≤ 8Dall R (w←v) , R;
                                                                                        a

     ≤ DΘall
               R (w←v) , R;           Θ                              Θ
                                                                                   b P(w←v) .
 16
Next, we set ϵ′ = 256ϵ
                   H which implies that

                                                       Hϵ′
                                                           ≥ 16ϵ.                                                    (G.20)
                                                       16
Here, to employ Lemma G.3, we need ϵ′ ∈ (0, 1/2] which is equivalent to 0 < ϵ ≤ H/512. Then, it
holds that
                                      a           a

                            all
                           DΘ     R (w←v) , R;
                                            b P(w←v) ≥ 2ϵ > ϵ,

which implies that
                                                    a          a
                                        n                             o
                                          all
                          {v ̸= Φa,w } ⊆ DΘ     R (w←v) , R;
                                                          b P(w←v) > ϵ .                                             (G.21)

By Eq.(G.21), we have the following lower bound for the probability
                                                      a           a

                   δ ≥ sup        P       DΘall
                                                  R (w←v) , R;
                                                            b P(w←v) > ϵ
                                                  E
                              v∈W (Mw←v
                                     a ,π ),A


                          ≥ sup              P        (v ̸= Φa,w )
                                                  E
                              v∈W (Mw←v
                                     a ,π ),A

                               1 X
                          ≥            P         (v ̸= Φa,w ),                                                       (G.22)
                              |W|     a ,π E ),A
                                   (Mw←v
                                    v∈W

By applying Theorem D.3 with P0 =                     P          , Pw =           P        , we have
                                                    a ,π E ),A
                                                 (Mw←0                        a ,π E ),A
                                                                           (Mw←w
                                                                                                
 1         X                                 1  1 X
                       (v ̸= Φa,w ) ≥ 1 −             DKL (     P        ,    P         ) − log 2.
|W|        a
                                          log |W| |W|          a ,π E ),A (M a ,π E ),A
                                                            (Mw←v           w←0
      (Mw ←v,π E ),A                                                 v∈W
                                                                                                                     (G.23)
Our next step is to bound the KL divergence. Using the same scheme in the proof (Metelli et al.,
2021, Theorem B.3), we can compute the KL-divergence as follows:
       DKL (        P         ,         P        )
                  a ,π E ),A (M a ,π E ),A
               (Mw←v           w←0
                              "N                                                            #
                                                a                       a
                               X             (w←w )                  (w←0 )
        = E(Mw ←v,π
               a    E ),A               DKL Pht     (· | st , at ), Pht     (· | st , at )
                                  t=1
                                                                  a                           a

                                                               ((w←v ))                    (w←0 )
        ≤ E(Mw ←v,π
               a    E ),A [Nha (sia , aka )]DKL               Pha       (· | sia , aka ), Pha     (· | sia , aka )

        ≤ 2(ϵ′ )2 E(Mw ←v,π
                       a    E ),A [Nha (sia , aka )],                                                                (G.24)
                   PN
where Nh (s, a) := t=1 1 {(ht , st , at ) = (h, s, a)} for any given (h, s, a) ∈ [H] × S × A and the
last inequality comes from Metelli et al. (2021, Lemma E.4). Combining Eq.(G.22) and Eq.(G.23),
we have
                                                                                            
                        1       1    X
           δ ≥1−                          2(ϵ′ )2 E(Mw ←v,π
                                                        a    E ),A [Nha (sia , aka )] − log 2
                                                                                             
                    log(|W|) |W|
                                              v∈W

for any w. It also holds for any a ∈ I that
                   1 X                                      (1 − δ) log |W| − log 2
                       E(Mw ←v,π
                            a    E ),A [Nha (sia , aka )] ≥                         .                                (G.25)
                  |W|                                                2(ϵ′ )2
                        v∈W



                                                               46
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


By summing Eq.(G.25) over all w, we obtain that
                  X 1         X 1 X
                         I
                                             E(Mw ←v,π
                                                  a    E ),A [Nha (sia , aka )]

                  a∈I |W |        I
                                    |W|
                                    w∈W         v∈W
                            1        X X
                       =        I
                                              E(Mw ,πE ),A [Nha (sia , aka )]
                           |W | w∈W I a∈I
                                    (1 − δ) log |W| − log 2
                       ≥ HKA                                .                                     (G.26)
                                             2(ϵ′ )2
                                    I
Hence, there exists a wbad ∈ W such that
                           X                                          (1 − δ) log |W| − log 2
                             E(Mwbad ,πE ),A Nht a (sia , aka ) ≥ HKA

    E(Mwbad ,πE ),A [N ] ≥
                                                                               2(ϵ′ )2
                            a∈I

                                   (1 − δ) log |W| − log 2
                        = H 3 KA                           ,                                      (G.27)
                                          131072ϵ2
where the last line is by ϵ′ = 256H
                                 ϵ
                                    . By taking δ = 1/3, we obtain that
                                      (1 − δ) log |W| − log 2          2 log |W| − 3 log 2
        E(Mwbad ,πE ),A [N ] ≥ H 3 KA                2
                                                              = H 3 KA
                                  3         131072ϵ  3                      393216ϵ2
                                   H SKA            H SA min {S, A}
                             =Ω               =Ω                        ,                  (G.28)
                                     ϵ2                      ϵ2
                                                         S
where the last line follows from Eq.(H.24) and log |W| ≥ 10 .


H     L OWER BOUND IN THE OFFLINE SETTING
H.1    L OWER BOUND OF OFFLINE IRL PROBLEMS

We direct our attention towards the lower bound analysis of the offline IRL problems, under the
performance metric described in Section 3.3, particularly in scenarios where Θ = V × A. In this
case log N (Θ; ϵ/H) is upper-bounded
                         ⋆ 4 2        by O(S),
                                         e     and the corresponding upper bound of the sample
                         C H  S
complexity becomes O e      2   ϵ .

Following Metelli et al. (2023) we define the (ϵ, δ)-PAC algorithm for offline IRL problems for all
ϵ, δ ∈ (0, 1).
Definition H.1 ((ϵ, δ)-PAC algorithm for offline IRL problems). We say an offline IRL algorithm A
is an (ϵ, δ)-PAC algorithm for offline IRL problems if for any offline IRL problem (M, π E , π b , π val )
and any parameter set Θ, with probability 1 − δ, A outputs a reward mapping Rb such that
                                              π val b
                                             DΘ    (R, R ⋆ ) ≤ ϵ.

Theorem H.2 (Lower bound for offline IRL problems). Fix Θ = V × A and let A be an (ϵ, δ)-PAC
algorithm for offline IRL problems, where δ ≤ 1/3. Then, there exists an offline IRL problem
(M, π E , π b , π val ) such that, if H, S ≥ 4, A ≥ 2, C ⋆ ≥ 2, there exists an absolute constant c0 such
that the sample complexity N is lower bounded by
                                             c0 C ⋆ H 2 S min {S, A}
                                        N≥                           .
                                                         ϵ2
where 0 < ϵ ≤ (H − 2)/1034.

The hard instance construction and the proof of Theorem H.2 and the hard instance construction
are deferred to Section H.2 and Section H.3, respectively. Our proof involves a modification of
the challenging instance constructed
                                     in Metelli et al. (2023). Specifically, when S ≤ A, the lower
bound scales with Ω C ⋆ S 2 , matching the C ⋆ S 2 factor dependence observed in the upper bound
(Theorem 4.2).


                                                      47
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H.2    H ARD INSTANCE CONSTRUCTION
                                                                           I
We consider the MDP\R Mw indexed by vector w ∈ W , defined in Section G. We assume C ⋆ ≥ 2.
Fix i⋆ ∈ [K], we construct the behavior policy π b as follows:
                   
                   
                       πhb (a0 |sstart ) = 1       for all i ∈ [K] and h ∈ [H − 1],
                          b                   1
                   
                    πH (ai |sstart ) = K             for all i ∈ [K],
                   
                   
                          b
                        πH+1   (a0 |si ) = 1       for all i ̸= i⋆ ,                  (H.1)
                          b                         1           b                 1
                                     |s         −                       |s
                   
                   
                   
                       π      (a
                          H+1 0 i       ⋆ ) = 1    C⋆  ,      π      (a
                                                                H+1 1 i    ⋆ ) = C⋆ ,
                        πhb (a0 |s̄i ) = 1
                   
                                                for all i ∈ [S] and h ≥ H + 2.
                   

And evaluation policy π val is defined by
                  
                         val
                   πh (a0 |sstart ) = 1
                                                      for all i ∈ [K] and h ∈ [H − 1],
                         val
                  
                  
                  
                      π H   (ai ⋆ |sstart ) =  1,
                         val
                       πH+1    (a0 |si ) = 1         for all i ̸= i⋆ ,                                                  (H.2)
                  
                        val
                   πH+1 (a1 |si⋆ ) = 1,
                  
                       πhval (a0 |s̄i )
                  
                                             for all i ∈ [S] and h ≥ H + 2.
                  

                  I
For all w ∈ W , we can show that π val has C ⋆ -concentrability in Mw .
                                                                                 I
Lemma H.3. Suppose that ϵ′ ∈ (0, 1/2]. For any w ∈ W , it holds that
                                                            val
                                        X              dπ (s, a)
                                                                  ≤ 3C ⋆ (H + 2)S.
                                                       dπb (s, a)
                              (h,s,a)∈[2H+2]×S×A


Proof. By the construction of behavior policy π b , we have
                val
         supp dπh (·, ·) ⊆ {(sstart , a0 ), (sstart , ak⋆ ), (si⋆ , a1 ), (s̄1 , a0 ), . . . , (s̄S , a0 )}.

Since πhb = πhval for all h ∈ [H − 1], then
                                        b                         val
                                     dπh (sstart , a0 ) = dπh (sstart , a0 ) = 1                                        (H.3)
for all h ∈ [H − 1].
At stage h = H, we have
                                 b                    1                   val
                              dπH (sstart , ai⋆ ) =     ,               dπH (sstart , ai⋆ ) = 1.                        (H.4)
                                                      K
At stage h = H + 1, we have
                                 b                    1                         val
                              dπH+1 (si⋆ , a1 ) =           ,             dπH+1 (si⋆ , a1 ) = 1.                        (H.5)
                                                    C ⋆K
At stage h ∈ {H + 2, . . . , 2H + 2}, by direct computation, we obtain that
                                           (i⋆ ,j,1)                                                    (i⋆ ,j,1)
         πb              C ⋆ K − 1 1 + ϵ′ wH+1                                val                1 + ϵ′ wH+1
        dh (s̄j , a0 ) =          +                  ,                     dπh (s̄j , a1 ) =                        ,   (H.6)
                          C ⋆ SK      C ⋆ SK                                                            S
for all j ∈ [S]. Since 0 < ϵ ≤ 1/2 and C ⋆ ≥ 1, we have
                                                                         (i⋆ ,j,1)
                         b              C K − 1 1 + ϵ′ wH+1
                                            ⋆
                      dπh (s̄j , a0 ) =        +
                                         SK         C ⋆ SK
                                        ⋆
                                       C K −1       1       1     1        1
                                     ≥         +         = (1 −        )≥                                               (H.7)
                                         SK      2C ⋆ SK    S   2C ⋆ K    2S
and
                                                                          (i⋆ ,j,1)
                                        val               1 + ϵ′ wH+1                      3
                                     dπh (si⋆ , a1 ) =                                ≤      ,                          (H.8)
                                                                 S                        2S


                                                            48
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


for all h ≥ H + 2. By Eq.(H.7) and (H.7), we obtain that
                                                    val
                                                 dπh (s̄j , a0 )
                                                    b            ≤ 3,                                                    (H.9)
                                                 dπh (s̄j , a0 )
for all h ≥ H + 2.
Combining Eq.(H.3), Eq.(H.4) and Eq.(H.5), we have
    2H+2               val                                val                       val
     X       X       dπ (s, a)          X    dπh (sstart , a0 ) dπH (sstart , ai⋆ )
                                =                              + πval                                                   (H.10)
                     dπb (s, a)                 b
                                             dπ (sstart , a0 )  dH (sstart , ai⋆ )
     h=1 (s,a)∈S×A                    h∈[H−1] h
                                         val
                                      dπH+1 (si⋆ , a1 )                 X      X dπval (s̄i , a0 )
                                                                                      h
                                  +      b                      +                         b                             (H.11)
                                      dπH+1 (si⋆ , a1 )                           dπ (s̄i , a0 )
                                                                       h≥H+2 i∈[S] h

                                                                              X       X dπval (s̄i , a0 )
                                  = H − 1 + K + C ⋆K +                                          h
                                                                                                    b                   (H.12)
                                                                                        dπ (s̄i , a0 )
                                                                             h≥H+2 i∈[S] h

                                  ≤ H − 1 + K + C ⋆ K + 3(H + 1)S ≤ C ⋆ (2H + 2)(2S + 1),
                                                                                      (H.13)
where the last second inequality is by Eq.(H.9) and the last inequality is by C ⋆ ≥ 2. This completes
the proof.

Lemma H.3 demonstrate that π b and π val satisfies C ⋆ -concentrability (Assumption 4.1) in any Mw .

Notations. To distinguish with different MDP\Rs, we still use Vhπ ·; r, P(w) to denote the value
                                                                                          I                   val
function of π in MDP Mw ∪ r. Given two rewards r r′ and w ∈ W , we define dπ (r, r′ ; P(w) ) by:
              val                                                val                          val
            dπ (r, r′ ; P(w) ) := sup EP(w) Vhπ (sh ; r, P(w) ) − Vhπ (sh ; r′ , P(w) ) .
                                   π,h∈[H]

Correspondingly, given a parameter set Θ, two reward mappings R, R ′ , we define
 π val
DΘ     (R, R ′ ; P(w) ) by

                       π val                           val
                    DΘ       (R, R ′ ; P(w) ) := sup dπ R(V, A), R ′ (V, A); P(w) .
                                                 (V,A)∈Θ

In this section, we only consider the case that Θ = V × A.
                                    I                                      a          a
Lemma H.4. Given any w ∈ W , w ̸= v ∈ W, and i⋆ ∈ [K]. Let R (w←w) , R (w←v) be the
ground truth reward mappings induced by Mw←w  a      , Mw←va  where a = (i⋆ , H + 1, 1) ∈ I. Set
Θ = V × A. For any rewarding mapping R and ϵ ∈ (0, 1/2], we have
                                               ′

                             a          a
                                                           a          a
                                                                          Hϵ′
                 π val                         π val
              7DΘ        R (w←w) , R; Pw←w + DΘ        R (w←v) , R; Pw←v ≥        .
                                                                               16

Proof. We consider similar construction of bad parameter V bad , Abad in the Proof of Lemma G.3.
To summarize, V bad , Abad is given by

      • We set Abad
                h (s, a) = 0 for all (h, s, a) ∈ [2H + 2] × S × A.

      • We set Vhbad by
                                             (
                                                 (2H+2−h)·(wi −vi )
                                                                               if s = s̄i , h = H + 2,
                             Vhbad (s) :=              2                                                                (H.14)
                                               0                               otherwise.

                      bad bad
Similarly, we define rw  , rv and r by
                a                                 a
   bad
       := R (w←w) V bad , Abad ,       bad
                                           := R (w←v) V bad , Abad ,                                    r := R V bad , Abad .

  rw                                  rw


                                                                49
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                            a                 a
By definition of R (w←w) , R (w←v) , we have
                                                                                      a      a

               bad                  bad                                             (w←w ) (w←v )   bad
              rw,H+1 (si⋆ , a1 ) − rv,H+1 (si⋆ , a1 )                   =          PH+2 − PH+2     VH+1 (si⋆ , a1 )

                                                                                                 bad
                                                                                    X (wi − vi )VH+2
                                                                        = ϵ′ ·
                                                                                                   S
                                                                                   i∈[S]

                                                                             Hϵ′ X           2  Hϵ′
                                                                        =       ·  (wi − vi ) ≥     ,                             (H.15)
                                                                             2S                 16
                                                                                      i∈[S]
                                                                                                       val
                                                                   π
where the last inequality follows from Eq.(G.4). By definition of DΘ , we have
            a             a                         a
  val
                                     val

Dπ R (w←w) , R; P(w←w) ≥ dπ rbad , r; P(w←w)
  Θ                                                             w
                                                                                                  a                        a
                                                                              π val                        π val
                                              ≥ E (w←w
                                                    a
                                                       )                     VH+2        bad
                                                                                    (s; rw   , P(w←w) ) − VH+2   (s; r, P(w←w) )
                                                      P             ,π val
                                                  X 1 + ϵ′ · w i                                          a                           a
                                                                                   π val                           π val
                                              =                                   VH+2           bad
                                                                                         (s̄i ; rw   , P(w←w) ) − VH+2   (s̄i ; r, P(w←w) )
                                                                    S
                                                  i∈[S]
                                                  X ϵ′                      a                        a
                                                        π val                        π val
                                              ≥        VH+2        bad
                                                              (s; rw   , P(w←w) ) − VH+2   (s; r, P(w←w) ) ,
                                                    2S
                                                  i∈[S]
                                                                                                                                  (H.16)
where the last line is due to ϵ′ ∈ (0, 1/2]. By construction of π val , in MDP\R Mw←v
                                                                                   a , the visiting
               val
probability dπH+1 is given by
                                                                                     a

                                                          val
                                                  dπH+1 si⋆ , a1 ; P(w←w) = 1.

                   a            a

           R (w←v) , R; P(w←v) , we also have
        val
     π
For DΘ
                       a            a                     a

           π val                           val
          DΘ       R (w←v) , R; P(w←v) ≥ dπ rvbad , r; P(w←v)
                                        val                           a                  val           a
              ≥ E (w←v
                    a
                       )
                                      π
                                     VH+1 (s; rvbad , P(w←v) ) − VH+1
                                                                  π
                                                                      (s; r, P(w←v) )
                    P       ,π val
                                                  a                                            a
                    π val                            π val
              =    VH+1   (si⋆ ; rvbad , P(w←v) ) − VH+1   (si⋆ ; r, P(w←v) )

                 bad
              = rv,H+1 (si⋆ , a1 ) − rH+1 (si⋆ , a1 )

                      a
                  X (w←v )                                        a                           a
                                            val
                                                                           π val
              −                             π
                   PH+1 (s̄i |si⋆ , a1 ) · VH+2 (s̄i ; rvbad , P(w←v) ) − VH+2   (s̄i ; r, P(w←v) )
                  i∈[S]
                 bad
              ≥ rv,H+1 (si⋆ , a1 ) − rH+1 (si⋆ , a1 )
                X 1 + ϵ ′ · vi                              a                           a
                                    π val                            π val
              −                 · VH+2    (s̄i ; rvbad , P(w←v) ) − VH+2   (s̄i ; r, P(w←v) ) ,                                   (H.17)
                       S
                  i∈[S]

where the second last line is by the bellman equation and the last line is due to the triangle inequality.
           a            a
       (w←w  )     (w←w    )       bad    bad
Since Ph       = Ph          and rw,h  = rv,h for all h ≥ H + 2, we have
                    a                           a                                                           a                               a
 π val                       π val                                                  π val                            π val
VH+2   (s̄i ; r, P(w←v) ) = VH+2   (s̄i ; r, P(w←w) ),                             VH+2   (s̄i ; rvbad , P(w←v) ) = VH+2           bad
                                                                                                                           (s̄i ; rw   , P(w←w) ).
                                                                                                                                    (H.18)
Apply Eq.(H.18) to Eq.(H.17), we have
                      a           a

          π val
        DΘ        R (w←v) , R; P(w←v)


                                                                             50
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            bad
         ≥ rv,H+1 (si⋆ , a1 ) − rH+1 (si⋆ , a1 )
           X 1 + ϵ′ · v i                              a                           a
                               π val                            π val
         −                 · VH+2    (s̄i ; rvbad , P(w←v) ) − VH+2   (s̄i ; r, P(w←v) )
                  S
             i∈[S]
            bad
         = rv,H+1 (si⋆ , a1 ) − rH+1 (si⋆ , a1 )
           X 1 + ϵ′ · v i                             a                           a
                               π val                           π val
         −                 · VH+2            bad
                                     (s̄i ; rw   , P(w←w) ) − VH+2   (s̄i ; r, P(w←w) )
                  S
             i∈[S]
              bad
         ≥ rv,H+1   (si⋆ , a1 ) − rH+1 (si⋆ , a1 )
            X 3                                 a                            a
                         π val                           π val
         −          · VH+2             bad
                               (s̄i ; rw   , P(w←w) ) − VH+2    (s̄i ; r, P(w←w) )
                 2S
           i∈[S]
                                                                          a        a

                                                          π val
              bad
         ≥ rv,H+1   (si⋆ , a1 ) − rH+1 (si⋆ , a1 ) − 3DΘ          R (w←w) , R; P(w←w) ,          (H.19)

where the last second inequality comes from ϵ′ ∈ (0, 1/2] and the last inequality comes from
Eq.(H.16).
                                                                             a          a

We next bound rw,H+1bad
                         (si⋆ , a1 ) − rH+1 (si⋆ , a1 ) by DΘ   π val
                                                                        R (w←w) , R; P(w←w) .
                       a             a                                a

         π val                                  val
       DΘ        R (w←w) , R; P(w←w) ≥ dπ rw          bad
                                                          , r; P(w←w)
                                                      a                        a
                                 π val                         π val
         ≥ E (w←w
               a
                  )             VH+1   (s; rvbad , P(w←w) ) − VH+1   (s; r, P(w←w) )
               P       ,π val
                                        a                           a
               π val                           π val
         =    VH+1           bad
                     (si⋆ ; rw   , P(w←w) ) − VH+1   (si⋆ ; r, P(w←w) )

            bad
         = rw,H+1 (si⋆ , a1 ) − rH+1 (si⋆ , a1 )

                 a
             X (w←w )                                       a                           a
                                       val
                                                                     π val
        −                              π
              PH+1 (s̄i |si⋆ , a1 ) · VH+2         bad
                                           (s̄i ; rw   , P(w←w) ) − VH+2   (s̄i ; r, P(w←w) )
            i∈[S]
           bad
        ≥ rw,H+1 (si⋆ , a1 ) − rH+1 (si⋆ , a1 )
          X 1 + ϵ′ · w i                             a                           a
                              π val                           π val
        −                 · VH+2            bad
                                    (s̄i ; rw   , P(w←w) ) − VH+2   (s̄i ; r, P(w←w) )
                 S
            i∈[S]
             bad
        ≥ rw,H+1    (si⋆ , a1 ) − rH+1 (si⋆ , a1 )
           X 3                                 a                           a
                        π val                           π val
        −          · VH+2             bad
                              (s̄i ; rw   , P(w←w) ) − VH+2   (s̄i ; r, P(w←w) )
                2S
          i∈[S]
                                                                         a        a

                                                          π val
             bad
        ≥ rw,H+1    (si⋆ , a1 ) − rH+1 (si⋆ , a1 ) − 3DΘ          R (w←w) , R; P(w←w) ,          (H.20)

where the last second inequality comes from ϵ′ ∈ (0, 1/2] and the last inequality is by Eq.(H.16).
Eq.(H.20) is equivalent to
                             a           a

                 π val
              4DΘ        R (w←w) , R; P(w←w) ≥ rw,H+1
                                                 bad
                                                        (si⋆ , a1 ) − rH+1 (si⋆ , a1 ) .    (H.21)

Combining Eq.(H.19) and Eq.(H.21), we conclude that
                        a           a                   a           a

            π val                           π val
         7DΘ        R (w←w) , R; P(w←w) + DΘ        R (w←v) , R; P(w←v)
                 bad                                     bad
              ≥ rw,H+1 (si⋆ , a1 ) − rH+1 (si⋆ , a1 ) + rv,H+1 (si⋆ , a1 ) − rH+1 (si⋆ , a1 )
                 bad                  bad             Hϵ′
              ≥ rv,H+1 (si⋆ , a1 ) − rw,H+1 (si⋆ , a1 ) ≥ ,                                      (H.22)
                                                       16
where the last inequality comes from Eq.(H.15). This completes the proof.



                                                        51
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H.3     P ROOF FOR T HEOREM H.2

Our proof is similar to the proof of Theorem G.2 in Section G.

Proof of Theorem H.2. For any ϵ ∈ (0, 1/2], δ ∈ (0, 1), We consider an offline IRL algorithm A
such that for any IRL problem (M, π E ), we have
                                       val
                               P       DΘπ
                                              R ⋆ , Rb ≤ ϵ ≥ 1 − δ,                      (H.23)
                                      (M,π E ),A

where       P        denotes the probability measure induced by executing the algorithm A in the IRL
        (M,π E ),A
problem (M, π E ), R ⋆ is the ground truth reward mapping and Rb is the estimated reward mapping
outputted by executing A in (M, π E ). Fix i⋆ ∈ [S], We define the the identification function for any
w ∈ W by
                                                         a          a

                                             π val
                           Φw := arg min DΘ          R (w←v) , R;
                                                               b P(w←v) ,
                                                 v∈W
                                         a
where a = (i⋆ , H + 1, 1), R (w←v) is the ground truth reward mapping induced by (Mw←v   E
                                                                                    a , π ).

Let v ⋆ = Φa,w . For any v ̸= v ⋆ ∈ W, by definition of v ⋆ , we have
                               a ⋆         a                       a       a

                 DΘπ val              b P(w←v⋆ ) ≤ Dπval R (w←v) , R;
                           R (w←v ) , R;                              b P(w←v) .
                                                       Θ

By applying Lemma G.3, we obtain that
Hϵ′      π val
                    a          a
                                                a
                          b P(w←v) + 7Dπval R (w←v⋆ ) , R;
                                                             a
                                                                               a
                                                        b P(w←v⋆ ) ≤ 8Dall R (w←v) , R;
                                                                                          a

     ≤ DΘ       R (w←v) , R;           Θ                               Θ
                                                                                     b P(w←v) .
 16
Next, we set ϵ′ = 256ϵ
                   H which implies that

                                          Hϵ′
                                                ≥ 16ϵ.                                  (H.24)
                                           16
Here, to employ Lemma H.4, we need ϵ′ ∈ (0, 1/2] which is equivalent to 0 < ϵ ≤ H/512. Then, it
holds that                              a           a

                            π val
                          DΘ        R (w←v) , R;
                                              b P(w←v) ≥ 2ϵ > ϵ,

which implies that
                                                     a          a
                                         n val                         o
                                           π
                             {v ̸= Φw } ⊆ DΘ     R (w←v) , R;
                                                           b P(w←v) ≥ ϵ .

By Eq.(H.23), we have the following lower bound for the probability
                                                      a            a
                                          val
                  δ ≥ sup        P        DΘπ
                                                R (w←v) , R;
                                                           b P(w←v) ≥ ϵ
                                                   E
                                v∈W (Mw←v
                                       a ,π ),A


                            ≥ sup            P             (v ̸= Φw )
                                                   E
                                v∈W (Mw←v
                                       a ,π ),A

                                 1 X
                            ≥            P         (v ̸= Φw ).                                                  (H.25)
                                |W|     a ,π E ),A
                                     (Mw←v
                                      v∈W

By applying Theorem D.3 with P0 =                           P      , Pw =        P          , we have
                                                     a ,π E ),A
                                                  (Mw←0                        a ,π E ),A
                                                                            (Mw←w
                                                                                                                  !         
 1 X                                   1  1 X
         P         (v ̸= Φw ) ≥ 1 −             DKL                                           P         ,   P          − log 2.
|W|     a ,π E ),A
     (Mw←w                          log |W| |W|                                         a ,π E ),A (M a ,π E ),A
                                                                                     (Mw←v           w←0
      v∈W                                                               v∈W
                                                                                                                (H.26)
Our next step is to bound the KL divergence. Using the same scheme in the proof (Metelli et al.,
2021, Theorem B.3), we can compute the KL-divergence as follows:
          DKL (         P         ,          P         )
                   a ,π E ),A (M a ,π E ),A
                (Mw←v           w←0


                                                                 52
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                 "N                                                          #
                                                                          a
                                                 a                     (w ←0)
                                         DKL P(     ) h (· | s , a ), P
                                  X
                                               w ←v
             = E(Mw ←v,π
                    a    E ),A                         t      t t      ht     (· | st , at )
                                   t=1
                                                         a                         a

                                                       (w←v )                    (w←0)
             ≤ E(Mw ←v,π
                    a    E ),A [N   (s
                                  ha ia , aka )]DKL  P H+1    (· | si ⋆ , a1 ), PH+1   (· | si ⋆ , a1 )

             ≤ 2(ϵ′ )2 E(Mw ←v,π
                            a    E ),A [NH+1 (si⋆ , a1 )],                                                  (H.27)
                    PN
where Nh (s, a) := t=1 1 {(ht , st , at ) = (h, s, a)} for any given (h, s, a) ∈ [2H + 2] × S × A
and the last inequality comes from (Metelli et al., 2021, Lemma E.4). Combining Eq.(H.25) and
(H.26), we have
                                                                                           
                         1       1   X
            δ ≥1−                         2(ϵ′ )2 E(Mw ←v,π
                                                        a    E ),A [Nha (si⋆ , a1 )] − log 2
                                                                                            
                     log(|W|) |W|
                                             v∈W

for any w. It also holds that
                    1 X                                      (1 − δ) log |W| − log 2
                        E(Mw ←v,π
                             a    E ),A [NH+1 (si⋆ , a1 )] ≥                         .                      (H.28)
                   |W|                                                2(ϵ′ )2
                        v∈W

Hence, there exists a whard ∈ W such that
                                                                (1 − δ) log |W| − log 2
                        E(Mwhard ,πE ),A [NH+1 (si⋆ , a1 )] ≥                           .                   (H.29)
                                                                         2(ϵ′ )2
By taking δ = 1/3, we have
                                                                                               2
                                            (1 − δ) log |W| − log 2   2 log |W| − 3 log 2     H S
    E(Mwhard ,πE ),A [NH+1 (si⋆ , a1 )] ≥                           =                     = Ω       ,
                                                     2(ϵ′ )2                 6(ϵ′ )2           ϵ2
                                                                                                (H.30)

where the last equality follows from  ϵ′ = 256ϵ              S                     b
                                            H and log W ≥ 10 . By construction of π , it holds
                                  1
that NH+1 (si⋆ , a1 ) ∼ Bin K, C ⋆ K , which implies that
                                       2           ⋆ 2            ⋆ 2
                              ⋆       H S          C H SK         C H S min {S, A}
     E(Mwhard ,πE ),A [N ] ≥ C K · Ω         =Ω              =Ω                          .
                                        ϵ               ϵ2                ϵ2


I     T RANSFER LEARNING
In this section, we explore the application of IRL in the context of transfer learning. Specifically,
we apply the rewards learned by Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 6 to do the same tasks in a different
environment.
To distinguish different environments,
                         n      o      given a transition dynanmics P and policy π, we introduce
                            P,π
the following notations: dh          represents the visitation probability induced by P and π, dP,π
                                      h∈[H]
signifies the metric dπ evaluated on P, and correspondingly DΘ
                                                             P,π                     π
                                                                 denotes the metric DΘ evaluated
on P.

I.1     T RANSFER LEARNING BETWEEN IRL PROBLEMS

We introduce the transfer learning setting outlined in Metelli et al. (2021), where we consider two
                                                                 E
IRL problems: (M, π E ) (the source IRL problem), (M′ , (π ′ ) ) (the target IRL problem). Here, M,
   ′
M share the same state space and action space, but different dynamics. Suppose that we can learn
                                                                                                 E
the source MDP and obtain a reward r. However, r is not necessarily a solution for (M′ , (π ′ ) ),
hence, in order to facilitate the transfer learning, we enforce the following assumption.


                                                         53
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Assumption I.1. If r represents a solution to the source IRL problem (M, π E ), it also stands as a
                                               E
solution to the target IRL problem (M′ , (π ′ ) ).
We remark that in numerous practical scenarios, Assumption I.1 may not be precisely met, but could
be approximated: within a certain distance, the solutions to the two IRL problems are very close to
each other.

I.2   T RANSFER BETWEEN TWO MDP\R S

In this section, we consider a more general setting, where we focus solely on a source IRL problem
and a target MDP\R.
We consider two MDP\Rs M = (S, A, H, P) (source MDP\R) and M′ = (S, A, H, P′ ) (the target
MDP\R), which share the same state space and action space, but different dynamics and an expert
policy π E . Let R ⋆ be the ground truth reward mapping of the IRL problem (M, π E ) and Rb be the
estimated reward mapping learned from (M, π E ). In the precious setting, we consider DP,π R ⋆ , Rb
                                                                   P′ ,π

as performance metric. However, in transfer learning, we use DΘ           R ⋆ , Rb as our measure of
performance. That is we use the rewards learned by the source IRL problem to perform the same
tasks in a different environment and evaluate them in the new environment.
As we see in Section 1, Inverse reinforcement learning(IRL) and behavioral cloning(BC) are highly
related. As mentioned in Metelli et al. (2021), transfer learning makes IRL more powerful than BC,
and a lot of literature has used IRL to do transfer learning (Syed & Schapire, 2007; Metelli et al.,
2021; Abbeel & Ng, 2004; Fu et al., 2017; Levine et al., 2011).
Inspired by the single policy concentrability of policies, we propose the following transferability
assumption.
Definition I.2 (Weak-transferability). Given transitions (P, P′ ), and policies (π, π ′ ), we say (P′ , π ′ )
is C wtran -weakly transferable from (P, π) if it holds that
                                                 ′    ′
                                              dPh ,π (s, a)
                                       sup                 ≤ C wtran .
                                        s,a   dP,π
                                                h   (s, a)
Definition I.3 (Transferability). Given source and target transitions P, P′ , and target policy π ′ , we
say π ′ is C tran -transferable from P to P′ if it holds that
                                                      ′   ′
                                                 dPh ,π (s, a)
                                      inf sup                    ≤ C tran .
                                       π   s,a       dP,π
                                                      h (s, a)

Here, we introduce two notions: transferability and weak-transferability. We remark that given
a policy π and a dynamics (P, P′ ), transferability measures how hard one can lean the states π ′
frequently goes to in P in a different environment P′ while given a policy pair (π, π ′ ) and a dynamics
pair (P, P′ ), weak-transferability measures how hard one learn the states π frequently visits in P via
policy π ′ in P′ . Without transferability, we can’t obtain information on the policy of interest in the
target MDP, which makes transfer learning hard to perform.

I.3   T HEORETICAL GUARANTEE

We then present the main theorem in this section.
Theorem I.4 (Transfer learning in the offline setting). Suppose (P′ , π val ) is C wtran -weakly transfer-
able from (P, π b ) (Definition I.2). In addition, we assume π E is well-posed (Definition 3.3) when
we receive feedback in option 1. hThen withiprobability at least 1 − δ, RLP (Algorithm 1) outputs
a reward mapping Rb such that R(V,     b A) (s, a) ≤ [R ⋆ (V, A)] (s, a) for all (V, A) ∈ Θ and
                                                                     h
                                                  h
                                    ′

                                   P ,π val
(h, s, a) ∈ [H] × S × A, and DΘ               R , R ≤ 2ϵ, within
                                               ⋆ b

                wtran 4
                      H SA log N (Θ; ϵ/H) C wtran H 2 SA(η + H log N (Θ; ϵ/H))

               C
           Oe                                      +                                          ,      (I.1)
                              ϵ2                                    ϵ
samples, where poly log (H, S, A, 1/δ) are omitted and η is defined in Eq.(3.3).


                                                          54
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem I.5 (Transfer learning in the online setting). Suppose π E is well-posed (Definition 3.4)
when we receive feedback in option 1. Let R ⋆ be the ground truth reward mapping of IRL problem
(M,hπ E ). Theniwith probability at least 1 − δ, RLE (Algorithm 6) outputs a reward mapping Rb such
that R(V,
      b A) (s, a) ≤ [R ⋆ (V, A)] (s, a) for all (V, A) ∈ Θ and (h, s, a) ∈ [H] × S × A, and
                                              h
                 h
                                                                          ′   val
                                                                         P ,π
                                             sup                        DΘ    (R ⋆ , R)
                                                                                     b ≤ 2ϵ,
                           π val is C tran -transferable from P to P′

provided that
                      √
    KH ≥ N ≥ O
             e            H 9 S 7 A7 K ,
                                                                                     !
        C tran HSA C tran + H 3 log N (Θ; ϵ/H)     C tran H 2 SA(η + log N (Θ; ϵ/H))
    K≥O
      e                                          +
                           ϵ2                                       ϵ

where η is defined in Eq.(3.3) and O
                                   e hides poly log (H, S, A, 1/δ).


Application: performing RL algorithms in different environments With Theorem I.4 and
Theorem I.5 in place, as a concrete application, we consider to utilize rewards learned by IRL
algorithms to execute RL algorithms in a different environment (M′ ). The following two corollaries
provide guarantees for the performance of learned rewards in executing RL algorithms in the offline
and online setting, respectively. Both of these corollaries are direct consequences of Proposition C.6.
Corollary I.6 (Performing RL algorithms with learned rewards in the offline setting). Fix θ =
(V, A) ∈ Θ, let rθ := R ⋆ (V, A) and rbθ := R(V,     b A), where Rb are recovered reward mapping
outputted by Algorithm 1. suppose that there exists a policy π such that π is ϵ̄-optimal in MDP
M′ ∪ rθ and (P′ , π) is C wtran -weakly transferable from (P, π b ) (Definition I.2). Let π     b be an ϵ′ -
                    ′     θ                                            θ
optimal policy in M ∪ rb (learned by some RL algorithms with rb ). Under the same assumption of
Theorem I.4 , we have V1⋆ (s1 ; M′ ∪ rθ ) − V1πb (s1 ; M′ ∪ rθ ) ≤ 2ϵ + ϵ′ + 2ϵ̄, provided that Algorithm 1
takes
               wtran 4
                      H SA log N (Θ; ϵ/H) C wtran H 2 SA(η + H log N (Θ; ϵ/H))

               C
          Oe                                     +                                              ,      (I.2)
                              ϵ2                                        ϵ
samples.
Corollary I.7 (Performing RL algorithms with learned rewards in the online setting). Fix θ =
(V, A) ∈ Θ, let rθ := R ⋆ (V, A) and rbθ := R(V, b A), where Rb are recovered reward mapping
outputted by Algorithm 6. suppose that there exists a policy π such that π is ϵ̄-optimal in MDP
M′ ∪ rθ and π is C tran -transferable from P to P′ (Definition I.3). Let π
                                                                         b be an ϵ′ -optimal policy in
   ′
M ∪b  r (learned by some RL algorithms with rb ), then we have V1 (s1 ; M′ ∪rθ )−V1πb (s1 ; M′ ∪rθ ) ≤
       θ                                       θ                  ⋆

2ϵ + ϵ′ + 2ϵ̄, provided that
                       √
     KH ≥ N ≥ O     e H 9 S 7 A7 K ,
                                                                                                !
                 tran        tran     3                       tran 2
               C      HSA  C      + H   log N (Θ; ϵ/H)      C     H  SA(η  +  log N  (Θ; ϵ/H))
     K≥O   e                                             +
                                   ϵ2                                        ϵ


Application: learning IRL problems by transfer learning We return to the topic of transfer learn-
ing between IRL problems. We note that our findings related to transfer learning between MDP\Rs
can also be employed in the context of transfer learning between IRL problems. As the illustrated in
                                                                                   π val b
Theorem I.4 and Theorem I.5, we can efficiently learn a Rb such that the distance DΘ    (R, R ⋆ ) ≤ 2ϵ,
where R is the ground truth reward
          ⋆                                              E
                                     mapping of (M, π ). By Assumption I.1, the rewards induced
                               ′ E
by R are solutions of M , (π ) , hence the rewards induced by Rb approximate the solutions of
     ⋆                     ′

             E
  M′ , (π ′ ) .


                                                               55
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I.4    P ROOF OF T HEOREM I.4

Note that under the same assumptions in Theorem I.4, the concentration event E defined in Lemma E.1
still holds with 1 − δ. By the week-transferablity of (π val , π b ), we have
                         ′   val
      X        X      dPh ,π (s, a)                                 X            X        n ′ val            o
                             b                    ≤ C wtran                              1 dPh ,π (s, a) ̸= 0
  h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A       dhP,π (s, a)                                h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
                                                                    X            X
                                                          wtran
                                                                                         1 a ∈ πhval (·|s) ≤ C wtran HSA.

                                                  ≤C                                                                        (I.3)
                                                                    h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A

For any θ = (V, A) ∈ Θ, define rθ = R ⋆ (V, A), and rbθ = R(V,
                                                           b A). With Eq.(I.3) at hand, we can
repeat the proof of Lemma E.2, thereby obtaining that
               ′  val        C wtran H 2 SAηι     X       X        ′  val
             dP ,π rθ , rbθ ≲                 +                 dhP ,π (s, a)bθh (s, a),  (I.4)
                                     K
                                                h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
                                                |                {z                   }
                                                                                                  (I)

holds on the event E. where η, bθh (s, a) are specified in Lemma E.1.
Furthermore, similar to Eq.(E.11), and through the application of the triangle inequality, we can
                            ′    val
decompose (s,a)∈S×A dPh ,π (s, a)bθh (s, a) as follows:
          P

       X       X          ′   val
 (I) =                 dPh ,π (s, a)bθh (s, a)
          h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
                                                        (s                                                                   )
              X     X              val       log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι h b           i        H log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
      ≲                 dπh (s, a) ·              b
                                                                   Vh Vh+1 (s, a) +
                                                Nh (s, a) ∨ 1                          Nhb (s, a) ∨ 1
        h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
                                                  s                     !
         X        X
                         π val           ϵ           log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
      +                 dh (s, a) ·          1+
                                        H               Nhb (s, a) ∨ 1
        h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
                                            s
         X        X      P′ ,π val            log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
      ≤                 dh         (s, a) ·                       [Vh Vh+1 ](s, a)
                                                Nhb (s, a) ∨ 1
        h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
        |                                   {z                                   }
                                                            (I.a)
                                                           s
          X        X               ′     val                     log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι h  b                i
      +                      dPh ,π (s, a) ·                                       V  h − V h  V h+1  (s, a)
                                                                   Nhb (s, a) ∨ 1
          h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
          |                                                         {z                                     }
                                                                    (I.b)
          X        X               ′     val               H log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
      +                      dPh ,π (s, a) ·
                                                              Nhb (s, a) ∨ 1
          h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
          |                                     {z                           }
                                               (I.c)
                                                                            s                           !
              X       X                  ′      val                 1            log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
      +ϵ·                          dPh ,π             (s, a) ·        +                                     .               (I.5)
                                                                    H            H 2 · Nhb (s, a) ∨ 1
              h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
          |                                                 {z                                          }
                                                           (I.d)

Thanks to Eq.(I.3), we can employ a similar argument as in the proof of Eq.(E.12), Eq.(E.17),
Eq.(E.18), and Eq.(E.19), which allows us to deduce that
                 r
                    C wtran H 4 SAnE log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
         (I.a) ≲                                     ,
                                     K
                 r
                    C wtran H 2 SA log N (Θ; ϵ/H) C wtran H 3 SA log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι5/2
         (I.b) ≲                                  +                                 ,
                                  K                                K

                                                                            56
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                            r
                          C wtran H 2 SA log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι                          C wtran SA log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
                  (I.c) ≲                                , ϵ · (1 +                                          ),               (I.6)
                                         K                                                     K
Combining Eq.(I.4), Eq.(I.5) and Eq.(I.6), we conclude that
                                                                                    r
 P′ ,π val
                                 ′  val        C wtran H 2 SAηι                         C wtran H 4 SAnE log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
DΘ                R , Rb = sup dP ,π rθ , rbθ ≲
                    ⋆
                                                                +
                           θ∈Θ                         K                                               K
                                                        C wtran H 3 SAnE log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι5/2
                                                    +                                       + ϵ.                              (I.7)
                                                                          K
The right-hand-side is upper bounded by 2ϵ as long as
                 wtran 4
                        H SA log N (Θ; ϵ/H) C wtran H 2 SA(η + H log N (Θ; ϵ/H))

                 C
       K≥O   e                                 +                                  .
                               ϵ2                             ϵ
Here poly log (H, S, A, 1/δ) are omitted.

I.5       P ROOF OF T HEOREM I.5

Under the assumptions in Theorem I.5, the concentration event E defined in Lemma F.2 still holds
with 1 − δ. Fix π such that π satisfies C tran -concentrability from P to P′ . We define

                                                   ′            ξ
                    Īh := (s, a) ∈ S × A | dbPh ,π (s, a) ≥       + eπh (s, a) ,
                                                                N
for all h ∈ [H]. Similar to Eq.(F.8), we have the following decomposition:
  ′                    X             ′
dP ,π rhθ , rbhθ ≤                dPh ,π (s, a) · rhθ (s, a) − rbhθ (s, a)


                         (h,s,a)∈[H]×S×A
       X                X       ′                                           X           X             ′
≤                            dPh ,π (s, a) · rhθ (s, a) − rbhθ (s, a) +                           dPh ,π (s, a) · rθ (s, a) − rbhθ (s, a) ,
      h∈[H] (s,a)∈I
                 / h ∪Īh                                                 h∈[H] (s,a)∈Ih ∪Īh
      |                             {z                             }      |                                     {z                        }
                                    (I)                                                                       (II)
                                                                                                                              (I.8)
where set Ih is defined in Eq.(F.5).
We further decompose the term (I) as follows:
      X X            ′                                       X                       X        ′
(I) ≤             dPh ,π (s, a) · rhθ (s, a) − rbhθ (s, a) +                                dPh ,π (s, a) · rhθ (s, a) − rbhθ (s, a) .
          h∈[H] (s,a)∈I
                     / h                                                h∈[H] (s,a)∈
                                                                                   / Īh
          |                           {z                          }     |                                  {z                         }
                                     (I.a)                                                                (I.b)
                                                                                                                              (I.9)
By the definition of transferability, there exists a policy π ′ such that
                                               ′                              ′
                                             dP ,π h (s, a) ≤ 2C tran dP,π
                                                                       h (s, a),

for any (h, s, a) ∈ [H] × S × A. For the term (I.a), we have
         X         X         ′                                                                    X                  ′
(I.a) =                   dPh ,π (s, a) · rhθ (s, a) − rbhθ (s, a) ≤ 2C tran                                    dP,π         θ
                                                                                                                                        bhθ (s, a)
                                                                                                                 h (s, a) · rh (s, a) − r
              h∈[H] (s,a)∈I
                         / h ∪Īh                                                          (s,a)∈I
                                                                                                / h ∪Īh
                                                                                                                             (I.10)
Similar to Eq.(F.9), on the event E, we have
 X        X            ′                                    X                      X          ′
                                    θ            θ                                                     θ
                  dP,π
                    h    (s, a) · rh  (s, a) − r
                                               bh  (s, a) ≤                               dP,π                    bhθ (s, a)
                                                                                           h (s, a) · rh (s, a) − r
h∈[H] (s,a)∈I
           / h ∪Īh                                                   h∈[H] (s,a)∈I
                                                                                 / h
                                                                                                          r
                                                                    ξH 2 SA H 2 SAη                           HSA
                                                                  ≲        +        +                             ,
                                                                      N        K                               K

                                                             57
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


which allows us to bound the term (I.a) as follows:
                                                                                         r
                                 C tran ξH 2 SA C tran H 2 SAη                               HSA
                      (I.a) ≲                    +              + C tran                         .                 (I.11)
                                        N                   K                                 K
For the term (I.b), on the event E, we have
           X X              ′
 (I.b) =                 dPh ,π (s, a) · rθ (s, a) − rbθ (s, a)
                 h∈[H] (s,a)∈
                            / Īh

         X          X         ′
                           dPh ,π (s, a) · − Ah (s, a) 1 a ∈ supp πhE (·|s) − 1 a ∈ supp π
                                                                                         bhE (·|s)

 =
        h∈[H] (s,a)∈
                   / Īh
        h                i
 −                bh Vh+1 (s, a)(s, a) − bθ (s, a)
             Ph − P                       h

                                                (
         X          X         ′
                           dPh ,π (s, a) ·                                 bhE (·|s) − ·1 a ∈ supp πhE (·|s)

 ≤                                                  Ah (s, a) · 1 a ∈ supp π
        h∈[H] (s,a)∈
                   / Īh
                                                              )
        h                        i
 +          (Ph − P
                  bh )Vh+1 (s, a)              + bθh (s, a)                                     (by triangle inequality)

 (i)             X       X           ′
 ≲H·                             dPh ,π (s, a)
              h∈[H] (s,a)∈
                         / Īh

 (ii)
             tran
                        X           X   P,π ′       π′        ξ
 ≤ 2C H ·                             dh (s, a) + eh (s, a) +
                                      b
                                                              N
                   h∈[H] (s,a)∈
                              / Īh
 (iii)             X X   ′                        ξ

  ≲ C tran H ·                       eπh (s, a) +
                                                  N
                  h∈[H] (s,a)∈
                             / Īh
                                 r
       C tran ξH 2 SA               HSA
 ≲                    + C tran               ,                                                                     (I.12)
              N                       K
where (i) is by ∥Ah ∥∞ , ∥Vh+1 ∥∞ , bθh (s, a) ≤ H, (ii) comes from Eq.(F.2) and the concentration
event E(ii), and (iii) follows from the definition of Īh .
Combining Eq.(I.11) and Eq.(I.12), we can conclude that
                                                                                        r
                                       C tran ξH 2 SA C tran H 2 SAη                        HSA
                                 (I) ≲               +               + C tran                   .                  (I.13)
                                              N              K                               K

For the term (II), following a similar approach as in Eq.(F.10), we have
        X         X          ′
(II) =                    dPh ,π (s, a) · bθh (s, a)
             h∈[H] (s,a)∈Ih ∪Īh
                                                                   (s
                  X          X                  ′                       log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι h b     i         H log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
             =                               dPh ,π (s, a) · min                         Vh Vh+1 (s, a) +
                                                                            b
                                                                          N (s, a) ∨ 1
                                                                          b                                  b b (s, a) ∨ 1
                                                                                                             N
                 h∈[H] (s,a)∈Ih ∪Īh                                       h                                   h
                            s                            !        )
                 ϵ          log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
             +     1+                             ,H
                 H            b b (s, a) ∨ 1
                              N h
                                                  (    (s                                     )
             (i) X         X          ′                   log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι h
                                                                            b h Vh+1 (s, a), H + H log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
                                                                                    i
             ≤                     dPh ,π (s, a) · min                      V
                                                              b
                                                            Nh (s, a) ∨ 1
                                                            b                                       b b (s, a) ∨ 1
                                                                                                    N
                h∈[H] (s,a)∈I ∪Īh       h                                                            h
                                                                                                                   (I.14)
                            s                            !)
                 ϵ              log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
             +     1+
                 H                b b (s, a) ∨ 1
                                  N      h


                                                                      58
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                   v                  h           i
                                                 (u
                                                   u log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι V  b h Vh+1 (s, a) + H
       (ii) X           X           ′                                                         H log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
       ≤                         dPh ,π (s, a) ·                                            +
                                                   t
                                                              N b
                                                               b (s, a) ∨ 1 + 1/H                b b (s, a) ∨ 1
                                                                                                 N
             h∈[H] (s,a)∈Ih ∪Īh                                h                                  h
                      s                        !)
             ϵ           log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
       +         1+
             H             Nb b (s, a) ∨ 1
                              h
                                                  v                 h           i
                                                  u
       (iii)  X         X            ′
                                                  u log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι   b h Vh+1 (s, a) + H
                                                                      V
        =                         dPh ,π (s, a) · t
                                                  u
                                                                  h           i
                                                                      ′
             h∈[H] (s,a)∈Ih ∪Īh                         KEπ′ ∼µb dbπh (s, a) + 1/H
             |                                        {z                                  }
                                                       (II.a)
            X         X             ′                H log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
       +                         dPh ,π (s, a) ·          h
                                                               ′
                                                                      i
           h∈[H] (s,a)∈Ih ∪Īh                    KEπ′ ∼µb dbπh (s, a) + 1/H
           |                                    {z                          }
                                              (II.b)
                                                                                                        
                                                         v
           ϵ X           X               P′ ,π
                                                         u                 log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
       +                                dh (s, a) · 1 + t                                     .            (I.15)
                                                        u                     h        i      
           H                                                                      π ′
                                                                      KEπ′ ∼µb dh (s, a) + 1/H
                                                                                 b
               h∈[H] (s,a)∈Ih ∪Īh
           |                                               {z                                  }
                                                       (II.c)

For the term (II.a), by the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, we have
               √         X       X     q
                                            ′
     (II.a) ≤ C tran                     dPh ,π (s, a) · (log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι[Vh Vh+1 ] (s, a) + H)
                         h∈[H] (s,a)∈Ih ∪Īh
      v                   ′
               dP,π   (s, a)
      u
     ·t        hh
      u
                             i
                    ′
       KEπ′ ∼µb dbπh (s, a) + 1/H
      √       X         X      q
                                   ′
     ≲ C tran                   dPh ,π (s, a) · (log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι[Vh Vh+1 ] (s, a) + H)
                  h∈[H] (s,a)∈Ih ∪Īh
      v
      u bP,π′              ′        ξ
      u 2d (s, a) + 2eπh (s, a) + 2N
     ·t h        h
                      ′
                             i
         KEπ′ ∼µb dbπh (s, a) + 1/H
       √      X         X      q
                                    ′
     ≲ C tran                    dPh ,π (s, a) · (log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι[Vh Vh+1 ] (s, a) + H)
                  h∈[H] (s,a)∈Ih ∪Īh
      v               ′
                dbP,π   (s, a)
      u
                  h
     ·t
      u
                 h             i
                      ′
       KEπ′ ∼µb dbπh (s, a) + 1/H
                                                                                      1/2
      √       X            X       ′
                                                                                       
     ≤ C tran                    dhP ,π (s, a) · (log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι[Vh Vh+1 ] (s, a) + H)
                                                                                      
                h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A
              |                                        {z                                 }
                                                                     (II.a.1)
                                                    1/2
                                          ′
           X          X            dbP,π   (s, a)   
       ×                             hh            i      .
                                      bπ′
           h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A KEπ ′ ∼µb dh (s, a) + 1/H
                                                     
         |                       {z                     }
                                          (II.a.2)

Following similar approaches as in Eq.(F.12) and Eq.(F.13), we have
                                                                                             r
                                p                                                                HSA
                      (II.a.1) ≲ H 3 log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι,                           (II.a.2) ≲           ,       (I.16)
                                                                                                  K

                                                                59
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


which implies that
                                                 r
                                                     C tran H 4 SA log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
                                      (II.a) ≲                                     .                    (I.17)
                                                                    K
For the term (II.b), by Eq.(B.3), we have
                        X      X          ′                          H log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
            (II.b) =                   dPh ,π (s, a) ·                    h
                                                                              ′
                                                                                     i
                         h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A                          KEπ′ ∼µb dbπ (s, a) + 1/H
                                                                               h
                           tran
                         C             X         X            ′              H log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
                     =            ·                       dP,π
                                                           h (s, a) ·
                                                                               h          i
                          K                                                        ′
                                                                        Eπ′ ∼µb dbπ (s, a) + 1/KH
                                      h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A                                  h

                       C tran X                  X            ′         H log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
                     ≲       ·                        dbP,π
                                                        h (s, a) ·
                                                                          h          i
                        K                                                     ′
                                                                   Eπ′ ∼µb dbπ (s, a) + 1/KH
                                      h∈[H] (s,a)∈S×A                                  h

                       C tran H 2 SA log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
                    ≲                                .                                                  (I.18)
                                      K
For the term (II.c), we have
                                                                            
                                                    v
            ϵ X           X                         u      log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
  (II.c) =                         dP,π
                                    h (s, a) · 1 + t
                                                   u          h        i    
            H                                                       ′
                                                                             
                                                                  π
                                                       KE ′ b d (s, a) + 1/H
                                                                        π ∼µ
                h∈[H] (s,a)∈Ih ∪Īh
                                                                 b
                                                                                   h
             √                                              v
                                                            u P,π′
               C tran ϵ X                                   u d (s, a) log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
                                            q
                                                 P′ ,π
                                   X
         =ϵ+                                   dh (s, a) · t h             h              i
                H                                                                ′
                                                                KEπ′ ∼µb dbπh (s, a) + 1/H
                        h∈[H] (s,a)∈Ih ∪Īh
             √                                              v
                                                            u bP,π′
               C tran ϵ X                                   u d (s, a) log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
                                            q
                                                 P′ ,π
                                   X
         ≲ϵ+                                   dh (s, a) · t h             h              i
                H                                               KE    ′  b   dπ ′ (s, a) + 1/H
                                                                     π ∼µ
                        h∈[H] (s,a)∈Ih ∪Īh
                                                                             b
                                                                              h
                                                        v                      ′
             ϵ                                          u X X dbP,π        h (s, a)      log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
               sX                                       u
                                          ′
                              X
         ≤ϵ+                           dPh ,π (s, a) · t                              h             i
             H                                                          KE      ′   b   d π ′ (s, a) + 1/H
                                                                              π ∼µ
                   h∈[H] (s,a)∈Ih ∪Īh                   h∈[H] (s,a)∈Ih
                                                                                        b
                                                                                          h
               r                                   !
                    C tran SA log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
         ≤ϵ 1+                                        ,                                                  (I.19)
                                HK
where the second last line is by the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality and the last line is by Eq.(B.3).
Then combining Eq.(I.17) Eq.(I.18), and Eq.(I.19), we obtain the bound for the term (II)
(II) ≲ (II.a) + (II.b) + (II.c)
       r                                                                      r
          C tran H 4 SA log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι C tran H 2 SA log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι           C tran log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
     ≲                                  +                             + ϵ(1 +                          )
                         K                             K                                  HK
       r
          C tran H 4 SA log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι
     ≲                                  + ϵ,                                               (I.20)
                         K
where the last line is from ϵ < 1.
Finally, combining Eq.(I.13) and Eq.(I.20), we get the final bound

  all
        R ⋆ , Rb = sup dπ rhθ , rbhθ ≤ (I) + (II)

DΘ
                  π,θ∈Θ
                                    r                                                        r
                C tran ξH 2 SA          C tran H 4 SA log N (Θ; ϵ/H)ι C tran H 2 SAη    tran   HSA
             ≲                    +                                  +               +C            +ϵ
                       N                               K                     K                  K

Hence, we can guarantee DΘ  all
                                 R ⋆ , Rb ≤ 2ϵ, provided that
                   √
   KH ≥ N ≥ O   e H 9 S 7 A7 K ,


                                                             60
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                                   !
          tran       tran     3                      tran 2
        C      HSA C      + H   log N (Θ; ϵ/H)     C     H  SA(η + log N (Θ; ϵ/H))
    K≥O
      e                                          +
                           ϵ2                                     ϵ

Here poly log (H, S, A, 1/δ) are omitted.


                                             61
