Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A C ONCEPTUAL F RAMEWORK FOR A NALYZING
S OCIAL R EPRESENTATION IN U NSTRUCTURED DATA
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Unstructured data used in foundation model development is a challenge for system-
         atic analyses to make data use and documentation decisions. From a Responsible
         AI perspective, these decisions often rely upon understanding how people are repre-
         sented in data. We propose a framework to guide analysis of human representation
         in unstructured data and identify downstream risks. We apply the framework in
         two toy examples using the Common Crawl web text corpus (C4) (Raffel et al.,
         2020), and LAION-400M (Schuhmann et al., 2021). We also propose hypothetical
         action steps in service of dataset use, development, and documentation.


1     I NTRODUCTION
Data is recognized as a core underlying factor contributing to machine learning model behaviours
that can be unfair or harmful to humans (Paullada et al., 2021). Insights from systematic analysis of
datasets can identify potential harms and inform interventions to mitigate risk. Principled analysis
of the data underpinning pre-trained foundation models is particularly salient given the increasing
reach of such models and their use by researchers and developers who lack the resources to develop
computationally-intensive models (Bommasani et al., 2021; Han et al., 2021).
At the same time, the large, unstructured nature of these datasets poses significant challenges for
conducting analyses required to make development, documentation, and use decisions. The open-
ended potential for downstream use, means that risks are wide-ranging and sometimes lack clear
methods of evaluation (Weidinger et al., 2021). Prior systematic fairness audits have often focused
on data labels and utilized aggregated and disaggregated analyses to identify class imbalances (e.g.,
(Saleiro et al., 2018; Kearns et al., 2018; Kleinberg et al., 2016; Friedler et al., 2019)). Despite
increased scrutiny of large unstructured datasets (Birhane et al., 2021; Dodge et al., 2021), methods
of analysis remain less robust and less systematic relative to labeled datasets, in part because labels
provide a crucial pointer to dataset features to evaluate for fairness and bias concerns.
We close this gap by contributing a conceptual framework to standardize workflows for analyzing
unstructured data. The framework (shown in Appendix A) focuses on social representation of people
in data, including the data features that indicate social identity and influence the representation of
different social groups.While many evaluations of unstructured data exist across ML, there is little
guidance or structure for applying them in practice to fairness workflows. As a result, practitioners
apply analyses ad hoc, continue to use what they have used before, or miss relevant analyses (Madaio
et al., 2022; Heger et al., 2022). Our primary contribution is a conceptual structure– that is, a
sociotechnical organization of analyses which are grouped according to who is in the data, what is
in the data, and associations between the two. Thus, the structure and core analytical questions are
modality-agnostic and extensible to new modality combinations. The framework does not strictly
prescribe analysis implementations– rather, it guides responsible AI (RAI) workflow planning for
data evaluation, documentation, and risk mitigation.

2     BACKGROUND
2.1   DATASET T RANSPARENCY AND D OCUMENTATION

A growing body of scholarship in RAI focuses on increasing transparency of AI systems and datasets
for a variety of stakeholders. These range from developers who build on pre-trained models to system


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


end-users who may be subject to algorithmic decision making (Lima et al., 2022; Wagner et al., 2020).
At the dataset level, transparency highlights critical information about the contents of a dataset as
well as the processes that underpin how a dataset was created. To this end, a range of work brings
structured approaches to documenting both dataset content and development processes (Bender &
Friedman, 2018; Gebru et al., 2021; Dodge et al., 2021; Díaz et al., 2022; Hutchinson et al., 2021;
Rostamzadeh et al., 2022; Srinivasan et al., 2021; Pushkarna et al., 2022). However as massive,
unstructured datasets increasingly become the norm in ML development, structured frameworks
are needed to help summarize key characteristics of the data they capture. Dodge et al. (2021)
offer an expansive audit of C4 (Raffel et al., 2020), which inspires a more structured approach for
disentangling the contents of web-crawled data that feature heavily in ML datasets. Our work aims to
standardize approaches to support existing transparency and documentation efforts by enabling the
identification and communication of potential social risks associated with data.


2.2   DATASET AUDITS

Datasets underpinning training and testing have been at the center of various tensions connected
to privacy, consent, unfair system performance, representational harms, and harmful applications
(Paullada et al., 2021). Against this backdrop, prominent ML datasets have been subject to close
scrutiny, with empirical examinations and audits uncovering a range of problematic content that
itself is harmful (e.g., copyright violations; representational harms such as misgendering) or that can
lead to downstream harms. For example, both image and text datasets have been shown to contain
co-occurrence statistics that mirror harmful social stereotypes (Garg et al., 2018; Hendricks et al.,
2018); image datasets have been found to include problematic sexual imagery, including depictions
of sexual violence and non-consensual sexual content, and racial and ethnic slurs within image labels
and captions (Birhane & Prabhu, 2021; Birhane et al., 2021); Dataset audits can close documentation
gaps (Dodge et al., 2021), be used to make data filtering or re-balancing decisions (Russakovsky
et al., 2014), and, in some extreme cases, lead to the deprecation of datasets, such as MegaFace
(Kemelmacher-Shlizerman et al., 2016) and Tiny Images (Torralba et al., 2008). Organizing prior
individual audits, we present a principled framework that supports dataset auditing to both shape
dataset development decisions, as well as flag downstream model evaluations to prioritize.


2.3   S TANDARDIZING R ESPONSIBLE AI W ORKFLOWS

Evaluating data in a structured way and communicating results to stakeholders remains an important
challenge for RAI. Data work often takes a backseat to work focused on developing state of the
art models and algorithms (Sambasivan et al., 2021b). In addition, current approaches to data
documentation are “largely ad hoc and myopic in nature” (Heger et al., 2022) and practitioners face
difficulty in understanding why documentation is needed, how best to document, and, ultimately,
what to document (Chang & Custis, 2022). A range of development toolkits and checklists have been
proposed to address these challenges, including documentation frameworks such as Data and Model
Cards (Gebru et al., 2021; Mitchell et al., 2019; Pushkarna et al., 2022), internal auditing frameworks
(Raji et al., 2020b), and impact assessment frameworks (Schiff et al., 2020). RAI audits in particular
require support to determine what to measure and how to measure it to avoid risks that can compound
through development (Sambasivan et al., 2021b). Mitchell et al. (2022) give a high-level framework
for measuring large, unstructured datasets and we extend this by configuring our framework around
downstream risks and demonstrate how the results of an audit can be used to distill dataset decisions.


3     F RAMEWORK

In this section, we introduce a framework for systematic evaluation, anchoring on risk and harm
associated with social representation in data. The full framework, including a list of data analyses
and dependencies can be found in the Appendix. The framework supports analyses for a variety of
goals ranging from dataset development to third-party audits. Our framework also identifies a set of
components that guide the operationalization of each analysis and the interpretation of their results.


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Framework conceptual structure. Guiding and output components are shown on the right.


3.1     F RAMEWORK ANALYSES

Figure 1 demonstrates the framework’s conceptual structure. We organize the framework around
high-level questions about human-centered considerations in data: namely, Who is in the data, What
is in the data, and How are the two associated? This structure also allows the analyses to focus on
data questions at different levels of complexity with respect to corresponding downstream harms, as
well as to prevent an over-focus on optimizing isolated analyses or metrics.
Our framework is designed to be general-purpose and extensible, thus it is not exhaustive of every
single possible analysis within each section. While we use text, image, and image-text datasets as
references for developing and describing the framework, it can be adapted to other modalities with
appropriate changes. For instance, the dialect analysis in text could be adjusted to include elements
of (or complemented with) analysis of accent in speech data. Given that SOTA implementations of an
analysis will change periodically, we focus instead on the goals of and workflows for generating and
interpreting analysis results. Analyses can also be modified, added, or removed as the field’s collective
sociotechnical understanding about relevant social biases evolve over time, while preserving the
overall framework structure. For example, salient social identity term lists may iteratively change as
best practices respond to social shifts, or as global socio-cultural contexts are increasingly integrated
into RAI considerations. Analyses can also be updated alongside our understanding of salient social
risks, the human social characteristics they are connected to, and our technical means of analyzing
them. However, the motivating questions remain stable.

3.1.1    W HO IS IN THE DATA ?
In asking who is in the data, we consider several human factors of data that include measuring the
presence of people in data along with social characteristics.
Presence of People: These analyses tally whether individuals or identifying information appear in
data. This includes calculations of personally-identifiable information and face or person detection.
Extending to new modalities, the analyses implicitly ask which data characteristics can indicate the
presence of a person, such as faces or bodies in visual data or voice in audio data. Results guide more
focused, follow up analyses that assess depictions of social groups.
Social Characteristics: These analyses center on data characteristics that are often associated with
social identity and may be used as proxies for social identity. Some proxies appear directly in data,
such as pronouns, while others, such as perceived age or gender expression in images, must be
inferred, frequently using predictive methods (e.g., Lanitis et al. (2004)). These include analyses of


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


dialect, linguistic style, skin tone, and voice pitch. Social characteristic analyses provides insight
into the over- and under-representation of specific social groups, which has been associated with
disparities in performance (Wilson et al., 2019; Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018) and general problems
for class prediction (Johnson & Khoshgoftaar, 2019). Because these characteristics are social in
nature, their measurement must be adapted to local context and time. For example, social identity
terms vary across social and cultural contexts, meaning static identity term list cannot be exhaustive.

3.1.2    W HAT IS IN THE DATA ?
The second grouping of analyses focuses on content that may influence human representation.
Content: This group of analyses is focused on content characteristics that relate to harmful or
undesirable outcomes that are independent of specific people or social groups. Analyses include
calculating the distribution of topics in text, as well as sexual content in images. Topic distribution
provides a birds-eye view of the composition of the data and can give an indication of sexually explicit
or sensitive topics contained in a dataset. Topic distributions can give clues to subtle downstream
biases. For example, models trained primarily on news data have been shown to exhibit biases against
particular country names and professions (Huang et al., 2019).
Provenance: Data provenance can indicate the values, norms, and perspectives likely to be contained
in data and ascertained through metadata, such as the geographic distribution of sources and their
publication dates. For example, source URLs point to the range of content represented in web-scraped
data, which offers insight into document content, such as linguistic and cultural content, as well as
the prevalence of machine-generated text (Dodge et al., 2021). The geographic, cultural, and social
representation in data can have implications for downstream models. For example, image classifiers
trained on datasets sourced predominantly from western countries have lower rates of accuracy when
applied to images from non-western countries (Shankar et al., 2017). Data recency can have particular
impacts on models supporting low-resource languages, which can disproportionately rely on religious
or historical texts due to data scarcity (e.g., Ahmadi & Masoud (2020)).

3.1.3    H UMAN × C ONTENT A SSOCIATIONS
The final section focuses on associations between human and content factors, which reveal how
people are depicted. Associations disaggregate analyses within and across modalities, such as social
identity terms and topics in text or occurrences between objects detected in images and identity terms
in associated text in multimodal datasets. Associations can reveal stereotype-aligned correlations,
which can amplify the stereotypes and propagate exclusionary norms (Dev et al., 2021; Weidinger
et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2018; Hendricks et al., 2018). While highly specific combinations of analyses
can be run (e.g., an evaluation of queer depictions in Spanish-language medical literature from a
specific year), the structure of the framework facilitates analyses beginning with the most general
question (i.e., are people depicted?) followed by more specific inquiries (e.g., with which other data
do people most often occur?) to provide a tractable entry point for RAI analyses.

3.2     F RAMEWORK C OMPONENTS

Next, we outline additional framework components that guide analysis results reporting and general
analysis planning. The Output and Action fields are provided to capture the results of a given
analysis and any mitigation actions decided in response. The Taking Action section discusses in more
depth the process of making mitigation decisions. In addition to a research-backed motivation related
to downstream risks, each analysis includes additional fields to support planning:
Analysis Object indicates whether an analysis is calculated on data directly (i.e., tokens in text data)
or if it applies to an inference produced by an intermediate classifier (e.g., inferred document topic;
predicted age of person in an image). This highlights which analyses are dependent on predictive
models and therefore susceptible to biases that those models may themselves exhibit. The distinction
between “Image” and “Inferred image signals” is particularly important since few analyses in the
framework are applied to image data directly.
Effort indicates rough time and cost of an analysis based on current techniques and tooling, which,
reflect bias toward use for English and Western data. In non-English and non-Western contexts, effort
is often higher for implementation.


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             Analysis Goals
 Dataset Development     Developing a dataset for training or evaluation through new data collection
                         and/or adaptation of existing datasets
 Use Decisions           Making decisions regarding appropriate use of a dataset, whether for training or
                         evaluative purposes
 Model Understanding     Investigating potential roots of or explanations for model behavior
 Auditing                Auditing a dataset to fill documentation gaps, ensure legal or institutional com-
                         pliance, or to foster greater public awareness

                        Table 1: A non-exhaustive list of data analysis goals.
Dependencies indicates intermediate resources needed to conduct an analysis, classifiers which
produce inferred signals. While the framework does not dictate a single, required implementation
for any analysis, we point to example classifiers and term lists that may be used. Moreover, some
dependencies, such as term lists, should ideally draw from qualitative insights to localize evaluations.

4   TAKING ACTION
The framework is not meant to be exhaustively implemented for every use case, since all possible
association analyses would produce an intractably large number of results. Moreover, which mitiga-
tion actions to take depends on context; the downstream effects of data filtering or rebalancing are,
in many cases, still an open question. Finally, while this framework can be used to discover new
biases, it is intended to help practitioners overcome challenges in applying existing evaluations and
mitigations motivated by institutional policies and well-documented data biases, such as gender bias.
These challenges include needed guidance for identifying risks and harms AI systems can generate,
and a systematic approach for applying known fairness evaluations across a broad range of products
and systems (Madaio et al., 2022; Heger et al., 2022).
An exhaustive review of mitigation actions is beyond the scope of this work, however we describe
key considerations that inform the actions a user should take. We also include a selection of guiding
questions and considerations at the start of the full framework. Key questions narrow the scope of
actions to be considered, making planning more tractable:

      • What are the planned deliverables of the data effort (e.g., training or evaluation data)?
      • What are the primary goals the analyses will support (e.g., making use decisions)?
      • To what extent can development steps be revisited or modified (e.g., data collection, docu-
        mentation)?
      • To what extent is the dataset mutable (i.e., can data be added, filtered, or modified)?

Dataset Purpose: The framework can be applied to a range of dataset types including pre-training
or fine-tuning datasets. It can also be used for understanding and evaluating model-generated data.
Suitable framework actions depend on the purpose of the dataset. For example, when analyzing
pre-training data, it may be unclear how changes to data distributions will impact model performance,
potentially making other mitigations more desirable. In contrast, data used for benchmark develop-
ment stands to be used as a repeated measure of model robustness and performance. Thus, actions
that might require additional costs or resources may be more easily justified to meet evaluation goals.
Analysis Goals: A range of goals can motivate framework use– each of which brings attention to
different actions. Table 1 lists common goals of dataset analyses. For example, developing a new
dataset from web-scraped data raises potential decisions to collect additional data or adjust filtering
criteria in the data collection process. In contrast, conducting an audit of a third-party dataset for
compliance purposes brings focus to documentation and data use decisions.
Development Phase: Each development phase affords different actions to address data concerns.
Table 2 shows common actions by development phase. For example, during data collection, toxic
content biased across social identity groups might be addressed by modifying the dataset or by
adjusting model evaluation planning. Alternatively, documentation can flag concerns for public
consumption. Moreover, concerns may be addressed through explicit dataset release decisions.
The decision to pursue an action such as the ones listed above will depend on analysis goals, available
resource play a key role in determining the mitigation actions that are available. Importantly, dataset


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Dev. Phase        Actions                  Description
                   Addition                 Rebalancing distributions across an entire dataset or within
 Data                                       specified categories with additional (potentially synthetic) data
 Collection/       Removal                  Filtering data to remove unwanted content
 Processing        Augmentation             Augmenting data, such as through data tagging (Anil et al.,
                                            2023) to allow a model to learn undesirable content while
                                            controlling its production downstream
                   Flagging                 Flagging analysis results for further downstream evaluation or
                                            documentation
                   Non-Use                  Not using the dataset, for example if applying analyses to
                                            different candidate datasets to decide which to use
 Model             Addt’l Benchmarking      Selection of additional evaluation benchmarks
 Evaluation        Benchmark Creation       Development of benchmarks to evaluate new concerns
                   Warning                  Documentation of general or use case-specific limitations
 Documentation
                   Non-Use                  Documentation of cases where the data should not be used
 Packaging and     Licensing                Development of licensing and terms of use specifications
 Release           Access                   Development of limited access policies

Table 2: A non-exhaustive list of actions that may be taken to address social risks identified in data.
actions such as filtering may exacerbate existing imbalances or introduce new ones, requiring iterative
evaluation. Direct action also may not be possible, for example if there are cost constraints or if data
sources and filtering techniques used to develop a third-party dataset are not clearly defined or known.


5     A PPLYING THE F RAMEWORK

In order to showcase how the framework guides evaluations, we provide two toy examples using C4
(Raffel et al., 2020) and LAION-400M (Schuhmann et al., 2021)– two large, unstructured datasets
available under a CC-BY 4.0 license. We apply analyses from the standpoint of a team seeking to
repurpose data for their own use. Our goal is to develop derivative datasets from C4 and LAION-
400M while assessing representational biases that have been broadly identified in text and image
datasets. Our examples focus on known biases and they are not meant to uncover scientifically novel
results, but rather provide a demonstration of how a practitioner can use the framework to meet
analysis goals. For example, a range of gender biases in text datasets has already been discovered,
however researchers and practitioners must conduct audits for generally known issues and comply
with project specifications with each dataset they work with. Thus, when faced with the question,
"how should I begin to evaluate gender bias in a dataset", this framework establishes a starting point.
We do not present every possible analysis; instead, we focus on a few key results. We do this for
two reasons. First, not all analyses are relevant for understanding a specific social group or modality.
Thus, in practice, only a selection of analyses will be conducted. Second, some analyses are not
yet technically feasible and are themselves the subject of research (e.g., detecting hateful symbols
and memes in images (Mathias et al., 2021)). Finally, because we primarily focus on how to use
results across analyses to inform risk mitigation, we do not delve into technical details or performance
metrics for the classifiers we use.

5.1   E VALUATING AGE R EPRESENTATION IN C4

Prior research identifies age bias as an issue for ML and AI development (Díaz et al., 2018; Garcia de
Alford et al., 2020) and calls for increased age representation in AI datasets (Park et al., 2021). With
this in mind, we turn to assessing how older adults are depicted in C4 using Association analyses.
We assess the results of age depictions via top-associated tokens and topics with age-related terms.
Output: We see in Figure 2 the tokens most associated with old age terms, which occur 110,000
times in the dataset. These include dementia, and degeneration, both of which can render negative
sentiment. We see related associations in the topics disproportionately associated with old age terms.
These include health topics, including medical conditions and assisted living, as well as skin and face
care beauty products, which likely point to content covering anti-ageing products and discussion.
Action: In line with prior work, we find limited and skewed representation of older age. Work
has been conducted on decoupling adjective associations from select identity terms (Dev et al.,


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Dataset Analysis Output: C4

      Age Terms X Top Tokens:
      Analysis Object: Text                                Output:
      Task: For social identity terms in text, calculate     Ageing    anti-aging, wrinkles, collagen,
              top word co-occurrences for each.                        elasticity, age-related
      Effort: Low                                            Old Age   age-related, middle-aged, de-
      Dependencies: None                                               generation, dementia, ripe
                                                             Elderly   dementia, ageing, older,
      Action: Flag associations. Consider rebalanc-                    alzheimer, frail
              ing harmful associations that emerge in
              model evaluations

      Age Terms X Topic:
      Task: Calculate the distribution of topics within Output:
              text, disaggregated by social identity
              terms or inferred social identity signals   Ageing       Medical Lit, Skin Care, Face
                                                                       Care, Anti-Ageing, Nutrition
      Analysis Object: Inferred Text Signals + Text          Old Age   Medical Lit, Books/Lit,
      Effort: Low                                                      Health Cond.,       History,
      Dependencies: Topic Classifier                                   Retirement
                                                             Elderly   Medical Lit, Retirement,
      Action: Flag problematic associations                            Assisted Living, Geriartics,
                                                                       Health Cond.


                            Figure 2: Sample dataset analyses output for C4.
2021), however broader sentential context surrounding age-related terms may still carry negative or
stigmatized sentiment. Filtering or removing data stands to worsen older adult underrepresentation
in ML datasets, however it is among the lowest cost options. For developing training data, other
actions may be taken. If a data collection or generation pipeline is feasible, targeted data collection or
synthetic data can be used to rebalance the data. Results can also be flagged to evaluate for similar
biases in data generated by the downstream model. Contingent on these evaluations, documentation
warnings or non-use in certain cases may also be necessary.

5.2   E VALUATING Q UEER R EPRESENTATION IN LAION-400M

LAION-400M features over 400 million image-text pairs extracted from Common Crawl. The dataset
is unstructured and uncurated, though it does feature NSFW tags, which were used to identify a
number of illicit images. Text-image datasets are shown to produce various social biases, such as
gender and skin tone biases (Cho et al., 2022). Researchers have found undesirable associations with
queer identity terms in text datasets (Dixon et al., 2018) and sexually explicit depictions of women in
LAION-400M (Birhane & Prabhu, 2021; Birhane et al., 2021). While explicit content can be used
for specific applications, unintentional inclusion risks unwanted generation of explicit content by
downstream models. We assess a combination of these biases by evaluating queer representation and
consider mitigations for adapting third-party training data. We run Association analyses in text using
the same topic classifier from our prior analyses, and run multimodal Association analyses using a
classifier similar to (Google Cloud Vision), which identifies sexual content in images. We use webref
entities to obtain queer identity terms.
Output: Figure 3 shows the top topics associated with a variety of sexual identities. Prominent
among these are those that seemingly refer to various sexual topics and activities. This includes
for "heterosexuality". Interestingly, the most frequent topic for "heterosexuality" is "LGBT Porn"
which suggests that the term is connected to a subgenre of pornographic videos. Though not a sexual
orientation, the generally derogatory term "transsexual" is also strongly associated with sexual topics.
Action: Considering dataset usage for T2I training in particular, there is likely a very limited set of
use cases in which the generation of sexual content would be appropriate. Such use cases would
likely entail very specialized dataset curation and model development. Therefore, one could consider
filtering sexual content in order to both limit its downstream production as well as to avoid the


                                                       7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Dataset Analysis Output: LAION-400M

      Queer Identity Terms X Sexual Imagery:
      Analysis Object: Text | Inferred Image Signals Output:
      Task: Calculate co-occurrences between social                                       0.6


                                                           Likelihood of Sexual Content
              identity terms and sexual imagery.                                          0.4

      Effort: Low                                                                         0.2


      Dependencies: Visual Content Classifier                                             0.0


                                                                                                                                                   lity
                                                                                                                                er
                                                                                                                      l


                                                                                                                                         r
                                                                                                            y
                                                                                                 ian


                                                                                                                  ua


                                                                                                                                      ee
                                                                                                         Ga


                                                                                                                                nd
      Action: Data filtering or tagging. Possible rebal-


                                                                                                                                                   ua
                                                                                                                 ex
                                                                                                sb


                                                                                                                                     Qu
                                                                                                                            ge


                                                                                                                                               ex
                                                                                                                Bis
                                                                                                Le


                                                                                                                           ns
              ancing


                                                                                                                                              os
                                                                                                                          Tra


                                                                                                                                             ter
                                                                                                                                          He
      Queer Identity Terms X Topic:
      Task: Calculate the distribution of top-Output:
               ics by queer identity terms
                                                Lesbian                                                Adult Videos, LGBT Porn,
      Analysis Object: Inferred Text Sig-                                                              Porn
               nals, Text                       Gay                                                    LGBT, LGBT Porn, Web Im-
      Effort: Low                                                                                      ages
      Dependencies: Topic Classifier             Bisexual                                              LGBT, Porn, Web Images
                                                 Transgender                                           LGBT, Social Issues, Discrimi-
      Action: Follow up analyses of sexual                                                             nation
               content                           Queer                                                 LGBT, Events/Listings, Web
                                                                                                       Images
                                                 Heterosexuality                                       Porn, Adult Videos, Porn


                 Figure 3: Sample dataset analyses output for LAION-400M Dataset.
inclusion of published sexual content, which has often been made public without sex worker consent
(Cole, 2020). Because filtering may lead to removal of nearly half of the instances of some identity
terms, rebalancing may also be needed. Alternatively, sexual content in text data could be augmented
with tags to preserve a downstream model’s ability to detect it while limiting its production.


6    E VALUATING R EPRESENTATION IN DATA

In line with Mitchell et al. (2022)’s call to establish practices for measuring data, characterizing how
people are represented in data is a necessary part of identifying risks. Yet, RAI lacks systematized
guidance to do so across data modalities. In RAI work, there has been little guidance for using
combinations of analyses and data features to measure latent representations of social identities.
Notably, our framework has no canonical list of social identities nor an exhaustive list of evaluations
for a given social identity. This is because social identity is unstable in nature (Hanna et al., 2020),
and the axes along which discrimination occurs are culturally specific (Sambasivan et al., 2021a).
Characteristics associated with social identities change with context and the same features can
be associated with disparate groups (e.g., hispanic surnames prevalent in both Latin America and
the Philippines). Moreover, the semantic meaningfulness of data across modalities varies. Social
identity terms can be easily identified in text; however image data, relies more heavily on labeling for
automated evaluation. Other modalities, such as sensor data, may not have clear social signals.
Analyzing how people are depicted is also challenging because "good" social representation changes
with context. As Chasalow & Levy (2021) posit, representativeness is both time and place specific.
The social categories we attend to are shaped both by normative assumptions about what should be
measured as well as the existence of a name for or conception of a social category. For example,
Andrews et al. (2022)’s research suggests that a word list generated today to analyze disability
representation in a dataset would likely feature different terminology than a list generated 30 years
ago. Localizing analyses to evaluate specific communities and contexts should ideally be done
through approaches that engage qualitative and participatory methods. Our framework is adaptable to
analysis implementations that are localized to contextualized social identity cues.


                                                      8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


6.1   T HE ROLE OF DATASETS IN A SSESSING H ARM

In developing this framework to support development decisions, we extend the work of others
advocating for more attention to data work (Sambasivan et al., 2021b), including the growing focus
on data-centric AI (DCAI) (Jarrahi et al., 2022). Building from DCAI’s focus on understanding
the data used and produced throughout ML development, our framework sets a foundation for
systematically analyzing social risks in data. If DCAI is focused broadly on shifting focus from the
model to the data, our framework emphasizes human-centered angle within that focus. Some work in
DCAI does bring attention to data sources and the sociocultural views they represent, such as those
expressed through data annotation (Díaz et al., 2022; Arhin et al., 2021; Mishra & Gorana, 2021).
However, this work has limited application to unstructured data.
An important part of dataset evaluation is determining when a data distribution is problematic. Future
work in DCAI and RAI should explore the effects of different distributions on model performance
and output bias. This work points to opportunities to use the framework to scaffold experiments to
study the effects of different data distributions on model performance across contexts. In this way the
framework is a concrete aid to what Jarrahi et al. (2022) calls "data benchmarking". Across iterative
development of the same model, as well as across developments of distinct models, the framework
can act as a consistent measuring stick for relating representations in data to model fairness.
At the same time, dataset evaluations are just one component of RAI evaluation. Much algorithmic
fairness work focuses on data sources and dataset pre-processing; however, as Hooker (2021) argues,
algorithm design choices, such as optimization for privacy guarantees, compression techniques, and
even learning rate can contribute to model biases. Hooker also critically points out that dataset
evaluations rely on a priori decisions about which features to evaluate and are inherently informed
by human biases regarding what should or should not be prioritized. As a result, dataset evaluations
must be considered alongside other approaches to mitigating risk and harm. For example, Hooker
turns to model compression techniques to isolate data points at risk of exacerbated error rates as a
way to guide further auditing. This enables iterative error analysis that DCAI calls for.

6.2   S UPPORTING RAI G OALS

RAI development requires data analyses that complement existing RAI processes while adapting to
sociotechnical risks that are contextually determined. In response, the framework eschews automated
test beds or fixed implementations (e.g., specific term lists or classifiers) and, instead, aims to
standardize workflow planning. This includes structured guidance to repeat and localize analyses
of human depictions in data. Our framework supports the development of transparency artifacts
by standardizing results and by flagging benchmark tests to prioritize based on problematic data
distributions. In this context, the framework stands as a structured auditing aid.
The same analysis results can warrant different actions depending on analysis goals. A primary
motivation for this framework is to analyze data used for foundation models. High model training
costs limit opportunities to run comprehensive studies to identify which mitigation strategies best
support fairness and model performance. For RAI, this means making mitigation decisions with
limited information about specific impacts. This challenge is exacerbated by data cascades, which
can compound to produce out-sized, negative outcomes (Sambasivan et al., 2021b). Yet, the range
of potential downstream risks warrants proactive decision making. While intervening on training is
difficult when downstream applications are unclear, the framework can also be used for multimodal
evaluations of fine-tuning data or model-generated data.

7     C ONCLUSION
The open-ended nature of AI risks and harms poses challenges to RAI practitioners seeking to
not only identify risks, but also take appropriate action to mitigate them, at times with limited
information about how downstream models will be fine-tuned or applied. In response, we propose
a standardized framework to evaluating unstructured datasets for downstream risk, with a focus
on human representation. Building from critical dataset audits and other frameworks developed in
recent years, we organize our framework around social representation and provide exemplar uses to
demonstrate its application. Our framework is designed as a general-purpose starting point that is
extensible to other modalities and application contexts, as needed.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Abubakar Abid, Maheen Farooqi, and James Zou. Persistent anti-muslim bias in large language
  models. In Proceedings of the 2021 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, pp. 298–306,
  2021.
Sina Ahmadi and Mariam Masoud. Towards machine translation for the kurdish language. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2010.06041, 2020.
Miltiadis Allamanis. The adverse effects of code duplication in machine learning models of code. In
 Proceedings of the 2019 ACM SIGPLAN International Symposium on New Ideas, New Paradigms,
 and Reflections on Programming and Software, pp. 143–153, 2019.
Erin E Andrews, Robyn M Powell, and Kara Ayers. The evolution of disability language: Choosing
  terms to describe disability. Disability and Health Journal, 15(3):101328, 2022.
Rohan Anil, Andrew M. Dai, Orhan Firat, Melvin Johnson, Dmitry Lepikhin, Alexandre Passos,
  Siamak Shakeri, Emanuel Taropa, Paige Bailey, Zhifeng Chen, Eric Chu, Jonathan H. Clark,
  Laurent El Shafey, Yanping Huang, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Gaurav Mishra, Erica Moreira, Mark
  Omernick, Kevin Robinson, Sebastian Ruder, Yi Tay, Kefan Xiao, Yuanzhong Xu, Yujing Zhang,
  Gustavo Hernandez Abrego, Junwhan Ahn, Jacob Austin, Paul Barham, Jan Botha, James Bradbury,
  Siddhartha Brahma, Kevin Brooks, Michele Catasta, Yong Cheng, Colin Cherry, Christopher A.
  Choquette-Choo, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Clément Crepy, Shachi Dave, Mostafa Dehghani, Sunipa
  Dev, Jacob Devlin, Mark Díaz, Nan Du, Ethan Dyer, Vlad Feinberg, Fangxiaoyu Feng, Vlad
  Fienber, Markus Freitag, Xavier Garcia, Sebastian Gehrmann, Lucas Gonzalez, Guy Gur-Ari,
  Steven Hand, Hadi Hashemi, Le Hou, Joshua Howland, Andrea Hu, Jeffrey Hui, Jeremy Hurwitz,
  Michael Isard, Abe Ittycheriah, Matthew Jagielski, Wenhao Jia, Kathleen Kenealy, Maxim Krikun,
  Sneha Kudugunta, Chang Lan, Katherine Lee, Benjamin Lee, Eric Li, Music Li, Wei Li, YaGuang
  Li, Jian Li, Hyeontaek Lim, Hanzhao Lin, Zhongtao Liu, Frederick Liu, Marcello Maggioni,
  Aroma Mahendru, Joshua Maynez, Vedant Misra, Maysam Moussalem, Zachary Nado, John
  Nham, Eric Ni, Andrew Nystrom, Alicia Parrish, Marie Pellat, Martin Polacek, Alex Polozov,
  Reiner Pope, Siyuan Qiao, Emily Reif, Bryan Richter, Parker Riley, Alex Castro Ros, Aurko Roy,
  Brennan Saeta, Rajkumar Samuel, Renee Shelby, Ambrose Slone, Daniel Smilkov, David R. So,
  Daniel Sohn, Simon Tokumine, Dasha Valter, Vijay Vasudevan, Kiran Vodrahalli, Xuezhi Wang,
  Pidong Wang, Zirui Wang, Tao Wang, John Wieting, Yuhuai Wu, Kelvin Xu, Yunhan Xu, Linting
  Xue, Pengcheng Yin, Jiahui Yu, Qiao Zhang, Steven Zheng, Ce Zheng, Weikang Zhou, Denny
  Zhou, Slav Petrov, and Yonghui Wu. Palm 2 technical report, 2023.
Kofi Arhin, Ioana Baldini, Dennis Wei, Karthikeyan Natesan Ramamurthy, and Moninder Singh.
  Ground-truth, whose truth?–examining the challenges with annotating toxic text datasets. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2112.03529, 2021.
Jack Bandy and Nicholas Vincent. Addressing" documentation debt" in machine learning research:
  A retrospective datasheet for bookcorpus. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.05241, 2021.
Solon Barocas, Kate Crawford, Aaron Shapiro, and Hanna Wallach. The problem with bias: Allocative
  versus representational harms in machine learning. SIGCIS, 2017. URL http://meetings.
  sigcis.org/uploads/6/3/6/8/6368912/program.pdf.
Emily M Bender and Batya Friedman. Data statements for natural language processing: Toward miti-
  gating system bias and enabling better science. Transactions of the Association for Computational
 Linguistics, 6:587–604, 2018.
Abeba Birhane and Vinay Uday Prabhu. Large image datasets: A pyrrhic win for computer vision?
  In 2021 IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), pp. 1536–1546.
  IEEE, 2021.
Abeba Birhane, Vinay Uday Prabhu, and Emmanuel Kahembwe. Multimodal datasets: misogyny,
  pornography, and malignant stereotypes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.01963, 2021.
Tolga Bolukbasi, Kai-Wei Chang, James Y Zou, Venkatesh Saligrama, and Adam T Kalai. Man is
  to computer programmer as woman is to homemaker? debiasing word embeddings. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Rishi Bommasani, Drew A Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx,
  Michael S Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, et al. On the opportuni-
  ties and risks of foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258, 2021.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Joy Buolamwini and Timnit Gebru. Gender shades: Intersectional accuracy disparities in commercial
  gender classification. In Conference on fairness, accountability and transparency, pp. 77–91.
  PMLR, 2018.
Aylin Caliskan, Joanna J Bryson, and Arvind Narayanan. Semantics derived automatically from
  language corpora contain human-like biases. Science, 356(6334):183–186, 2017.
Nicholas Carlini, Florian Tramer, Eric Wallace, Matthew Jagielski, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Katherine
  Lee, Adam Roberts, Tom B Brown, Dawn Song, Ulfar Erlingsson, et al. Extracting training data
  from large language models. In USENIX Security Symposium, volume 6, 2021.
Jiyoo Chang and Christine Custis. Understanding implementation challenges in machine learning
   documentation. In Equity and Access in Algorithms, Mechanisms, and Optimization, pp. 1–8.
   2022.
Kyla Chasalow and Karen Levy. Representativeness in statistics, politics, and machine learning.
  In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp.
  77–89, 2021.
Jaemin Cho, Abhay Zala, and Mohit Bansal. Dall-eval: Probing the reasoning skills and social biases
  of text-to-image generative transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.04053, 2022.
Samantha Cole. These nudes do not exist and i don’t know why this startup does either. In Vice,
  2020. https://www.vice.com/en/article/qjdx7w/these-nudes-do-not-exist-and-i-dont-know-why-
  this-startup-does-either.
Kate Crawford and Trevor Paglen. Excavating ai: The politics of images in machine learning training
  sets. Ai & Society, 36(4):1105–1116, 2021.
Sunipa Dev, Tao Li, Jeff M Phillips, and Vivek Srikumar. OSCaR: Orthogonal subspace correction and
  rectification of biases in word embeddings. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 5034–5050, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican
  Republic, November 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.
  emnlp-main.411. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.411.
Mark Díaz, Isaac Johnson, Amanda Lazar, Anne Marie Piper, and Darren Gergle. Addressing
 age-related bias in sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the 2018 chi conference on human factors
 in computing systems, pp. 1–14, 2018.
Mark Díaz, Ian Kivlichan, Rachel Rosen, Dylan Baker, Razvan Amironesei, Vinodkumar Prab-
 hakaran, and Emily Denton. Crowdworksheets: Accounting for individual and collective identities
 underlying crowdsourced dataset annotation. In 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability,
 and Transparency, pp. 2342–2351, 2022.
Lucas Dixon, John Li, Jeffrey Sorensen, Nithum Thain, and Lucy Vasserman. Measuring and
  mitigating unintended bias in text classification. In Proceedings of the 2018 AAAI/ACM Conference
  on AI, Ethics, and Society, pp. 67–73, 2018.
Jesse Dodge, Maarten Sap, Ana Marasović, William Agnew, Gabriel Ilharco, Dirk Groeneveld,
  Margaret Mitchell, and Matt Gardner. Documenting large webtext corpora: A case study on the
  colossal clean crawled corpus. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08758, 2021.
Sorelle A Friedler, Carlos Scheidegger, Suresh Venkatasubramanian, Sonam Choudhary, Evan P
  Hamilton, and Derek Roth. A comparative study of fairness-enhancing interventions in machine
  learning. In Proceedings of the conference on fairness, accountability, and transparency, pp.
  329–338, 2019.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Adriana Solange Garcia de Alford, Steven K Hayden, Nicole Wittlin, and Amy Atwood. Reducing
  age bias in machine learning: An algorithmic approach. SMU Data Science Review, 3(2):11, 2020.
Nikhil Garg, Londa Schiebinger, Dan Jurafsky, and James Zou. Word embeddings quantify 100
  years of gender and ethnic stereotypes. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(16):
  E3635–E3644, 2018.
Timnit Gebru, Jamie Morgenstern, Briana Vecchione, Jennifer Wortman Vaughan, Hanna Wallach,
  Hal Daumé Iii, and Kate Crawford. Datasheets for datasets. Communications of the ACM, 64(12):
  86–92, 2021.
Samuel Gehman, Suchin Gururangan, Maarten Sap, Yejin Choi, and Noah A Smith. Real-
  toxicityprompts: Evaluating neural toxic degeneration in language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2009.11462, 2020.
Google Cloud Vision. Image annotation. URL https://cloud.google.com/vision/
  docs/reference/rest/v1/images/annotate#safesearchannotation.
Xu Han, Zhengyan Zhang, Ning Ding, Yuxian Gu, Xiao Liu, Yuqi Huo, Jiezhong Qiu, Yuan Yao,
 Ao Zhang, Liang Zhang, et al. Pre-trained models: Past, present and future. AI Open, 2:225–250,
  2021.
Alex Hanna, Emily Denton, Andrew Smart, and Jamila Smith-Loud. Towards a critical race method-
  ology in algorithmic fairness. In Proceedings of the 2020 conference on fairness, accountability,
  and transparency, pp. 501–512, 2020.
Amy K Heger, Liz B Marquis, Mihaela Vorvoreanu, Hanna Wallach, and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan.
 Understanding machine learning practitioners’ data documentation perceptions, needs, challenges,
 and desiderata. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, 6(CSCW2):1–29, 2022.
Lisa Anne Hendricks, Kaylee Burns, Kate Saenko, Trevor Darrell, and Anna Rohrbach. Women also
  snowboard: Overcoming bias in captioning models. In Proceedings of the European conference on
  computer vision (ECCV), pp. 771–787, 2018.
Sara Hooker. Moving beyond “algorithmic bias is a data problem”. Patterns, 2(4):100241, 2021.
Dirk Hovy and Shrimai Prabhumoye. Five sources of bias in natural language processing. Language
  and Linguistics Compass, 15(8):e12432, 2021.
Po-Sen Huang, Huan Zhang, Ray Jiang, Robert Stanforth, Johannes Welbl, Jack Rae, Vishal Maini,
  Dani Yogatama, and Pushmeet Kohli. Reducing sentiment bias in language models via counterfac-
  tual evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.03064, 2019.
Ben Hutchinson, Andrew Smart, Alex Hanna, Emily Denton, Christina Greer, Oddur Kjartansson,
  Parker Barnes, and Margaret Mitchell. Towards accountability for machine learning datasets: Prac-
  tices from software engineering and infrastructure. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on
  Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, FAccT ’21, pp. 560–575, New York, NY, USA, 2021.
  Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450383097. doi: 10.1145/3442188.3445918.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3442188.3445918.
Mohammad Hossein Jarrahi, Ali Memariani, and Shion Guha. The principles of data-centric ai (dcai).
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.14611, 2022.
Justin M Johnson and Taghi M Khoshgoftaar. Survey on deep learning with class imbalance. Journal
  of Big Data, 6(1):1–54, 2019.
Michael Kearns, Seth Neel, Aaron Roth, and Zhiwei Steven Wu. Preventing fairness gerrymandering:
 Auditing and learning for subgroup fairness. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
 2564–2572. PMLR, 2018.
Ira Kemelmacher-Shlizerman, Steven M Seitz, Daniel Miller, and Evan Brossard. The megaface
   benchmark: 1 million faces for recognition at scale. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
   computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 4873–4882, 2016.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Mahrukh Khan, Muhammad Atif Tahir, and Zeeshan Ahmed. Detection of violent content in cartoon
 videos using multimedia content detection techniques. In 2018 IEEE 21st International Multi-Topic
 Conference (INMIC), pp. 1–5. IEEE, 2018.
Jon Kleinberg, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Manish Raghavan. Inherent trade-offs in the fair determi-
  nation of risk scores. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.05807, 2016.
Andreas Lanitis, Chrisina Draganova, and Chris Christodoulou. Comparing different classifiers
  for automatic age estimation. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part B
 (Cybernetics), 34(1):621–628, 2004.
Katherine Lee, Daphne Ippolito, Andrew Nystrom, Chiyuan Zhang, Douglas Eck, Chris Callison-
  Burch, and Nicholas Carlini. Deduplicating training data makes language models better. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2107.06499, 2021.
Gabriel Lima, Nina Grgić-Hlača, Jin Keun Jeong, and Meeyoung Cha. The conflict between
  explainable and accountable decision-making algorithms. In 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness,
 Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 2103–2113, 2022.
Alexandra Sasha Luccioni and Joseph D Viviano. What’s in the box? a preliminary analysis of
  undesirable content in the common crawl corpus. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.02732, 2021.
Michael Madaio, Lisa Egede, Hariharan Subramonyam, Jennifer Wortman Vaughan, and Hanna
 Wallach. Assessing the fairness of ai systems: Ai practitioners’ processes, challenges, and needs
 for support. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, 6(CSCW1):1–26, 2022.
Lambert Mathias, Shaoliang Nie, Aida Mostafazadeh Davani, Douwe Kiela, Vinodkumar Prab-
  hakaran, Bertie Vidgen, and Zeerak Waseem. Findings of the woah 5 shared task on fine grained
  hateful memes detection. In Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Online Abuse and Harms (WOAH
  2021), pp. 201–206, 2021.
Abhilash Mishra and Yash Gorana. Who decides if ai is fair? the labels problem in algorithmic
  auditing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.08723, 2021.
Margaret Mitchell, Simone Wu, Andrew Zaldivar, Parker Barnes, Lucy Vasserman, Ben Hutchinson,
 Elena Spitzer, Inioluwa Deborah Raji, and Timnit Gebru. Model cards for model reporting. In Pro-
 ceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, FAT* ’19, pp. 220–229,
 New York, NY, USA, 2019. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450361255. doi:
 10.1145/3287560.3287596. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3287560.3287596.
Margaret Mitchell, Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, Nathan Lambert, Marissa Gerchick, Angelina
 McMillan-Major, Ezinwanne Ozoani, Nazneen Rajani, Tristan Thrush, Yacine Jernite, and Douwe
 Kiela. Measuring data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.05129, 2022.
Joon Sung Park, Michael S Bernstein, Robin N Brewer, Ece Kamar, and Meredith Ringel Morris.
  Understanding the representation and representativeness of age in ai data sets. In Proceedings of
  the 2021 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, pp. 834–842, 2021.
Amandalynne Paullada, Inioluwa Deborah Raji, Emily M. Bender, Emily Denton, and Alex Hanna.
 Data and its (dis)contents: A survey of dataset development and use in machine learning re-
 search. Patterns, 2(11):100336, 2021. ISSN 2666-3899. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patter.
 2021.100336. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
 S2666389921001847.
Mahima Pushkarna, Andrew Zaldivar, and Oddur Kjartansson. Data cards: Purposeful and transparent
 dataset documentation for responsible ai. In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness,
 Accountability, and Transparency, 2022.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena,
  Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified
  text-to-text transformer. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(140):1–67, 2020. URL
  http://jmlr.org/papers/v21/20-074.html.


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Inioluwa Deborah Raji, Timnit Gebru, Margaret Mitchell, Joy Buolamwini, Joonseok Lee, and
   Emily Denton. Saving face: Investigating the ethical concerns of facial recognition auditing. In
  Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, pp. 145–151, 2020a.

Inioluwa Deborah Raji, Andrew Smart, Rebecca N White, Margaret Mitchell, Timnit Gebru, Ben
   Hutchinson, Jamila Smith-Loud, Daniel Theron, and Parker Barnes. Closing the ai accountability
   gap: Defining an end-to-end framework for internal algorithmic auditing. In Proceedings of the
  2020 conference on fairness, accountability, and transparency, pp. 33–44, 2020b.

Negar Rostamzadeh, Diana Mincu, Subhrajit Roy, Andrew Smart, Lauren Wilcox, Mahima Pushkarna,
  Jessica Schrouff, Razvan Amironesei, Nyalleng Moorosi, and Katherine Heller. Healthsheet:
  development of a transparency artifact for health datasets. In 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness,
  Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 1943–1961, 2022.

Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng
  Huang, Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael S. Bernstein, Alexander C. Berg, and Li Fei-
  Fei. Imagenet large scale visual recognition challenge. CoRR, abs/1409.0575, 2014. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/1409.0575.

Pedro Saleiro, Benedict Kuester, Loren Hinkson, Jesse London, Abby Stevens, Ari Anisfeld,
  Kit T Rodolfa, and Rayid Ghani. Aequitas: A bias and fairness audit toolkit. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1811.05577, 2018.

Nithya Sambasivan, Erin Arnesen, Ben Hutchinson, Tulsee Doshi, and Vinodkumar Prabhakaran. Re-
  imagining algorithmic fairness in india and beyond. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM conference
  on fairness, accountability, and transparency, pp. 315–328, 2021a.

Nithya Sambasivan, Shivani Kapania, Hannah Highfill, Diana Akrong, Praveen Paritosh, and Lora M
  Aroyo. “everyone wants to do the model work, not the data work”: Data cascades in high-stakes ai.
  In proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 1–15,
  2021b.

Maarten Sap, Dallas Card, Saadia Gabriel, Yejin Choi, and Noah A. Smith. The risk of racial bias in
 hate speech detection. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
 tational Linguistics, pp. 1668–1678, Florence, Italy, July 2019. Association for Computational
 Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-1163. URL https://aclanthology.org/P19-1163.

Morgan Klaus Scheuerman, Jacob M Paul, and Jed R Brubaker. How computers see gender: An
 evaluation of gender classification in commercial facial analysis services. Proceedings of the ACM
 on Human-Computer Interaction, 3(CSCW):1–33, 2019.

Daniel Schiff, Bogdana Rakova, Aladdin Ayesh, Anat Fanti, and Michael Lennon. Principles to
  practices for responsible ai: Closing the gap. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.04707, 2020.

Christoph Schuhmann, Richard Vencu, Romain Beaumont, Robert Kaczmarczyk, Clayton Mullis,
  Aarush Katta, Theo Coombes, Jenia Jitsev, and Aran Komatsuzaki. Laion-400m: Open dataset of
  clip-filtered 400 million image-text pairs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.02114, 2021.

Shreya Shankar, Yoni Halpern, Eric Breck, James Atwood, Jimbo Wilson, and D Sculley. No
  classification without representation: Assessing geodiversity issues in open data sets for the
  developing world. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.08536, 2017.

Ramya Srinivasan, Emily Denton, Jordan Famularo, Negar Rostamzadeh, Fernando Diaz, and Beth
  Coleman. Artsheets for art datasets. 2021.

Antonio Torralba, Rob Fergus, and William T Freeman. 80 million tiny images: A large data set for
  nonparametric object and scene recognition. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine
  intelligence, 30(11):1958–1970, 2008.

Trieu H Trinh and Quoc V Le. A simple method for commonsense reasoning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1806.02847, 2018.


                                                14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ben Wagner, Krisztina Rozgonyi, Marie-Therese Sekwenz, Jennifer Cobbe, and Jatinder Singh. Reg-
  ulating transparency? facebook, twitter and the german network enforcement act. In Proceedings
  of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 261–271, 2020.
Laura Weidinger, John Mellor, Maribeth Rauh, Conor Griffin, Jonathan Uesato, Po-Sen Huang, Myra
  Cheng, Mia Glaese, Borja Balle, Atoosa Kasirzadeh, et al. Ethical and social risks of harm from
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.04359, 2021.
Benjamin Wilson, Judy Hoffman, and Jamie Morgenstern. Predictive inequity in object detection.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.11097, 2019.
Jieyu Zhao, Tianlu Wang, Mark Yatskar, Vicente Ordonez, and Kai-Wei Chang. Gender bias in
   coreference resolution: Evaluation and debiasing methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.06876,
   2018.


                                               15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Appendix
Table of Contents
      A Framework Introduction                                                                      16
        A.1 Guiding Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      16

      B Analysis Overview                                                                           18
        B.1 Human Factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     18
        B.2 Content Factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     18
        B.3 Human X Content Associations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        18
        B.4 Analysis Dependencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       19

      C List of Framework Analyses                                                                  20
        C.1 Human Factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     20
        C.2 Content Factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     23
        C.3 Human X Content Associations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        26



A     F RAMEWORK I NTRODUCTION

Here we present a framework overview, detailed for text, image, and text-image application. Rather
than an exhaustive list of every possible analysis, the Human-Content Associations section shows only
social identity analyses for each modality. At the end of the overview we provide a list of example
tools that can be used to meet the dependency requirements of the analyses. The full framework
features recommended risk mitigation actions, however, in practice, mitigation steps should depend
on development context and goals. The below tables list common analysis goals and mitigation
actions and the following section on Guiding Considerations lists questions and prompts to guide
framework use.

                                             Analysis Goals
 Dataset Development     Developing a dataset for training or evaluation through new data collection
                         and/or adaptation of existing datasets
 Use Decisions           Making decisions regarding appropriate use of a dataset, whether for training or
                         evaluative purposes
 Model Understanding     Investigating potential roots of or explanations for model behavior
 Auditing                Auditing a dataset to fill documentation gaps, ensure legal or institutional com-
                         pliance, or to foster greater public awareness

                        Table 3: A non-exhaustive list of data analysis goals.


A.1   G UIDING C ONSIDERATIONS
      • What are the planned deliverables of the data being analyzed?
        The planned outputs help to inform decisions regarding resource investment in analyses
        and potential mitigations. For example, a novel benchmark dataset may warrant more
        extensive analysis than a pre-training dataset because it will be repeatedly use to judge the
        performance of many models. Similarly, a fine-tuning dataset may be the subject of more
        modification than a pre-training dataset due to its smaller size and direct role in shaping
        model compliance with a range of fairness and policy constraints.
      • What are the primary goals the analyses will support?
        Compliance audits and use decisions may only warrant documentation, or packaging and
        release actions; model understanding may simply be used to help diagnose model behavior


                                                    16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Dev. Phase        Actions                  Description
                   Addition                 Rebalancing distributions across an entire dataset or within
 Data                                       specified categories with additional (potentially synthetic) data
 Collection/       Removal                  Filtering data to remove unwanted content
 Processing        Augmentation             Augmenting data, such as through data tagging (Anil et al.,
                                            2023) to allow a model to learn undesirable content while
                                            controlling its production downstream
                   Flagging                 Flagging analysis results for further downstream evaluation or
                                            documentation
                   Non-Use                  Not using the dataset, for example if applying analyses to
                                            different candidate datasets to decide which to use
 Model             Addt’l Benchmarking      Selection of additional evaluation benchmarks
 Evaluation        Benchmark Creation       Development of benchmarks to evaluate new concerns
                   Warning                  Documentation of general or use case-specific limitations
 Documentation
                   Non-Use                  Documentation of cases where the data should not be used
 Packaging and     Licensing                Development of licensing and terms of use specifications
 Release           Access                   Development of limited access policies

Table 4: A non-exhaustive list of actions that may be taken to address social risks identified in data.

        (i.e., no mitigation action on data); whereas the development of a new dataset can involve
        many mitigation actions.
      • To what extent can completed or planned development steps be revisited or modified
        Additional analyses and mitigations require time and resources, as does experimentation to
        compare which actions are most effective for a given project. For example, budget may be
        limited for additional data collection, while data filtering or tagging may still be possible.
      • To what extent is the dataset mutable? (i.e., can data be added, removed, or changed?)
        The mutability of a dataset narrows the available mitigation actions and the degree to which
        data can be filtered or rebalanced.
      • Can new or additional model benchmarks be run?
        When developing a new model, an ultimate consideration is whether biases identified in
        data will persist through training and finetuning steps. This is known to be true for a number
        of biases discovered in certain datasets. For novel or recently discovered biases, relevant
        benchmarks may not exist or are not feasible to create to test downstream models for the
        bias. This may place emphasis on other mitigation actions, depending on the risk associated
        with the identified bias.
      • Will the data or a model trained on the data be released or made available for external
        use? If so, can the release terms (e.g., terms of use, licensing, policies) be modified?
        The use of data and models released externally cannot be as carefully controlled as data and
        models used strictly within a single institution. Safeguards against risks may be handled
        through terms of use or licensing agreements in order to mitigate data or model limitations.
      • Are there institutional or legal requirements regarding what should be analyzed in
        the data?
        Legal and institutional compliance are a first step for planning analyses and reporting results.
        These can be supplemented with parallel fairness analyses of additional social groups, or
        analyzed more in depth to make mitigation decisions (e.g., analyzing which data sources
        feature the strongest identified biases in order to make filtering decisions)
      • Are there additional fairness or bias concerns a priori?
        Beyond compliance concerns, consider analyses that involve groups or data subjects that
        have been previously impacted by similar systems or within which the context the data or
        model will be released.
      • What signals are available for analyzing social characteristics in the data?
        The feasibility of running a given analysis depends on the available data features. Aside from
        straightforward considerations, such as whether a dataset contains faces that can be detected,
        varied social characteristics may map to a single data feature (e.g., common surnames across
        disparate racial and ethnic groups) or may not easily map to any data features (e.g., religion
        and disability are two examples of social characteristics that are not always ’visible’ in
        images).


                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B      A NALYSIS OVERVIEW
B.1     H UMAN FACTORS

B.1.1     P RESENCE OF P EOPLE
        • Personally-Identifiable Information
        • Faces

B.1.2     S OCIAL C HARACTERISTICS
        • Social Identity Terms
        • Pronouns
        • Hateful Terms in Text
        • Dialect
        • Perceived Social Identity in Images
        • Hateful Symbols in Images

B.2     C ONTENT FACTORS

B.2.1     C ONTENT
        • Offensive Speech
        • Topics
        • Sexual Imagery
        • Violent Imagery

B.2.2     P ROVENANCE
        • Top Sources
        • Source Geography
        • Source Publication Time
        • Language
        • Data Duplication
        • Dataset Overlap

B.3     H UMAN X C ONTENT A SSOCIATIONS

Text

        • Social Identity Terms X Top Tokens
        • Social Identity Terms X Offensive Speech
        • Social Identity Terms X Topic

Image

        • Perceived Social Identity Features X Top Image Features
        • Perceived Social Identity Features X Sexual Imagery
        • Perceived Social Identity Features X Violent Imagery

Text-Image

        • Social Identity Terms X Sexual Imagery
        • Social Identity Terms X Violent Imagery


                                                18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      • Perceived Social Identity Features X Text-Image
      • Perceived Social Identity Features X Sexual Imagery
      • Perceived Social Identity Features X Violent Imagery
      • Perceived Social Identity Features X Offensive Speech
      • Perceived Social Identity Features X Topic

B.4   A NALYSIS D EPENDENCIES

Below is a list of technical dependencies required for framework analyses along with example
classifiers that can be used.

PII Detection: Google Data Loss Prevention API (InfoType Detector)
Face Detection: Google Cloud Vision API (Image Annotation)
Sexual Imagery: Google Cloud Vision API (Safe Search Annotation)
Violent Imagery: Google Cloud Vision API (Safe Search Annotation)
Object Classifier: Google Cloud Vision API (Object Localization)
Topic Classifier: Google Cloud Natural Language API (Content Categories)
Offensive Speech: Perspective API (Note: Not offensive speech, but Toxicity)
Language Classifier: Google Cloud Natural Language API (Text Annotation
Dialect Classifier: No comprehensive classification approaches.
Hateful Symbols: No currently reliable method
Social Identity Features: A number of published audits point to important limitations of social
         identity classification systems (e.g., Buolamwini & Gebru (2018) and Scheuerman et al.
         (2019) audits of gender classification for image, and Raji et al. (2020a) audit of gender and
         age classification for image), therefore we encourage research and results interpretation with
         individual usage contexts in mind.


                                                 19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C      L IST OF F RAMEWORK A NALYSES
C.1     H UMAN FACTORS

Analyses focused on identifying individuals, social identity groups, and cultural groups in data.

Presence of People


    C.1.1    P ERSONALLY I DENTIFIABLE I NFORMATION (PII)
    Personally identifiable information allows for an individual’s identity to be potentially inferred through
    direct or indirect means. It includes, but is not limited to, names, email addresses, addresses, and images
    or video with identifying characteristics. The presence of personally identifiable information in a dataset
    is not inherently problematic. However, even if a dataset is not intended for public use, publishing a
    model trained on a dataset containing personally identifiable information risks “leaking” that information
    through attack methods designed to recover specific training instances from a model Carlini et al. (2021).
    Generative models that have overfit to the training distribution may also risk generating outputs that
    constitute a breach in privacy.

    Task: Identify data containing PII
    Analysis Object: Text | Inferred Text Signals
    Effort: Medium
    Dependencies: PII Detection
    Output: Proportion and list of data points containing PII
    Action: Flag PII to assess potential privacy violations that arise for model tasks or as a result of dataset
            publication



    C.1.2    P EOPLE IN I MAGES
    As a subcategory of personally-identifiable information, faces in datasets are at risk of “leaking” through
    attack methods designed to recover specific training instances from a model Carlini et al. (2021). The
    presence of PII is not inherently problematic, however privacy risks must be evaluated in the context of
    specific tasks.

    Task: Calculate the proportion of images that depict people (e.g., via face detection)
    Analysis Object: Inferred Image Signals
    Effort: Low
    Dependencies: Face Detection
    Output: Proportion of images that depict people
    Action: Flag images of people


                                                        20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Social Characteristics


  C.1.3     S OCIAL I DENTITY T ERMS
  Under-representation in datasets can contribute to representational harms Barocas et al. (2017), such
  as strong under-representation of darker-skinned individuals in datasets linked to under-performance in
  pedestrian detection Wilson et al. (2019) and data imbalances generally causing issues for class prediction
  Johnson & Khoshgoftaar (2019). Attention to social identity representation in datasets also helps to
  support intersectional analyses which inherently focus on relatively smaller intersections of data but require
  sufficient data points to conduct.

  Task: Calculate proportion of text referencing different social identity groups, considering unitary and
          intersectional groups
  Analysis Object: Text
  Effort: Low
  Dependencies: Social Identity Term List
  Output: Frequency of text depicting unitary and intersectional groups
  Action: Flag social identity representation


  C.1.4     P RONOUN D ISTRIBUTION
  Pronoun distributions help provide a high-level snapshot of gender representation in datasets to evaluate
  their connection to model performance on gender bias benchmarks. Gender stereotypic associations have
  been well documented in NLP Bolukbasi et al. (2016); Caliskan et al. (2017) and mitigating imbalances in
  gendered terms in datasets has been shown to mitigate gender bias in benchmark performance Zhao et al.
  (2018).

  Task: Count number of gender pronouns that occur
  Analysis Object: Text
  Effort: Low
  Dependencies: Pronoun List
  Output: Distribution of pronouns
  Action: Flag pronoun distribution


  C.1.5     H ATEFUL T ERMS IN T EXT
  When training datasets contain derogatory language, slurs, or offensive language, there is a risk models
  trained on the data will apply these terms in an inappropriate manner, e.g. describing people with such
  terms. Several recent audits of image classification datasets and image-to-text datasets have uncovered the
  presence racial and ethnic slurs and other derogatory and hateful language Birhane et al. (2021); Birhane
  & Prabhu (2021); Crawford & Paglen (2021).

  Task: Count number of hateful terms that occur
  Analysis Object: Text
  Effort: Low
  Dependencies: Hateful Term List
  Output: Distribution of hateful terms, the groups they reference, and their occurrences
  Action: Flag hateful terms


                                                       21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  C.1.6    D IALECT
  Dialects vary across regions and cultures. Data that lacks manners of speaking or dialects prominently used
  by subgroups can lead to erasure of those dialects in resultant models, or categorization of non-dominant
  dialects as incorrect, low quality, or even offensive Sap et al. (2019).

  Task: Calculate proportion of documents representing languages and dialects aimed to be supported in
          downstream applications
  Analysis Object: Inferred Text Signals
  Effort: High
  Dependencies: Dialect Classifier
  Output: Proportion of utterances representing different languages and dialects
  Action: Flag dialect representation. Consider rebalancing strongly underrepresented dialects or qualifying
           downstream model capabilities.



  C.1.7    S OCIAL I DENTITY IN I MAGES
  Training datasets that under-represent certain social identity groups can produce models that exhibit poor
  performance when presented with novel depictions of those groups. For example, image classifiers trained
  on datasets sourced predominantly from western countries have lower accuracy when applied to images
  from non-western countries Shankar et al. (2017), and facial analysis systems trained on datasets that skew
  heavily towards lighter skinned subjects have higher error rates when applied to images depicting faces
  with darker skin tones Buolamwini & Gebru (2018).

  Task: Calculate proportion of images depicting social identity groups, considering unitary and intersec-
          tional groups
  Analysis Object: Inferred Image Signals
  Effort: Low
  Dependencies: Perceived Social Identity Classifiers
  Output: Proportion of images depicting unitary and intersectional groups
  Action: Flag social identity representation



  C.1.8    H ATEFUL S YMBOLS IN I MAGES
  Visual imagery associated with hate groups (e.g., swastikas) may go undetected or undocumented in
  datasets. Identifying hateful content across modalities can help mitigate the risk of unintentionally
  generating hateful or offensive content. It is important to note that offensiveness of imagery is often
  dependent on cultural context, and hence any action to address this issue should account for this.

  Task: Calculate proportion of images that depict known hateful symbols or text
  Analysis Object: Inferred Image Signals
  Effort: Not yet possible by automated methods
  Dependencies: Hateful Symbol Classifier
  Output: Proportion of images depicting known hateful symbols or text
  Action: Flag images with hateful symbols


                                                      22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.2   C ONTENT FACTORS


Analyses focused on identifying content that may heighten the sensitivity of human depictions.

Content


  C.2.1      O FFENSIVE S PEECH D ISTRIBUTION
  Identifying the distribution of offensive content in training data can help to understand the relationship
  between offensive speech in training data and model outputs as well as help mitigate the risk of unin-
  tentionally generating toxic content. Analyses of OWTC and OpenAI-WT suggest that toxic language
  generation has links to toxic language in web text data and toxic training examples that may be harder for
  a model to “forget” Gehman et al. (2020).

  Task: Calculate the distribution of toxicity
  Analysis Object: Inferred Text Signals
  Effort: Low
  Dependencies: Offensive Speech Classifier or similar (e.g., Perspective APIa )
  Output: Histogram of offensiveness across documents
  Action: Flag toxic content
      a
          www.perspectiveapi.com


  C.2.2      T OPIC D ISTRIBUTION
  Topic distribution can provide a birds-eye view of the composition of the dataset across various topics
  such as sports, games, finance, etc. More importantly, it can also give an indication of sexually explicit or
  sensitive topics they contain, and potential biases they bring. For example, models trained primarily on
  news data have been shown to exhibit biases against particular country names and professions Huang et al.
  (2019). Assessments of data distributions across languages may highlight potential weaknesses across
  languages in generative tasks.

  Task: Calculate the distribution of topics
  Analysis Object: Inferred Text Signals
  Effort: Low
  Dependencies: Topic Classifier (e.g., Google Cloud Content Categoriesa )
  Output: Histogram of topic distribution
  Action: Flag dominant topics
      a
          https://cloud.google.com/natural-language/docs/categories


                                                      23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  C.2.3    S EXUAL I MAGERY
  Many datasets have been identified as unintentionally containing sexually explicit content. For example,
  audits of image datasets such as Imagenet, TinyImage, and LAION-400M found pornographic and explicit
  imagery, predominantly depicting women Birhane et al. (2021); Birhane & Prabhu (2021). While some
  datasets may be explicitly curated to contain sexually explicit content, unintentional inclusion of such
  content can risk accidental generation of sexually explicit content by models trained on the data. Sexually
  explicit image content also raises potential ethical concerns regarding data sourcing since much publically
  available pornographic content has been stolen from sex workers or captured in a non-consentual manner
  Cole (2020).

  Task: Calculate the proportion of images that depict sexual content
  Analysis Object: Inferred Image Signals
  Effort: Low
  Dependencies: Visual Content Classifier (e.g., Cloud Vision APIa )
  Output: Proportion of images depicting sexual content
  Action: Flag sexual imagery. Consider filtering sexual imagery depending on downstream tasks and to
          avoid problematically-sourced dataset content
    a
      https://cloud.google.com/vision/docs/reference/rest/v1/images/
  annotate#safesearchannotation


  C.2.4    V IOLENT I MAGERY
  Like sexual imagery, violent content may feature in datasets as a part of efforts to moderate content, such
  as in the detection of cartoon content that may be inappropriate for children Khan et al. (2018). For
  general purposes, inadvertent generation of violent content may be undesirable or counter to institutional
  or platform policies.

  Task: Calculate the proportion of images that depict violent content
  Analysis Object: Inferred Image Signals
  Effort: Low
  Dependencies: Visual Content Classifier (e.g., Cloud Vision APIa )
  Output: Proportion of images depicting violent content
  Action: Flag violent imagery. Consider filtering violent imagery depending on downstream tasks
    a
      https://cloud.google.com/vision/docs/reference/rest/v1/images/
  annotate#safesearchannotation


Provenance


  C.2.5    T OP S OURCES
  The top source URL domains provide a high-level indication of the range of content most represented in
  web-scraped data. This, in turn, provides insight into document content, such as language and cultural
  content represented, as well as the prevalence of machine-generated text Dodge et al. (2021).

  Task: Count the top websites from which tokens were collected
  Analysis Object: Metadata
  Effort: Low
  Dependencies: None
  Output: List of the top websites ordered by tokens collected
  Action: Flag top URLs



                                                      24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  C.2.6     S OURCE G EOGRAPHIC S PREAD
  Source URL domains provide an indication of geographic, cultural, and social representation. When
  training datasets have strong cultural skews, a resulting model can exhibit poor performance when
  presented with culturally or regionally specific depictions. For example, image classifiers trained on
  datasets sourced predominantly from western countries have lower rates of accuracy when applied to
  images from non-western countries Shankar et al. (2017).

  Task: Calculate the known proportions of total tokens from different geographic regions (e.g., as deter-
          mined through country-specific top-level domains such as, .uk, .de, .gh, etc.)
  Analysis Object: Metadata
  Effort: Low
  Dependencies: None
  Output: List of the top country-level domains with the proportion of data sourced from each
  Action: Flag geographic spread. Consider rebalancing if regions relatively underrepresented in the dataset
           are prioritized for downstream uses.


  C.2.7     S OURCE DATA P UBLICATION T IME
  The relevance of some data can change over time. For example, assessments of truth or offensiveness
  of a statement can change in relation to when it is evaluated. Data recency may have impacts on models
  supporting low-resource languages, which can disproportionately rely on religious or historical texts due
  to data scarcity Ahmadi & Masoud (2020).

  Task: Identify the dates (years) of publication for data obtained
  Analysis Object: Metadata
  Effort: Low
  Dependencies: None
  Output: Histogram of data published per year
  Action: Flag publication time. Consider rebalancing if prioritizing tasks likely to be relatively sensitive to
           data publication time (e.g., Q&A factuality; use of contemporary slang in generative language
           tasks)


  C.2.8     L ANGUAGE
  Languages vary across regions and cultures, however work in NLP frequently focuses on English, even
  when there is data available for other languages Hovy & Prabhumoye (2021). As with under-representation
  of data and classes in other contexts, poorly represented languages in a language dataset may lead to
  worsened performance of a downstream model when applied to that langauge.

  Task: Calculate proportion of documents representing languages aimed to be supported in downstream
          applications
  Analysis Object: Text | Inferred Text Signals
  Effort: Low
  Dependencies: Language Classifier (e.g., Google Cloud Natural Language API)
  Output: Proportion of utterances representing different languages
  Action: Flag language representation. Consider rebalancing strongly underrepresented languages or
          qualifying downstream model capabilities.


                                                       25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  C.2.9    DATA D UPLICATION
  Duplicate text has been identified in a number of datasets (e.g., Bandy & Vincent (2021)) and has
  been shown to worsen model performance on some tasks Allamanis (2019) as well as induce model
  memorization Lee et al. (2021), which can carry privacy risk Carlini et al. (2021).

  Task: Calculate the proportion of duplicated data points
  Analysis Object: Text | Image
  Effort: Low
  Dependencies: None
  Output: Proportions of duplicated data points
  Action: Filter duplicate data to reduce memorization and privacy risks and improve model performance


  C.2.10     DATASET OVERLAP
  There is growing awareness and concern of test set contamination, i.e. presence of training instances in the
  test set, especially with large internet sourced datasets. Explicitly examining and mitigating any overlap in
  training and evaluation splits is increasingly commonplace (e.g., Trinh & Le (2018); Brown et al. (2020).

  Task: Identify overlaps between the present dataset and relevant datasets and benchmarks
  Analysis Object: Text | Image
  Effort: Medium [Dependencies:] None
  Output: For benchmark datasets identified, list of percent overlap with the current dataset based on exact
          matches of target text
  Action: Filter dataset overlaps to preserve the validity of benchmark results


C.3    H UMAN X C ONTENT A SSOCIATIONS

Disaggregated analyses of how content is associated with human factors. Listed below are a selection
of all possible associations between Human Factors and Content Factors. Disaggregated analyses
enable evaluation of stereotypical or otherwise harmful associations between depictions of people and
dataset content. For example, prior research has identified stereotype-aligned associations between
gender and activities in image datasets Zhao et al. (2018); Hendricks et al. (2018), associations
between muslims and violence in language models Abid et al. (2021), and associations between
women of color and explicit content in text datasets Luccioni & Viviano (2021) and image-text
datasets Birhane et al. (2021).

Text


  C.3.1    S OCIAL I DENTITY T ERMS X T OP T OKENS
  Analysis Object: Text
  Task: For social identity terms in text, calculate top word co-occurrences for each
  Effort: Low
  Dependencies: None
  Output: List of most frequent social identity terms and their respective top co-occurrences, demarcating
          identity terms (e.g., woman, Muslim, trans)
  Action: Flag associations. Consider rebalancing harmful associations that emerge in model evaluations


                                                      26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  C.3.2     S OCIAL I DENTITY T ERMS X T OPIC
  Task: Calculate the distribution of topics within text, disaggregated by social identity terms or inferred
          social identity signals
  Analysis Object: Inferred Text Signals + Social Identity Term List
  Effort: Low
  Dependencies: Topic Classifier (e.g., Google Cloud Content Categoriesa )
  Output: Distribution of topics disaggregated by social identity
  Action: Flag disproportionate associations between social identity terms and stereotypical or sensitive
          topics
     a
         https://cloud.google.com/natural-language/docs/categories


  C.3.3     S OCIAL I DENTITY T ERMS X O FFENSIVE S PEECH
  Task: Calculate the distribution of toxicity within text, disaggregated by social identity terms or inferred
          social identity signals
  Analysis Object: Inferred Text Signals + Social Identity Term List
  Effort: Low
  Dependencies: Offensive Speech Classifier or similar (e.g., Perspective APIa
  Output: Distribution of toxicity, disaggregated by social identity
  Action: Flag high toxicity. Consider rebalancing harmful associations that emerge in model evaluations
     a
         www.perspectiveapi.com


Image


  C.3.4     P ERCEIVED S OCIAL I DENTITY F EATURES X T OP I MAGE F EATURES
  Task: Calculate co-occurrences between perceived social identity features and image features, such as
          objects and other people.
  Analysis Object: Inferred Image Signals
  Effort: Low
  Dependencies: Object Classifier (e.g., Google Cloud Vision APIa )
  Output: List of perceived social identity features and the top co-occurrences for each.
  Action: Flag stereotypical associations. Consider rebalancing harmful associations that emerge in model
           evaluations.
     a
         https://cloud.google.com/vision/docs/object-localizer


                                                      27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  C.3.5    P ERCEIVED S OCIAL I DENTITY F EATURES X S EXUAL I MAGERY
  Task: Calculate co-occurrences between perceived social identity features and sexual imagery.
  Analysis Object: Inferred Image Signals
  Effort: Low
  Dependencies: Visual Content Classifier (e.g., Google Cloud Vision APIa
  Output: Proportion of images depicting sexual content disaggregated by social identity features
  Action: Flag sexual content. Consider filtering sexual content depending on downstream tasks and to
          avoid problematically-sourced dataset content.
    a
      https://cloud.google.com/vision/docs/reference/rest/v1/images/
  annotate#safesearchannotation


  C.3.6    P ERCEIVED S OCIAL I DENTITY F EATURES X V IOLENT I MAGERY
  Task: Calculate co-occurrences between perceived social identity features and violent imagery.
  Analysis Object: Inferred Image Signals
  Effort: Low
  Dependencies: Visual Content Classifier (e.g., Cloud Vision APIa
  Output: Proportion of images depicting violent content disaggregated by social identity
  Action: Flag violent content. Consider filtering sexual content depending on downstream tasks and to
          avoid problematically-sourced dataset content
    a
      https://cloud.google.com/vision/docs/reference/rest/v1/images/
  annotate#safesearchannotation


  C.3.7    P ERCEIVED S OCIAL I DENTITY F EATURES X H ATEFUL S YMBOLS
  Task: Calculate co-occurrences between perceived social identity features and hateful symbols detected
          in images.
  Analysis Object: Inferred Image Signals
  Effort: Not currently possible
  Dependencies: Hateful Symbol Classifier
  Output: Proportion of images depicting sexual content disaggregated by social identity
  Action: Flag hateful content. Consider filtering hateful content depending on downstream tasks.


Text-Image


  C.3.8    S OCIAL I DENTITY T ERMS X S EXUAL I MAGERY
  Analysis Object: Social Identity Term List + Inferred Image Signals
  Task: Calculate co-occurrences between social identity terms and sexual imagery.
  Effort: Low
  Dependencies: Visual Content Classifier (e.g., Cloud Vision APIa
  Output: Proportion of images depicting sexual content disaggregated by social identity term
  Action: Flag associations. Consider rebalancing harmful associations that emerge in downstream model
           evaluations
     a
     https://cloud.google.com/vision/docs/reference/rest/v1/images/
  annotate#safesearchannotation



                                                   28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  C.3.9     S OCIAL I DENTITY T ERMS X V IOLENT I MAGERY
  Analysis Object: Social Identity Term List + Inferred Image Signals
  Task: Calculate co-occurrences between social identity terms and violent imagery.
  Dependencies: Visual Content Classifier (e.g., Cloud Vision APIa
  Output: Proportion of images depicting violent content disaggregated by social identity term
  Action: Flag associations. Consider rebalancing harmful associations that emerge in downstream model
           evaluations
  Effort: Low
     a
     https://cloud.google.com/vision/docs/reference/rest/v1/images/
  annotate#safesearchannotation



  C.3.10     P ERCEIVED S OCIAL I DENTITY F EATURES X T OP T EXT T OKENS
  Analysis Object: Inferred Image Signals + Text
  Task: Calculate co-occurrences between perceived social identity signals and tokens in associated text.
  Effort: Low
  Dependencies: Perceived Social Identity Classifiers
  Output: List of most frequent co-occurrences for each social identity signal
  Action: Flag associations. Consider rebalancing harmful associations that emerge in downstream model
           evaluations



  C.3.11     P ERCEIVED S OCIAL I DENTITY F EATURES X O FFENSIVE S PEECH
  Analysis Object: Inferred Image Signals + Inferred Text Signals
  Task: Calculate co-occurrences between perceived social identity signals and tokens in associated text.
  Effort: Low
  Dependencies: Offensive Speech Classifier or similar (e.g., Perspective APIa
  Output: Distribution of toxicity, disaggregated by social identity
  Action: Flag high toxicity. Consider rebalancing harmful associations that emerge in model evaluations
     a
         www.perspectiveapi.com



  C.3.12     P ERCEIVED S OCIAL I DENTITY F EATURES X T OPIC
  Analysis Object: Inferred Image Signals + Inferred Text Signals
  Task: Calculate co-occurrences between perceived social identity signals and tokens in associated text.
  Effort: Low
  Dependencies: Topic Classifier (e.g., Google Cloud Content Categoriesa )
  Output: Distribution of toxicity, disaggregated by social identity
  Action: Flag high toxicity. Consider rebalancing harmful associations that emerge in model evaluations
     a
         https://cloud.google.com/natural-language/docs/categories


                                                     29
