Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


P ROVABLE K NOWLEDGE T RANSFER USING S UCCES -
SOR F EATURE FOR D EEP R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

Anonymous authors
Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         This paper studies the transfer reinforcement learning (RL) problem where mul-
         tiple RL problems have different reward functions but share the same underlying
         transition dynamics. In this setting, the Q-function of each RL problem (a.k.a. a
         task) can be decomposed into a successor feature (SF) and a reward mapping: the
         former characterizes the transition dynamics, and the latter characterizes the task-
         specific reward function. This Q-function decomposition, coupled with a policy
         improvement operator known as generalized policy improvement (GPI), reduces
         the search space of finding the optimal Q-function, and the SF & GPI framework
         exhibits promising empirical performance compared to traditional RL methods
         like Q-learning. However, its theoretical foundations remain largely unestab-
         lished, especially when learning successor features using deep neural networks
         (SFs-DQN). This paper studies the provable knowledge transfer using SFs-DQN
         in transfer RL problems. We establish the first convergence analysis with provable
         generalization guarantees for SF-DQN with GPI. The theory reveals that SF-DQN
         with GPI outperforms conventional RL approaches, such as deep Q-network, in
         terms of both faster convergence rate and better generalization. Numerical experi-
         ments on real and synthetic RL tasks support the superior performance of SF-DQN
         & GPI, quantitatively aligning with our theoretical findings.


1   I NTRODUCTION
In reinforcement learning (RL), the goal is to train an agent to perform a task within an environ-
ment in a desirable manner by allowing the agent to interact with the environment. Here, the agent
is guided towards the desirable behavior by the rewards, and the optimal policy is derived from a
learned value function (Q-function) in selecting the best actions to maximize the immediate and fu-
ture rewards. This framework can effectively capture a wide array of real-world applications, such as
gaming(Mnih et al., 2013; Silver et al., 2017), robotics (Kalashnikov et al., 2018), autonomous ve-
hicles (Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2016; Schwarting et al., 2018), healthcare (Coronato et al., 2020), and
natural language processing (Tenney et al., 2018). However, RL agents require a significant amount
of interactions with the environment to tackle complex tasks, especially when RL is equipped with
deep neural networks (DNNs). For example, AlphaGo (Silver et al., 2017) required 29 million
matches and 5000 TPUs at a cost exceeding $35 million, which is time-consuming and memory-
intensive. Nevertheless, many complex real-world problems can naturally decompose into multiple
interrelated sub-problems, all sharing the same environmental dynamics (Sutton et al., 1999; Bacon
et al., 2017; Kulkarni et al., 2016a). In such scenarios, it becomes highly advantageous for an agent
to harness knowledge acquired from previous tasks to enhance its performance in tackling new but
related challenges. This practice of leveraging knowledge from one task to improve performance in
others is known as transfer learning (Lazaric, 2012; Taylor & Stone, 2009; Barreto et al., 2017).
This paper focuses on an RL setting with learning multiple tasks, where each task is associated with
a different reward function but shares the same environment. This setting naturally arises in many
real-world applications such as robotics (Yu et al., 2020). We consider exploring the knowledge
transfer among multiple tasks via the successor feature (SF) framework (Barreto et al., 2017) which
disentangles the environment dynamic from the reward function at an incremental computational
cost. The SF framework is derived from successor representation (SR) (Dayan, 1993) by introduc-
ing the value function approximation. Specifically, SR (Dayan, 1993) decouples the value function
into a future state occupancy measure and a reward mapping. Here, the future state occupancy


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


characterizes the transition dynamics of the environment, and the reward mapping characterizes the
reward function of the task. SF is a natural application of SR in solving value function approxima-
tion. Furthermore, Barreto et al. (2017) propose a generalization of the classic policy improvement,
termed generalized policy improvement (GPI), enabling smooth knowledge transfer across learned
policies. In contrast to traditional policy improvement, which typically considers only a single pol-
icy, Generalized Policy Improvement (GPI) operates by maintaining a set of policies, each associated
with a distinct skill the agent has acquired. This approach enables the agent to switch among these
policies based on the current state or task requirements, providing a flexible and adaptive framework
for decision-making. Empirical findings presented in (Barreto et al., 2017) highlight the superior
transfer performance of SF & GPI in deep RL when compared to conventional methods like Deep
Q-Networks (DQNs). Subsequent works further justified the improved performance of SF in subgoal
identification (Kulkarni et al., 2016b) and real-world robot navigation (Zhang et al., 2017).
While performance guarantees of SF-based learning are provided in the simple tabular setting (Bar-
reto et al., 2017; 2018), less is known for such approaches in the widely used function approximation
setting. In this context, this paper aims to close this gap by providing theoretical guarantees for SF
learning in the context of DNNs. Our objective is to explore the convergence and generalization
analysis of SF when paired with DNN approximation. We also seek to delineate the conditions
under which SF learning can offer more effective knowledge transfer among tasks when contrasted
with classical deep reinforcement learning (DRL) approaches, e.g., DQN (Mnih et al., 2013).
Contributions. This paper presents the first convergence analysis with generalization guarantees for
successor feature learning with deep neural network approximation (SF-DQN). This paper focuses
on estimating the optimal Q-value function through the successor feature decomposition, where the
successor feature decomposition component is approximated through a deep neural network. The
paper offers a comprehensive analysis of the convergence of deep Q-networks with successor feature
decomposition and provides insights into the improved performance of the learned Q-value function
derived from successor feature decomposition. The key contributions of this study are as follows:
C1. The convergence analysis of the proposed SF-DQN to the optimal Q-function with gener-
alization guarantees. By decomposing the reward into a linear combination of the transition feature
and reward mapping, we demonstrate that the optimal Q-function can be learned by alternately up-
dating the reward mapping and the successor feature using the collected data in online RL. This
learned Q-function converges to the optimal Q-function with generalization guarantees at a rate of
1/T , where T is the number of iterations in updating transition features and reward mappings.
C2. The theoretical characterization of enhanced performance by leveraging knowledge from
previous tasks through GPI. This paper characterizes the convergence rate with generalization
guarantees in transfer RL utilizing GPI. The convergence rate accelerates following the degree of
correlation between the source and target tasks.
C3. The theoretical characterization of the superior transfer learning performance with SF-
DQN over non-representation learning approach DQNs. This paper quantifies the transfer learn-
ing ability of SF-DQN and DQN algorithms by evaluating their generalization error when trans-
ferring knowledge from one task to another. Our results indicate that SF-DQN achieves improved
generalization compared to DQN, demonstrating the superiority of SF-DQN in transfer RL.
1.1   R ELATED W ORKS
Successor features in RL. In the pioneering work, (Dayan, 1993) introduced the concept of SR,
demonstrating that the value function can be decomposed into a reward mapping and a state repre-
sentation that measures the future state occupancy from a given state, with learning feasibility proof
in tabular settings. Subsequently, (Barreto et al., 2017) extended SR from three perspectives: (1)
the feature domain of SR is extended from states to state-action pairs, known as SF; (2) DNNs are
deployed as function approximators to represent the SF and reward mappings; (3) GPI algorithm is
introduced to accelerate policy transfer for multi-tasks. (Barreto et al., 2017; 2018) provided trans-
fer guarantees for Q-learning with SF and GPI in the tabular setting. Furthermore, (Kulkarni et al.,
2016b; Zhang et al., 2017) apply SF learning with DNN-based schemes to subgoal identification
(Kulkarni et al., 2016b) and robot navigation (Zhang et al., 2017). A comprehensive RL transfer
comparison using SF under different assumptions can be found in (Zhu et al., 2023).
RL with neural networks. Recent advancements in RL with neural network approximation mainly
include the Bellman Eluder dimension (Jiang et al., 2017; Russo & Van Roy, 2013), Neural Tangent


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Kernel (NTK) (Yang et al., 2020; Cai et al., 2019; Xu & Gu, 2020; Du et al., 2020), and Besov
regularity (Suzuki, 2019; Ji et al., 2022; Nguyen-Tang et al., 2022). However, each of these frame-
works has its own limitations. The Eluder dimension exhibits exponential growth even for shallow
neural networks (Dong et al., 2021), making it challenging to characterize sample complexity in
real-world applications of DRL. The NTK framework linearizes DNNs to bypass the non-convexity
derived from the non-linear activation function in neural networks. Nevertheless, it requires using
computationally inefficient, extremely wide neural networks (Yang et al., 2020). Moreover, the NTK
approach falls short in explaining the advantages of utilizing non-linear neural networks over linear
function approximation (Liu et al., 2022; Fan et al., 2020). The Besov space framework (Ji et al.,
2022; Nguyen-Tang et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022; Fan et al., 2020) requires sparsity on neural net-
works and makes the impractical assumption that the algorithm can effectively identify the global
optimum, which is unfeasible for non-convex objective functions involving neural networks.
Theory of generalization in deep learning. The theory of generalization in deep learning has
been extensively developed in supervised learning, where labeled data is available throughout train-
ing. Generalization in learned models necessitates low training error and small generalization gap.
However, in DNNs, training errors and generalization gaps are analyzed separately due to their non-
convex nature. To ensure bounded generalization, it is common to focus on one-hidden-layer neural
networks (Safran & Shamir, 2018) in convergence analysis. Existing theoretical analysis tools in su-
pervised learning with generalization guarantees draw heavily from various frameworks, including
the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) framework (Jacot et al., 2018; Du et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2018),
model recovery techniques (Zhong et al., 2017; Ge et al., 2018; Bakshi et al., 2019; Soltanolkotabi
et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2020), and the analysis of structured data (Li & Liang, 2018; Shi et al.,
2022; Brutzkus & Globerson, 2021; Allen-Zhu & Li, 2022; Karp et al., 2021; Wen & Li, 2021).

2    P RELIMINARIES
In this paper, we address the learning problem involving multiple tasks {Ti }ni=1 and aim to find the
optimal policy πi⋆ for each task Ti . We begin by presenting the preliminaries for a single task and
then elaborate on our algorithm for learning with multiple tasks in the following section.
Markov decision process and Q-learning. The Markov decision process (MDP) is defined as a
tuple (S, A, P, r, γ), where S is the state space and A is the set of possible actions. The transition
operator P : S ×A → ∆(S) gives the probability of transitioning from the current state s and action
a to the next state s′ . The function r : S × A × S → [−Rmax , Rmax ] measures the reward for a
given state-action pair. The discount factor γ ∈ [0, 1) determines the significance of future rewards.
For the i-th task, the goal of the agent is to find the optimal policy πi⋆ withPat = πi⋆ (st ) at each time
                                                                                 ∞
step t. The aim is to maximize the expected discounted sum of reward as t=0 γ t · ri (st , at , st+1 ),
where ri denotes the reward function for the i-th task. For any state-action pair (s, a), we define the
action-value function Qπi given a policy π as
                                            P∞
                       Qπi (s, a) =Eπ,P            t

                                              t=0 γ ri (st , at , st+1 ) | s0 = s, a0 = a .             (1)
                                            ⋆
Then, the optimal Q-function, denoted as Qπi or Q⋆i , satisfies
                                                                                      ⋆
                  Q⋆i (s, a) := max Qπi (s, a) = Es′ |s,a ri (s, a, s′ ) + γ max
                                                                              ′
                                                                                 Qπi (s′ , a′ ),        (2)
                                  π                                           a

where (2) is also known as the Bellman equation. Through the optimal action-value function Q⋆i ,
the agent can derive the optimal policy (Watkins & Dayan, 1992; Sutton & Barto, 2018) following
                                       πi⋆ (s) = arg maxa Q⋆i (s, a).                                  (3)
Deep Q-networks (DQNs). The DQN utilizes a DNN parameterized with weights ω, denoted as
Qi (s, a; ω) : Rd → R for the i-th task, to approximate the optimal Q-value function Q⋆i in (2).
Specifically, given input feature x := x(s, a), the output of the L-hidden-layer DNN is defined as
                                             ⊤             ⊤
                                                             · · · σ(ω1⊤ x) ,

                            Qi (s, a; ω) := ωL+1 /K · σ ωL                                       (4)
where x = x(s, a) and σ(·) is the ReLU activation function, i.e., σ(z) = max{0, z}.
Successor feature. For i-the task, suppose the expected one-step reward associated with the transi-
tion (s, a, s′ ) can be computed as
                       ri (s, a, s′ ) = ϕ(s, a, s′ )⊤ wi⋆ ,       with     ϕ, wi⋆ ∈ Rd ,               (5)


                                                        3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where ϕ remains the same for all the task. With the reward function in (5), the Q-value function in
(1) can be rewritten as
                                    P∞                                       ⊤ ⋆
              Qπi (s, a) = Eπ,P             t
                                                                                      ψiπ (s, a)⊤ wi⋆ .

                                       t=0 γ ϕ(st , at , st+1 ) | (s0 , a0 )  wi :=                       (6)
Then, the optimal Q function satisfies
                                       P∞                                    ⊤ ⋆
              Q⋆i (s, a) = Eπi⋆ ,P          i
                                                                                      ψi⋆ (s, a)⊤ wi⋆ .

                                       i=0 γ ϕ(si , ai , si+1 ) | (s0 , a0 )  wi :=                       (7)


3    P ROBLEM F ORMULATION AND A LGORITHM
Problem formulation. Without loss of generality, the data is assumed to be collected from the tasks
in the order of T1 to Tn during the learning process. The goal is to utilize the collected data for each
                                                                      j−1
task, e.g., Tj , and the learned knowledge from previous tasks {Ti }i=1    to derive the optimal policy
  ⋆
πj for Tj . These tasks share the same environment dynamic but the reward function changes across
the task as shown in (5). For each task Ti , we denote its reward as
                                ri = ϕ · wi⋆ , with ∥ϕ∥2 ≤ ϕmax ,                                         (8)
where ϕ is the transition feature across all the tasks and wi⋆ is the reward mapping.
From (7), the learning of optimal Q-function for the i-th task is decomposed as two sub-tasks:
learning SF ψi⋆ (s, a) and learning reward wi⋆ .
Reward mapping. To find the optimal wi⋆ , we utilize the information from ϕ(s, a, s′ ) and
ri (s, a, s′ ). The value of w⋆ can be obtained by solving the optimization problem
                                     minwi ∥ri − ϕ · wi ∥2 .                                       (9)
Successor features. We use ψiπ to denote the successor feature for the i-th task, and ψiπ satisfies
                      ψiπ (s, a) = Es′ |s,a ϕ(s, a, s′ ) + γ · ψiπ s′ , π(s′ ) .

                                                                                                  (10)
The expression given by (10) aligns perfectly with the Bellman equation in (2), where ϕ acts as the
reward. Therefore, following DQNs, we utilize a function ψ(s, a) parameterized using the DNN as

                                 ψi (Θi ; s, a) = H Θi ; x(s, a) ,                                   (11)
                        d
where x : S × A −→ R is the feature mapping of the state-action pair. Without loss of generality,
we assume |x(s, a)| ≤ 1. Then, find ψ ⋆ is to minimize the mean squared Bellman error (MSBE)
                                                                                                   2
   min : f (Θi ) := E(s,a)∼π⋆ Es′ |s,a ψi (Θi ; s, a) − ϕ(s, a, s′ ) − γ · ψi Θi ; s′ , π ⋆ (s′ ) . (12)

    Θi

It is worth mentioning that although (12) and (9) appear to be independent of each other, the update
of wi does affect the update of ψi through the shift in data distribution. The collected data is
estimated based on the policy depending on the current estimated values of ψi and wi , which shifts
the distribution of the collected data away from πi⋆ . This, in turn, leads to a bias depending on the
value of wi in the calculation of the gradient of Θi in minimizing (12).
Generalized policy improvement (GPI). Suppose we have acquired knowledge about the optimal
successor features for the previous n tasks, and we use ψ̂i to denote the estimated successor feature
function for the i-th task. Now, let’s consider a new task Tn+1 with the reward function defined as
             ⋆
rn+1 = ϕwn+1     . Instead of training from scratch, we can leverage the knowledge acquired from
previous tasks to improve our approach. We achieve this by deriving the policy follows
                             π(a|s) = arg max max ψ̂i (s, a)⊤ wn+1   ⋆
                                                                         .                       (13)
                                                  a   1≤i≤n+1

This strategy tends to yield better performance than relying solely on ψ̂n+1 (s, a)⊤ wn+1⋆
                                                                                              , especially
                                                                          ⋆
when ψ̂n+1 has not yet converged to the optimal successor feature ψn+1 during the early learning
stage, while some task is closely related to the new tasks, i.e., some wi⋆ is close to wn+1     ⋆
                                                                                                    . This
policy improvement operator is derived from Bellman’s policy improvement theorem (Bertsekas &
Tsitsiklis, 1996) and (2). When the reward is fixed across different policies, e.g., {πi }ni=1 , and given
that the optimal Q-function represents the maximum across the entire policy space, the maximum of
multiple Q-functions corresponding to different policies, max1≤i≤n Qπn , is expected to be closer
to Q⋆ than any individual Q-function, Qπi . In this paper, the parameter ϕ in learning the successor
feature is analogous to the reward in learning the Q-function. As ϕ remains the same for different
tasks, this analogy has inspired the utilization of GPI in our setting, even where the rewards change.


                                                         4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.1   S UCCESSOR FEATURE D EEP Q-N ETWORK

The goal is to find wi and Θi by solving the optimization problems in (9) and (12) for each task
sequentially, and the optimization problems are solved by mini-batch stochastic gradient descent
(mini-batch SGD). Algorithm 1 contains two loops, and the outer loop number n is the number of
tasks and inner loop number T is the maximum number of iterations in solving (9) and (12) for each
                                                                        (0)
task. At the beginning, we initialize the parameters as Θ(0) and wi for task i with 1 ≤ i ≤ n. In
t-th inner loop for the i-th task, let st be the current state, and θc be the learned weights for task c.
The agent selects and executes actions according to
                                                                                          (t)
                                          a = πβ (maxc∈[i] ψ(Θc ; st , a)⊤ wi ),                                                       (14)
where πβ (Q(st , a)) is the policy operator based on the function Q(st , a), e.g., greedy,
ε-greedy, and softmax.        For example, if πβ (·) stands for greedy policy, then a =
                                   (t)
arg maxa maxc∈[i] ψ(Θc ; st , a)⊤ wi . The collected data are stored in a replay buffer with size
N . Then, we sample a mini-batch of samples from the replay buffer and denote the samples as Dt .
Algorithm 1 Successor Feature Deep Q-Network (SF-DQN)
 1: Input: Number of iterations T , and experience replay buffer size N , step size {ηt , κt }Tt=1 .
                  (0)               (0) n
 2: Initialize {Θi }n i=1 and {wi }i=1 .
 3: for Task i = 1, 2, · · · , n do
 4:     for t = 0, 1, 2, · · · , T − 1 do
 5:          Collect data and store in the experience replay buffer Dt following a behavior policy πt in (14).
                                                  (t)
 6:          Perform gradient descent steps on Θi and w(t) following (15).
 7:     end for
                               (T )    (T )
 8:     Return Qi = ψi (Θi )⊤ wi for i = 1, 2, ·, n.
 9: end for
Next, we update the current weights using a mini-batch gradient descent algorithm following
                                          X
            w(t+1) = w(t) − κt ·             ϕ(sm , am , s′m )⊤ w(t) − r(sm , am , s′m ) · ϕ(sm , am , s′m )
                                        m∈Dt
                                         X
                                            ψ(Θi ; sm , am ) − ϕ(sm , am , s′m ) − γ · ψ(Θi ; s′m , a′ )
             (t+1)    (t)                      (t)                                        (t)                                           (15)
            Θi     = Θi − ηt ·
                                        m∈Dt
                                                                    (t)
                                                       ·∇Θi ψ(Θi ; sm , am ),
                                                                                                                    (t)
where ηt and κt are the step sizes, and a′ = arg maxa maxc∈[i] ψ(Θc ; s′m , a)⊤ wi . The gradient
      (t)
for Θi in (15) can be viewed as the gradient of
                                 X                                                                2
                                                                               ψi (Θi ; s′ , a′ ) ,
                                                                                    (t)
                                             ψi (Θi ; s, a) − ϕ − Es′ |s,a max
                                                                            ′
                                                                                                                                        (16)
                                                                                  a
                           (sm ,am )∼Dt
                                                                                                             (t)
which is the approximation to (12) via replacing maxa′ ψi⋆ with maxa′ ψi (Θi ).

4     T HEORETICAL R ESULTS
4.1 S UMMARY OF M AJOR T HEORETICAL F INDINGS
To the best of our knowledge, our results in Section 4.3 provide the first theoretical characterization
for SF-DQN with GPI, including a comparison with the conventional Q-learning under commonly
used assumptions. Before formally presenting them, we summarize the highlights as follows.
                                   Table 1: Important Notations
   K        Number of neurons in the hidden layer.                        L    Number of the hidden layers.
    d       Dimension of the feature mapping of (s, a).                   T    Number of iterations.
 Θ⋆    ⋆
  i , wi    The global optimal to (12) and (9) for i-th task.             N    Replay buffer size.
                                                              ⋆ ⊤
   ρ1       The smallest eigenvalue of E∇ψi (Θ⋆   i )∇ψi (Θi ) .          ρ2   The smallest eigenvalue of Eϕ(s, a)ϕ(s, a)⊤ .
   q⋆       A variable indicates the relevance between current and pre-   C⋆   A constant related to the distribution shift between the be-
            vious tasks.                                                       havior and optimal policies.
(T1) Leaned Q-function converges to the optimal Q-function at a rate of 1/T with general-
                                                                    (T )      (T )
ization guarantees. We demonstrate that the learned parameters Θi and wi converge towards
                                 ⋆       ⋆
their respective ground truths, Θi and wi , indicating that SF-DQN converges to optimal Q-function
at a rate of 1/T as depicted in (23) (Theorem 1). Moreover, the generalization error of the learned


                                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                            (0)   ⋆
                                        ∥w −w ∥2              1
Q-function scales on the order of 1−γ−Ω(N    −1/2 )−Ω(C ⋆ ) · T . By employing a large replay buffer
                                                    ⋆
N , minimizing the data distribution shift factor C , and improving the estimation of task-specific
reward weights w(0) , we can achieve a lower generalization error.
(T2) GPI enhances the generalization of the learned model with respect to the task relevance
factor q ⋆ . We demonstrate that, when GPI is employed, the learned parameters exhibit improved
                                              1−c                                                   ⋆
estimation error with a reduction rate at 1−c·q   ⋆ for some constant c < 1 (Theorem 2), where q      is
                                              ⋆
defined in (24). From (24), it is clear that q decreases as the distances between task-specific reward
weights, denoted as ∥wj⋆ − wi⋆ ∥2 , become smaller. This indicates a close relationship between the
previous tasks and the current task, resulting in a smaller q ⋆ and, consequently, a larger improvement
through the usage of GPI.
(T3) SF-DQN achieves a superior performance over conventional DQN by a factor of 1+γ            2 for
the estimation error of the optimal Q-function. When we directly transfer the learned knowledge
of the Q-function to a new task without any additional training, our results demonstrate that SF-DQN
always outperforms its conventional counterpart, DQN, by a factor of 1+γ 2 (Theorems 3 and 4). As γ
approaches one, we raise the emphasis on long-term rewards, making the accumulated error derived
from the incorrect Q-function more signficant. Consequently, this leads to reduced transferability
between the source tasks and the target task. Conversely, when γ is small, indicating substantial
potential for transfer learning between the source and target tasks, we observe a more significant
improvement when using SF-DQN.
4.2 A SSUMPTIONS
We propose the assumptions in deriving our major theoretical results. These assumptions are com-
monly used in existing RL and neural network learning theories to simplify the presentation.
Assumption 1. There exists a deep neural network with weights Θ⋆i such that it minimizes (12) for
the i-th task, i.e, f (Θ⋆i ) = 0.

Assumption 1 assumes a substantial expressive power of the deep neural network, allowing it to
effectively represent ψ ⋆ in the presence of an unknown ground truth Θ⋆ .
Assumption 2. At any fixed outer iteration t, the behavior policy πt and its corresponding transition
kernel Pt satisfy
                     sups∈S dT V P(sτ ∈ ·) | s0 = s), Pt ≤ λν τ , ∀ τ ≥ 0                        (17)
for some constant λ > 0 and ν ∈ (0, 1), where dT V denotes the total-variation distance.

Assumption 2 assumes the Markov chain {sn , an , sn+1 } induced by the behavior policy is uni-
formly ergodic with the corresponding invariant measure Pt . This assumption is standard in Q-
learning (Xu & Gu, 2020; Zou et al., 2019; Bhandari et al., 2018), where the data are non-i.i.d.
Assumption 3. For any Θ(t,0) ∈ Rn and w(t,0) ∈ Rd , the greedy policy πt at the t-th outer loop,
i.e., πt (a|s) = arg maxa′ Qt (s, a′ ), satisfies

                    πt (a|s) − π ⋆ (a|s) ≤ C · sup(s,a) ∥Qt (s, a) − Q⋆ (s, a)∥F ,                 (18)

where C is a positive constant. Equivalently, when Qt = ψ(Θ(t) )⊤ w(t) , we have

                   πt (a|s) − π ⋆ (a|s) ≤ C · ∥Θ(t) − Θ⋆ ∥2 + ∥w(t) − w⋆ ∥2 .

                                                                                                   (19)

Assumption 3 indicates the policy difference between the behavior policy and the optimal policy.
Moreover, (19) can be considered as a more relaxed variant of condition (2) in Zou et al. (2019) as
(19) only necessitates the constant to hold for the distance of an arbitrary function from the ground
truth, rather than the distance between two arbitrary functions.

4.3     M AIN T HEORETICAL F INDINGS
4.3.1    C ONVERGENCE ANALYSIS OF SF-DQN
Theorem 1 demonstrates that the learned Q function converges to the optimal Q function when using
SF-DQN for Task 1. Notably, GPI is not employed for the initial task, as we lack prior knowledge


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


about the environment. Specifically, given conditions (i) the initial weights for ψ are close to the
ground truth as shown in (20), (ii) the replay buffer is large enough as in (21), and (iii) the distribution
shift between the behavior policy and optimal policy is bounded (as shown in Remark), the learned
parameters from Algorithm (1) for task 1, ψ1 (Θ1 ) and w1 , converge to the ground truth ψ1⋆ and w1⋆
as in (22), indicating that the learned Q function converges to the optimal Q function as in (23).
Theorem 1 (Convergence analysis of SF-DQN without GPI). Suppose the assumptions in Section
4.2 hold and the initial neuron weights of the SF of task 1 satisfy
                                                (0)
                                          ∥Θ1 − Θ⋆1 ∥F              ρ1
                                                       ≤ (1 − cN ) · 2 ,                                          (20)
                                             ∥Θ⋆1 ∥F                K
                                                             1
for some positive cN . When we select the step size as ηt = t+1 , and the size of the replay buffer is
                                          N = Ω(c−2 −1   2   2
                                                 N ρ1 · K · L d log q).                                           (21)
                                                         −d                     (T )
Then, with the high probability of at least 1 − q             , the weights θ          from Algorithm 1 satisfy
                                                          ⋆       (0)
                              (T )             C1 + C         · ∥w1 − w1⋆ ∥2log2 T
                            ∥Θ1      − Θ⋆1 ∥2 ≤                           ·        ,
                                             (1 − γ − cN )(1 − γ)ρ1 − C ⋆     T
                                                                                                                  (22)
                                    (T )
                                                        ρ 2  T     (0)
                                  ∥w1 − w1⋆ ∥2 ≤ 1 −            ∥w1 − w1⋆ ∥2 ,
                                                       ϕmax
where C1 = (2 + γ) · Rmax , and C ⋆ = |A| · Rmax · (1 + logν λ−1 + 1−ν
                                                                    1
                                                                       ) · C. Specifically, the
learned Q-function satisfies
                                          (0)                             (0)
                          C1 + ∥w1 − w1⋆ ∥2         log2 T   ∥w1 − w1⋆ ∥2 Rmax       ρ2  T
  max Q1 − Q⋆ ≤                                   ·        +                     1−        .                      (23)
   s,a                 (1 − γ − cN )(1 − γ)ρ1 − 1     T          1−γ                ϕmax

Remark 1 (upper bound of C): To ensure the meaningfulness of the upper bound in (23),
specifically that the denominator needs to be greater than 0, C has an explicit upper bound as
C ≤ (1−γ−c    N )(1−γ)ρ1
           |A|·Rmax      . Considering the definition of C in Assumption 3, it implies that the dif-
ference between the behavior policy and the optimal policy is bounded. In other words, the fraction
of bad tuples in the collected samples is constrained.
Remark 2 (Initialization): Note that (20) requires a good initialization. Firstly, it is still a state-of-
the-art practice in analyzing Q-learning via deep neural network approximation. Secondly, accord-
ing to the NTK theory (Jacot et al., 2018), there always exist some good local minima, which is
almost as good as the global minima, near some random initialization. Finally, such a good initial-
ization can also be adapted from some pre-trained models.

4.3.2    I MPROVED PERFORMANCE WITH GENERALIZED POLICY IMPROVEMENT
Theorem 2 establishes that the estimated Q function converges towards the optimal solution with
the implementation of GPI as shown in (25), leveraging the prior knowledge learned from previous
tasks. The enhanced performance associated with GPI finds its expression as q ⋆ defined in (24).
Notably, when tasks i and j exhibit a higher degree of correlation, meaning that the distance be-
tween wi⋆ and wj⋆ for tasks i and j is minimal, we can observe a more substantial enhancement by
employing GPI in the process of transferring knowledge from task i to task j from (25).
Theorem 2 (Convergence analysis of SF-DQN with GPI). Let us define
                                         (1 + γ)Rmax min1≤i≤j−1 ∥wi⋆ − wj⋆ ∥2
                                  q⋆ =              ·                         .                                   (24)
                                             1−γ            (0)
                                                          ∥Θj − Θ⋆j ∥2
                                                                      (T )
Then, with the probability of at least 1 − q −d , the neuron weights Θj for the j-th task satisfy
                                                                 (0)
                     (T )                          C1 + C ⋆ ∥wj − wj⋆ ∥2                log2 T
                 ∥Θj        − Θ⋆j ∥2 ≤                                                ·        .                  (25)
                                          (1 − γ − cN )(1 − γ)ρ1 − min{q ⋆ , 1} · C ⋆     T
Remark 3 (Improvement via GPI): Utilizing GPI enhances the convergence rate from in the order
      1     1                       1         1
of 1−C  ⋆ · T to in the order of 1−q ⋆ ·C ⋆ · T . When the distance between the source task and target tasks

is small, q ⋆ can approach zero, indicating an improved generalization error by a factor of 1 − C ⋆ ,
where C ⋆ is proportional to the fraction of bad tuples. The improvement achieved through GPI
is derived from the reduction of the distance between the behavior policy and the optimal policy,
subsequently decreasing the fraction of bad tuples in the collected data. Here, C ⋆ is proportional to
the fraction of bad tuples without using GPI, and q ⋆ · C ⋆ is proportional to the fraction of bad tuples
when GPI is employed.

                                                          7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.3.3 B OUNDS FOR TRANSFER REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
                                                            π⋆
From Theorems 1 and 2, we have successfully estimated Qi i for task i using our proposed SF-DQN.
When the reward changes to rn+1 (s, a, s′ ) = ϕ⊤ (s, a, s′ )wn+1
                                                               ⋆
                                                                 for a new task Tn+1 , as long as we
                ⋆
have estimated wn+1 , we can calculate the estimated Q-value function for Tn+1 simply by setting
                                 π
                                 n+1                       (T )⋆
                               Qn+1  (s, a) = max ψ(Θj ; s, a)wn+1 .                                (26)
                                                1≤j≤n
      (t)
As wn+1 experiences linear convergence to its optimal w⋆ , which is significantly faster than the
                            (t)
sublinear convergence of Θ(n+1) , as shown in (22), this derivation of Qn+1 in (26) simplifies the
                 ⋆                                                                        ⋆
computation of Θn+1 into a much more manageable supervised setting for approximating wn+1     with
only a modest performance loss as shown in (27). This is demonstrated in the following Theorem 3.
Theorem 3 (Transfer learning via SF-DQN). For the (n+1)-th task with rn+1 = ϕ⊤ wn+1  ⋆
                                                                                         , suppose
the Q-value function is derived based on (26), we have
                                                                             ⋆
                       π                   1+γ                            ∥wn+1  ∥2
                      n+1
               max |Qn+1  − Q⋆n+1 | ≤          ϕmax min ∥wj⋆ − wn+1
                                                                ⋆
                                                                    ∥2 +             .              (27)
                                           1−γ      j∈[n]                (1 − γ) · T
Remark 4 (Connection with existing works): The second term of the upper bound in (27),
   ⋆
∥wn+1  ∥2
 (1−γ)·T , can be explained as ϵ in Barreto et al. (2017), which results from the approximation error
of the optimal Q-functions in the previous tasks.
Without the SF decomposition as shown in (7), one can apply a similar strategy in (26) for DQN as
                                      π′
                                       n+1                    (T )
                                     Qn+1  (s, a) = max Q(ωj ; s, a).                               (28)
                                                   1≤j≤n
In Theorem 4, (29) illustrates the performance of (28) through DQN. Compared to Theorem 3,
transfer learning via DQN is worse than that via SF-DQN by a factor of 1+γ  2 when comparing the
estimation error of the optimal function Q⋆n+1 in (27) and (29), indicating the advantages of using
SFs in transfer reinforcement learning.
                                                                                   ⋆
Theorem 4 (Transfer learning via DQN). For the (n+1)-th task with rn+1 = ϕ · wn+1     , suppose the
Q-value function is derived based on (28), we have
                                                                               ⋆
                      π′                    2                               ∥wn+1  ∥2
                      n+1
               max |Qn+1  − Q⋆n+1 | ≤          ϕmax · min ∥wj⋆ − wn+1
                                                                  ⋆
                                                                      ∥2 +             .            (29)
                                           1−γ        j∈[n]                (1 − γ) · T
Remark 5 (Improvement by a factor of 1+γ    2 ): Transfer learning performance in SF-DQN is influ-
enced by the knowledge gap between previous and current tasks, primarily attributed to differences
in rewards and data distribution. In SF-DQN, the impact of reward differences is relatively small
since ϕ that plays the role of reward remains fixed. The parameter γ affects the influence of data
distribution differences. A small γ prioritizes immediate rewards, thereby the impact of data dis-
tribution on the knowledge gap is not significant. With a small γ, the impact of reward difference
dominates, resulting in a high gap between SF-DQN and DQN in transfer learning.
4.4 T ECHNICAL CHALLENGES , C OMPARISON WITH EXISTING WORKS
Beyond deep learning theory: Challenges in deep reinforcement learning. The proof of The-
orem 1 is inspired from the convergence analysis of one-hidden-layer neural networks within the
(semi-)supervised learning domain (Zhong et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2022). This proof tackles two
primary objectives: i) the first objective involves characterizing the local convex region of the objec-
tive functions presented in (12) and (9); ii) the second objective focuses on quantifying the distance
between the gradient defined in (15) and the gradient of the objective functions in (12) and (9).
However, extending this approach from the (semi-)supervised learning setting to the deep reinforce-
ment learning domain introduces additional challenges. First, we expand our proof beyond the
scope of one-hidden-layer neural networks to encompass multi-layer neural networks. This exten-
sion requires new technical tools for characterizing the Hessian matrix and concentration bounds,
as outlined in Appendix F.1. Second, the approximation error bound deviates from the supervised
learning scenarios due to several factors: the non-i.i.d. of the collected data, the distribution shift
between the behavior policy and the optimal policy, and the approximation error incurred when uti-
lizing (16) to estimate (12). Addressing these challenges requires developing supplementary tools,
as mentioned in Lemma 7. Notably, this approximation does not exhibit scaling behavior propor-
tional to ∥Θi − Θ⋆i ∥2 , resulting in a sublinear convergence rate.
Beyond DQN: challenges in GPI. The major challenges in proving Theorems 2-4 centers on de-
riving the improved performance by utilizing GPI. The intuition is as follows. Imagine we have two


                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


closely related tasks, labeled as i and j, with their respective optimal weight vectors, wi⋆ and wj⋆ ,
being close to each other. This closeness suggests that these tasks share similar rewards, leading to a
bounded distributional shift in the data, which, in turn, implies that their optimal Q-functions should
exhibit similarity. To rigorously establish this intuition, we aim to characterize the distance between
these optimal Q-functions, denoted as |Q⋆i − Q⋆j |, in terms of the Euclidean distance between their
optimal weight vectors, ||wi⋆ − wj⋆ ||2 (See details in Appendix G). Furthermore, we can only esti-
mate the optimal Q-function for previous tasks during the learning process, and such an estimation
error accumulates in the temporal difference learning, e.g., the case of the SF learning of ψ ⋆ . We
need to develop novel analytical tools to quantify the error accumulating in the temporal difference
learning (see details in Appendix C), which is unnecessary for supervised learning problems.
5    E XPERIMENTS
This section summarizes empirical validation for the theoretical results obtained in Section 4 using
a synthetic RL benchmark environment. The experiment setup and additional experimental results
for real-world RL benchmarks are summarized in Appendix E.
Convergence of SF-DQN with varied initialization. Figure 1 shows the performance of Algorithm
                           (0)
1 with different initial w1 to the ground truth w1⋆ . When the initialization is close to the ground
truth, we observe an increased accumulated reward, which verifies our theoretical findings in (23)
                                                                 (0)
that the estimation error of the optimal Q-function reduces as ∥w1 − w⋆ ∥2 decreases.
                                    1.0


                                                                                                  normalized average reward
        normalized average reward


                                    0.8                                                                                       0.8

                                    0.6                                                                                       0.6

                                    0.4                               w1(0) w1*                                               0.4
                                                                            20
                                    0.2                                     40                                                0.2
                                                                            60                                                                                 SFDQN (GPI)
                                    0.0                                     80                                                0.0                              DQN (GPI)
                                          0   25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200                                                          0   25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200
                                                   number of episodes                                                                        number of episodes

Figure 1: Performance of SF-DQN presented                                                  Figure 2: Transfer comparison for SF-DQN
in Algorithm 1 on Task 1.                                                                  and DQN (with GPI)
Performance of SF-DQN with GPI when adapting to tasks with varying relevance. We con-
ducted experiments to investigate the impact of GPI with varied task relevance. Since the difference
in reward mapping impacts data distribution shift, rewards, and consequently the optimal Q-function,
we utilize the metric ∥w1⋆ −w2⋆ ∥2 to measure the task irrelevance. The results summarized in Table 2
demonstrate that when tasks are similar (i.e., small ∥w1⋆ −w2⋆ ∥), SF-DQN with GPI consistently out-
performs its counterpart without GPI. However, when tasks are dissimilar (i.e., large ∥w1⋆ − w2⋆ ∥),
both exhibit same or similar performance, indicating that GPI is ineffective when two tasks are
irrelevant. The observations in Table 2 validate our theoretical findings in (25), showing a more
significant improvement in using GPI as ∥w1⋆ − w2⋆ ∥2 decreases.
              Table 2: Normalized average reward for SF-DQN with and without GPI.
       ∥w1∗ − w2∗ ∥                                               = 0.01              = 0.1                 =1                                                   = 10
    SF-DQN (w/ GPI)                                            0.986 ± 0.007      0.965 ± 0.007        0.827 ± 0.008                                         0.717 ± 0.012
    SF-DQN (w/o GPI)                                           0.942 ± 0.004      0.911 ± 0.013        0.813 ± 0.009                                         0.707 ± 0.011
Comparison of the SF-DQN agent and DQN agent. From Figure 2, it is evident that the SF-DQN
agent consistently achieves a higher average reward (task 2) than the DQN when starting training on
task 2, where transfer learning occurs. These results strongly indicate the improved performance of
the SF-DQN agent over the DQN, aligning with our findings in (27) and (29). SF-DQN benefits from
reduced estimation error of the optimal Q-function compared to DQN when engaging in transfer
reinforcement learning for relevant tasks.
6    C ONCLUSION
This paper analyzes the transfer learning performance of SF & GPI, with SF being learned us-
ing deep neural networks. Theoretically, we present a convergence analysis of our proposed SF-
DQN with generalization guarantees and provide theoretical justification for its superiority over
DQN without using SF in transfer reinforcement learning. We further verify our theoretical find-
ings through numerical experiments conducted in both synthetic and benchmark RL environments.
Future directions include exploring the possibility of learning ϕ using a DNN approximation and
exploring the combination of successor features with other deep reinforcement learning algorithms.


                                                                                      9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu and Yuanzhi Li. Feature purification: How adversarial training performs robust
  deep learning. In 2021 IEEE 62nd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science
  (FOCS), pp. 977–988. IEEE, 2022.
Pierre-Luc Bacon, Jean Harb, and Doina Precup. The option-critic architecture. In Proceedings of
  the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 31, 2017.
Ainesh Bakshi, Rajesh Jayaram, and David P Woodruff. Learning two layer rectified neural networks
  in polynomial time. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 195–268. PMLR, 2019.
André Barreto, Will Dabney, Rémi Munos, Jonathan J Hunt, Tom Schaul, Hado P van Hasselt,
  and David Silver. Successor features for transfer in reinforcement learning. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Andre Barreto, Diana Borsa, John Quan, Tom Schaul, David Silver, Matteo Hessel, Daniel
  Mankowitz, Augustin Zidek, and Remi Munos. Transfer in deep reinforcement learning using
  successor features and generalised policy improvement. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 501–510. PMLR, 2018.
Dimitri Bertsekas and John N Tsitsiklis. Neuro-dynamic programming. Athena Scientific, 1996.
Jalaj Bhandari, Daniel Russo, and Raghav Singal. A finite time analysis of temporal difference
   learning with linear function approximation. In Conference on learning theory, pp. 1691–1692.
   PMLR, 2018.
Rajendra Bhatia. Matrix analysis, volume 169. Springer Science & Business Media, 2013.
Alon Brutzkus and Amir Globerson. An optimization and generalization analysis for max-pooling
  networks. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 1650–1660. PMLR, 2021.
Qi Cai, Zhuoran Yang, Jason D Lee, and Zhaoran Wang. Neural temporal-difference learning con-
  verges to global optima. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Antonio Coronato, Muddasar Naeem, Giuseppe De Pietro, and Giovanni Paragliola. Reinforcement
  learning for intelligent healthcare applications: A survey. Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, 109:
  101964, 2020.
Peter Dayan. Improving generalization for temporal difference learning: The successor representa-
  tion. Neural computation, 5(4):613–624, 1993.
Kefan Dong, Jiaqi Yang, and Tengyu Ma. Provable model-based nonlinear bandit and reinforce-
  ment learning: Shelve optimism, embrace virtual curvature. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:26168–26182, 2021.
Simon S Du, Xiyu Zhai, Barnabas Poczos, and Aarti Singh. Gradient descent provably optimizes
  over-parameterized neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2018.
Simon S. Du, Xiyu Zhai, Barnabas Poczos, and Aarti Singh. Gradient descent provably optimizes
  over-parameterized neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=S1eK3i09YQ.
Simon S Du, Jason D Lee, Gaurav Mahajan, and Ruosong Wang. Agnostic q-learning with function
  approximation in deterministic systems: Near-optimal bounds on approximation error and sample
  complexity. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:22327–22337, 2020.
Jianqing Fan, Zhaoran Wang, Yuchen Xie, and Zhuoran Yang. A theoretical analysis of deep q-
   learning. In Learning for Dynamics and Control, pp. 486–489. PMLR, 2020.
Rong Ge, Jason D. Lee, and Tengyu Ma. Learning one-hidden-layer neural networks with land-
  scape design. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=BkwHObbRZ.


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clément Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and gen-
  eralization in neural networks. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2018.
Xiang Ji, Minshuo Chen, Mengdi Wang, and Tuo Zhao. Sample complexity of nonparamet-
  ric off-policy evaluation on low-dimensional manifolds using deep networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2206.02887, 2022.
Nan Jiang, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Alekh Agarwal, John Langford, and Robert E Schapire. Con-
  textual decision processes with low bellman rank are pac-learnable. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 1704–1713. PMLR, 2017.
Dmitry Kalashnikov, Alex Irpan, Peter Pastor, Julian Ibarz, Alexander Herzog, Eric Jang, Deirdre
 Quillen, Ethan Holly, Mrinal Kalakrishnan, Vincent Vanhoucke, et al. Scalable deep reinforce-
 ment learning for vision-based robotic manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 651–
 673. PMLR, 2018.
Stefani Karp, Ezra Winston, Yuanzhi Li, and Aarti Singh. Local signal adaptivity: Provable feature
  learning in neural networks beyond kernels. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  34:24883–24897, 2021.
Tejas D Kulkarni, Karthik Narasimhan, Ardavan Saeedi, and Josh Tenenbaum. Hierarchical deep
  reinforcement learning: Integrating temporal abstraction and intrinsic motivation. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 29, 2016a.
Tejas D Kulkarni, Ardavan Saeedi, Simanta Gautam, and Samuel J Gershman. Deep successor
  reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.02396, 2016b.
Alessandro Lazaric. Transfer in reinforcement learning: a framework and a survey. In Reinforcement
  Learning: State-of-the-Art, pp. 143–173. Springer, 2012.
Jaehoon Lee, Yasaman Bahri, Roman Novak, Samuel S Schoenholz, Jeffrey Pennington, and Jascha
  Sohl-Dickstein. Deep neural networks as gaussian processes. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2018.
Yuanzhi Li and Yingyu Liang. Learning overparameterized neural networks via stochastic gradient
  descent on structured data. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 8157–
  8166, 2018.
Fanghui Liu, Luca Viano, and Volkan Cevher. Understanding deep neural function approximation
  in reinforcement learning via ϵ-greedy exploration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.07376, 2022.
A Yu Mitrophanov. Sensitivity and convergence of uniformly ergodic markov chains. Journal of
  Applied Probability, 42(4):1003–1014, 2005.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan Wier-
  stra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.5602, 2013.
Thanh Nguyen-Tang, Sunil Gupta, Hung Tran-The, and Svetha Venkatesh. On sample complex-
  ity of offline reinforcement learning with deep reLU networks in besov spaces. Transactions
  on Machine Learning Research, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  LdEm0umNcv.
Daniel Russo and Benjamin Van Roy. Eluder dimension and the sample complexity of optimistic
  exploration. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 26, 2013.
Itay Safran and Ohad Shamir. Spurious local minima are common in two-layer relu neural networks.
   In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4430–4438, 2018.
Wilko Schwarting, Javier Alonso-Mora, and Daniela Rus. Planning and decision-making for au-
 tonomous vehicles. Annual Review of Control, Robotics, and Autonomous Systems, 1:187–210,
 2018.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Shai Shalev-Shwartz, Shaked Shammah, and Amnon Shashua. Safe, multi-agent, reinforcement
  learning for autonomous driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.03295, 2016.

Zhenmei Shi, Junyi Wei, and Yingyu Liang. A theoretical analysis on feature learning in neural
  networks: Emergence from inputs and advantage over fixed features. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2022.

David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Matthew Lai, Arthur Guez,
  Marc Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran, Thore Graepel, et al. Mastering chess and shogi
  by self-play with a general reinforcement learning algorithm. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.01815,
  2017.

Mahdi Soltanolkotabi, Adel Javanmard, and Jason D Lee. Theoretical insights into the optimization
 landscape of over-parameterized shallow neural networks. IEEE Transactions on Information
 Theory, 65(2):742–769, 2018.

Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.

Richard S Sutton, Doina Precup, and Satinder Singh. Between mdps and semi-mdps: A frame-
  work for temporal abstraction in reinforcement learning. Artificial intelligence, 112(1-2):181–
  211, 1999.

Taiji Suzuki. Adaptivity of deep reLU network for learning in besov and mixed smooth besov
  spaces: optimal rate and curse of dimensionality. In International Conference on Learning Rep-
  resentations, 2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=H1ebTsActm.

Matthew E Taylor and Peter Stone. Transfer learning for reinforcement learning domains: A survey.
 Journal of Machine Learning Research, 10(7), 2009.

Ian Tenney, Patrick Xia, Berlin Chen, Alex Wang, Adam Poliak, R Thomas McCoy, Najoung Kim,
  Benjamin Van Durme, Samuel R Bowman, Dipanjan Das, et al. What do you learn from context?
  probing for sentence structure in contextualized word representations. In International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2018.

Joel A Tropp. User-friendly tail bounds for sums of random matrices. Foundations of computational
  mathematics, 12(4):389–434, 2012.

Roman Vershynin. Introduction to the non-asymptotic analysis of random matrices. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1011.3027, 2010.

Christopher JCH Watkins and Peter Dayan. Q-learning. Machine learning, 8(3):279–292, 1992.

Zixin Wen and Yuanzhi Li. Toward understanding the feature learning process of self-supervised
  contrastive learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 11112–11122.
  PMLR, 2021.

Pan Xu and Quanquan Gu. A finite-time analysis of q-learning with neural network function ap-
  proximation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10555–10565. PMLR, 2020.

Zhuoran Yang, Chi Jin, Zhaoran Wang, Mengdi Wang, and Michael I Jordan. On function approx-
  imation in reinforcement learning: optimism in the face of large state spaces. In Proceedings of
  the 34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 13903–13916,
  2020.

Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey
  Levine. Meta-world: A benchmark and evaluation for multi-task and meta reinforcement learning.
  In Conference on Robot Learning, Virtual, November 2020.

Jingwei Zhang, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Joschka Boedecker, and Wolfram Burgard. Deep rein-
   forcement learning with successor features for navigation across similar environments. In 2017
   IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 2371–2378.
   IEEE, 2017.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Shuai Zhang, Meng Wang, Jinjun Xiong, Sijia Liu, and Pin-Yu Chen. Improved linear convergence
  of training cnns with generalizability guarantees: A one-hidden-layer case. IEEE Transactions
  on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 2020.
Shuai Zhang, Meng Wang, Sijia Liu, Pin-Yu Chen, and Jinjun Xiong. How unlabeled data im-
  prove generalization in self-training? a one-hidden-layer theoretical analysis. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Kai Zhong, Zhao Song, Prateek Jain, Peter L Bartlett, and Inderjit S Dhillon. Recovery guaran-
  tees for one-hidden-layer neural networks. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference
  on Machine Learning-Volume 70, pp. 4140–4149. JMLR. org, https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03175,
  2017.
Zhuangdi Zhu, Kaixiang Lin, Anil K Jain, and Jiayu Zhou. Transfer learning in deep reinforcement
  learning: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2023.
Shaofeng Zou, Tengyu Xu, and Yingbin Liang. Finite-sample analysis for sarsa with linear function
  approximation. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.


                                               13
