Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


f -FERM: A S CALABLE F RAMEWORK FOR ROBUST
FAIR E MPIRICAL R ISK M INIMIZATION
 Sina Baharlouei ∗                 Shivam Patel †                  Meisam Razaviyayn ∗


                                            A BSTRACT
         Training and deploying machine learning models that meet fairness criteria for
         protected groups are fundamental in modern artificial intelligence. While numerous
         constraints and regularization terms have been proposed in the literature to promote
         fairness in machine learning tasks, most of these approaches are not amenable to
         stochastic optimization due to the complex and nonlinear structure of constraints
         and regularizers. Here, the term “stochastic” refers to the ability of the algorithm
         to work with small mini-batches of data. Motivated by the limitation of existing
         literature, this paper presents a unified stochastic optimization framework for fair
         empirical risk minimization based on f -divergence measures (f -FERM). The pro-
         posed stochastic algorithm enjoys theoretical convergence guarantees. In addition,
         our experiments demonstrate the superiority of fairness-accuracy tradeoffs offered
         by f -FERM for almost all batch sizes (ranging from full-batch to batch size of
         one). Moreover, we show that our framework can be extended to the case where
         there is a distribution shift from training to the test data. Our extension is based on
         a distributionally robust optimization reformulation of f -FERM objective under ℓp
         norms as uncertainty sets. Again, in this distributionally robust setting, f -FERM
         not only enjoys theoretical convergence guarantees but also outperforms other
         baselines in the literature in the tasks involving distribution shifts. An efficient
         stochastic implementation of f -FERM is publicly available 1 .

1 I NTRODUCTION
Machine learning models are increasingly deployed in critical applications ranging from health-
care (Ahmad et al., 2018) to image processing (Krizhevsky et al., 2017), education to job recruit-
ment (Boselli et al., 2018), and social networking to cybersecurity (Xin et al., 2018). Machine
learning practitioners have adopted learning algorithms to fathom inherently difficult and crucial
problems. However, naïve deployment of these models may lead to serious shortcomings such
as biased predictions against minority groups (Angwin et al., 2016; Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018),
vulnerability to adversarial attacks (Madry et al., 2017; Carlini & Wagner, 2017; Baharlouei et al.,
2023), or lack of generalizability (Arjovsky et al., 2019). Consequently, it is of utmost importance to
have reliable and trustworthy models that are, in particular, fair and comply with equality norms and
provisions worldwide (Act, 1964; Elford, 2023).
With the increasing concern for the trustworthiness of unchecked machine learning algorithms, a
broad class of paradigms has been proposed to counteract and mitigate both the cause and effects of
model unreliability. Imposing statistical independence between model output and particular input
features is of interest in various domains, especially when the generalization of a trained model
is based on a collection of spurious features present in the training dataset (Dwork et al., 2012;
Hardt et al., 2016; Yan et al., 2017). These could be sensitive features like gender, race, age, and/or
income in the context of fairness or confounding factors like environmental artifacts in the context of
image classification (Arjovsky et al., 2019). Existing literature on imposing statistical independence
between selected input features and model outputs is directed into three approaches: pre-processing,
post-processing, and in-processing methods.
Pre-processing methods entail upstream changes made in datasets to mask sensitive features or reduce
the dependency of output variables on sensitive features through transforming data in a stage before
the training phase (Kamiran & Calders, 2012; Zemel et al., 2013; Ustun et al., 2019). Post-processing
methods involve model-specific adjustments to the model’s output to ensure the independence of
   ∗
     University of Southern California (baharlou,razaviya@usc.edu)
   †
     Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT Bombay (shivamapatel2002@gmail.com)
   1
     https://github.com/optimization-for-data-driven-science/f-FERM


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


predictions and sensitive attributes (Hardt et al., 2016; Alghamdi et al., 2022). While pre-processing
and post-processing methods do not affect the training procedure, they fail to exploit underlying
training mechanisms for the best achievable accuracy-fairness tradeoffs. Unsurprisingly enough,
optimizing accuracy and fairness jointly (in-processing) leads to better tradeoffs than sequentially
optimizing fairness and accuracy in a pre-processing or post-processing fashion.
In-processing methods alternatively add fairness constraints or regularizers, penalizing dependence
between sensitive attributes and output variables. (Zafar et al., 2017) utilizes covariance as the
measure of independence between the sensitive attributes and the predictions. While such a measure
is amenable to stochastic updates, it fails to capture correlations beyond linear. Alternatively, several
non-linear measures such as Rényi correlation (Baharlouei et al., 2020), χ2 divergence (Lowy et al.,
2022), L∞ distance (Donini et al., 2018), and Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) (Prost et al.,
2019) are proposed in the literature to establish the independence of the predictors and sensitive
attributes. In-processing techniques can be model-specific (Wan et al., 2021; Aghaei et al., 2019) or
generalizable to different training algorithms (Baharlouei et al., 2020; Lowy et al., 2022).
In the spirit of in-processing methods, input data-driven constraints or regularization terms are used
to modify training objectives of problems like learning generalizable models to new environments,
invariant learning, and learning in the presence of distribution shifts (Arjovsky et al., 2019; Mary
et al., 2019; Baharlouei et al., 2020). Such constrained/regularized reformulations are prevalent in
learning robust classifiers against adversarial attacks (Sinha et al., 2018), meta-learning (Balaji et al.,
2018), federated learning (Deng et al., 2023), and alternative learning paradigms such as learning
distributionally robust optimization (DRO) models (Kuhn et al., 2019; Levy et al., 2020), tilted
empirical risk minimization (TERM) (Li et al., 2020), and Squared-root Lasso (Belloni et al., 2011).
While in-processing techniques outperform pre-processing and post-processing approaches, they
are not scalable to large datasets because of a lack of adaptability to stochastic optimization (Mary
et al., 2019; Lowy et al., 2022). All aforementioned examples consist of regularization terms in their
objective functions where the gradient cannot be described as a linear combination of data point
functions. As a result, applying stochastic gradient descent or other stochastic first-order methods on
the objective functions of such problems might not converge, especially for small batch sizes.
Motivated by this, (Lowy et al., 2022) proposes a stochastic optimization framework for Exponential
Rényi Mutual Information as the measure of independence. More recently Zhong & Tandon (2023)
use f -divergences as regularization terms to establish the independence between sensitive attributes
and predictions. They estimate the f -divergence regularizers offline through multi-layer neural
networks to avoid the computational challenges of devising scalable stochastic methods for nonconvex
min-max problems. Our approach, on the other hand, directly solves the variational formulation for
both full-batch and stochastic settings with convergence guarantees to non-spurious solutions. In
Section 2, using the variational representation of f -divergences, we present a convergent stochastic
optimization framework for fair learning via f -divergences. (Lowy et al., 2022) is a special case of
f -divergences where f (t) = t2 − 1 (χ2 divergence). Aside from χ2 , all other divergences listed in
Table 1 are not introduced in the literature to the best of our knowledge.
Designing convergent stochastic algorithms for fair empirical risk minimization can be further
explored in scenarios involving changes in the data distribution from the source to the target domain.
Detection and mitigation of biases against protected groups in the presence of distribution shifts
have been extensively studied in recent years. Lechner et al. (2021) theoretically shows that learning
fair representations (pre-processing) is nearly impossible for the popular notions of fairness, such as
demographic parity in the presence of the distribution shift. Ding et al. (2021), on the other hand,
experimentally demonstrates that applying post-processing fairness techniques (Hardt et al., 2016) to
learn fair predictors of income concerning race, gender, and age fails to transfer from one US state
(training domain) to another state. Overlooking distribution shifts can lead to catastrophic decisions
threatening the well-being of human subjects when deploying a trained model in certain hospitals
to other hospitals (Schrouff et al., 2022). The current literature for handling distribution shifts with
in-processing methods relies on certain assumptions on the type of distribution shift (demographic
shift (Fang et al., 2020; Du & Wu, 2021; Maity et al., 2021; Giguere et al., 2021), label shift (Dai &
Brown, 2020), and/or covariate shift (Rezaei et al., 2021; Singh et al., 2021)) or explicit access to the
causal graph (Mishler & Dalmasso, 2022; Schrouff et al., 2022) of predictors, sensitive attributes,
and target variables. As a result, they face practical limitations and cannot cope with most real-world
problems involving complex shifts that cannot be categorized in the ones assumed in their works.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alternatively, Taskesen et al. (2020) provides convex objective functions for imposing fairness on
logistic regression using constraint optimization. Staib & Jegelka (2019) use MMD for defining
uncertainty sets around training distribution, whereas Husain (2020) use Integral Probability Measure
(IPM) to mitigate the distribution shift. The main limitation of these approaches is their reliance
on the convexity of the underlying learning model and lack of scalability due to incompatibility
with stochastic optimization algorithms. Wang et al. (2023) uses the Maximum Mean Discrepancy
(MMD) distance between the spectral norm of the Hessian matrix at advantaged and disadvantaged
data points. However, they do not provide convergence guarantees for their proposed algorithm to
any notion of optimality. In addition, the method is not necessarily amenable to stochastic updates.
While we naturally define the uncertainty set directly on the joint distribution of sensitive attributes
and predictions, they use the curvature of the obtained solution quantified by the norm of the Hessian
matrix as a heuristic for promoting the robustness of the fair solution.
Contributions: This paper establishes a scalable (stochastic) fair empirical risk minimization
framework through regularization via f -divergences (f -FERM) for both standard and distributed shift
settings. f -FERM presents a unified methodology based on the Legendre-Fenchel transformation,
enabling us to develop theoretically convergent first-order stochastic algorithms when only small
batches of data are available at each iteration. Further, we have presented the first distributionally
robust optimization framework under ℓp norms uncertainty sets covering nonconvex losses such as
neural networks. The presented framework for fair inference in the presence of distribution shifts does
not rely on the causal graph describing the causal interaction of input features, sensitive attributes,
and target variables, which is rarely available in practical problems.
Paper Organization: We structure our response towards designing scalable, robust, and fair algo-
rithms into two sections. Section 2 motivates the design of unbiased gradient estimators of objectives
with information-theoretic f -divergence regularizers. In Section 3, we present our approach for fair
inference in the presence of the distribution shift in detail. Our experiments provide an extensive
examination of various f -divergences and their suitability as regularizers and also show the consis-
tency of our method across all batch sizes in contrast to existing benchmarks. Similar experiments
are carried out for robust training on varying amounts of distributional shifts in data.
2    FAIR E MPIRICAL R ISK M INIMIZATION VIA f - DIVERGENCES
A widely studied problem in algorithmic fairness is promoting a notion of group fairness, such as
demographic parity, equalized odds, equality of opportunity, or sufficiency through an in-processing
method. For these notions, we aim to establish a [conditional] statistical independence between the
predictions (e.g., the creditworthiness of the individual) and the sensitive attributes (e.g., gender, race).
For simplicity of presentation, we formulate all problems under the demographic parity notion, which
requires statistical independence between the prediction and the sensitive attribute. Without loss of
generality, all formulations and methods are generalizable to other aforementioned notions of group
fairness by considering conditional random variables (see Appendix A). A popular in-processing
approach for training fair (classification) models under the demographic parity notion is to regularize
the empirical risk minimization:
                              n
                          1X
                  min           ℓ(ŷθ (xi ), yi ) + λD P(ŷθ (x), s), P(ŷθ (x)) ⊗ P(s) ,                (1)
                    θ     n i=1

where θ is the learning parameters (e.g., weights of the neural network); xi ∈ Rd is the i-th input
feature vector; yi is the actual label/class for sample i; ŷθ (xi ) is the prediction of the model for
sample i; and ℓ(ŷθ (xi ), yi ) is the loss function measuring the “goodness-of-fit" for sample i. Here,
D is a divergence between the joint probability distribution of the predictions and sensitive attributes
and the Kronecker product of their marginal distributions. Recall that ŷθ and s are statistically
independent iff P(ŷθ (x), s) follows P(ŷθ (x)) ⊗ P(s). Thus, the second term in (1) is zero iff ŷθ and
s are statistically independent (complete fairness under the demographic parity notion).
This section studies the fair empirical risk minimization regularized by a broad class of f -divergence
measures. Let P and Q be two discrete probability measures taking values in P = {1, . . . , m}. The
f -divergence between P and Q is defined as (Polyanskiy & Wu, 2022, Def 4.9)(see Appendix B for
the general continuous case):
                                                    m        P
                                                               j
                                                   X
                                     Df (P, Q) =       Qj f                                          (2)
                                                   j=1
                                                             Q j



                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The above definition, which is also known as f -mutual information (Lu et al., 2023; Csiszár, 1967),
covers many known divergence measures used for imposing fairness, such as KL-divergence for the
choice of f (t) = t log(t) (Shui et al., 2022), or χ2 divergence when f (t) = (t − 1)2 (Lowy et al.,
2022). As shown in Appendix C, Df in (1) is zero if and only if the probability distribution of s
and ŷθ are statistically independent for the choices of f listed in Table 1. In addition, we prove
that these f -divergences either cover or provide upper bounds for the popular notions of fairness
violations in the literature, such as ℓp distances, Rényi correlation (Baharlouei et al., 2020), and
demographic parity (equalized odds) violation. This means that by minimizing these regularizers,
we are minimizing an upper bound of (other) popular fairness violation measures, and thus we are
controlling them implicitly. Further, unlike Rényi correlation (Baharlouei et al., 2020; Grari et al.,
2020), we can utilize Legendre-Fenchel duality (and variational representation) to develop (provably)
convergent algorithms with stochastic (mini-batch) updates. This formulation and the resulting
stochastic optimization algorithm are described in the next subsection.

2.1 A C ONVERGENT S TOCHASTIC A LGORITHM FOR FAIR ERM VIA f -D IVERGENCES
Let us start by rewriting (1) using f -divergences as the divergence measure:
                   n
                1X                                                          ŷθ ,s (ŷθ = j, s = k)
                                            X                             P
       min            ℓ(ŷθ (xi ), yi ) + λ      Ps (s = k)Pŷθ (ŷθ )f                                      (f -FERM)
        θ       n i=1                       j∈Y,
                                                                         Pŷθ (ŷθ = j)Ps (s = k)
                                                k∈S

 While the non-linearity of f -divergences in (f -FERM) empowers the underlying model to capture
more complex dependencies between sensitive attributes and predictions compared to the linear
measures (Zafar et al., 2017), the objective function can no longer be represented as a summation
of functions over input data points. Consequently, one cannot directly apply the stochastic gradient
descent method (or its variations, such as Adam) to the objective function in (f -FERM). In particular,
directly evaluating the gradient of the objective function of (f -FERM) on a mini-batch of data
leads to a statistically biased estimation of the entire objective’s gradient. Such statistical biases
prevent the convergence of algorithms such as SGD (even with a strongly convex minimization
landscape) (Ajalloeian & Stich, 2020; Chen & Luss, 2018), let aside the more complex objectives
arising in modern-day neural networks.
To derive stochastic algorithms, one can use the variational forms of f -divergences to delineate them
as a pointwise supremum of affine transformation over probability densities. The most commonly used
and well-behaved transform is the Legendre-Fenchel transform (often called the convex conjugates),
which linearizes the dependence of the objective function to input data points using a variational
reformulation. Particularly, we can rewrite (f -FERM) using the following result:
Proposition 2.1. Let f (·) be a convex function. Then, (f -FERM) can be reformulated as:
                 n
                 X                             X h                                                                  i
  min max              ℓ(ŷθ (xi ), yi ) + λ          Ajk Pŷ,s (ŷθ = j, s = k) − f ∗ (Ajk )Pŷ (ŷθ = j)Ps (s = k) (3)
   θ     A
                 i=1                           j∈Y,
                                               k∈S
        ∗                              T
where f (z) = supw∈dom(f ) w z − f (w) is the Legendre-Fenchel transformation of the function f .
Proof. The proof is standard and appears in Appendix D.
In order to solve (3), we will use (stochastic) first-order methods. Notice that Ps (s = k) is constant
through the optimization procedure and is computed once by counting       Pnthe number of data points
whose sensitive attribute takes the value of k: πk := Ps (s = k) = n1 i=1 1(si = k). Assume we
use the softmax layer to compute the probabilities of different classes in our classification task (as it
is standard in logistic regression or using neural networks for classification). Let Fj (xi ; θ) be the
j-th entry of the softmax layer output for datapoint xi , predicting the probability of class j. Then it is
easy to show that we can obtain unbiased estimators of Pŷθ (ŷθ = j) and Pŷθ ,s (ŷθ = j, s = k) using
i.i.d. mini-batch B of data points. More precisely, we have
                                              n                       |B|
                                           1X                    h 1 X                i
                    Pŷθ (ŷθ = j) =             Fj (xi ; θ) = E          Fj (xi ; θ)
                                           n i=1                  |B| i=1
                                                                  |       {z        }
                                                                         P̂ŷ (j; B)
                                                                           θ
                                                                                                                     (4)
                                               n                           |B|
                                       1                              h 1 X
                                             Fj (xi ; θ)1(si = k) = E          Fj (xi ; θ)1(si = k) .
                                               X                                                    i
            Pŷθ ,s (ŷθ = j, s = k) =
                                       n i=1                           |B| i=1
                                                                       |            {z            }
                                                                                       P̂ŷ ,s (j,k; B)
                                                                                           θ


                                                               4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Table 1: Unbiased Estimators for f -divergence Regularizers
                                                                                     P
 Divergence              f (t)                      The term rjk inside regularizer λ j,k rjk in (5)
                                                                                        A2
 χ2                       (t − 1)2                          πk [Ajk Pŷθ |sk − (Ajk + 4jk )Pŷθ ]
 Reverse KL               − ln t                            πk [Ajk Pŷθ |sk + (1 + ln(−Ajk ))Pŷθ ]
                          1
 Total Variational        2 |t − 1|                         πk Ajk [Pŷθ |sk − Pŷθ ]I{|Ajk |<1/2}
 KL                       t ln t                            πk [Ajk Pŷθ |sk − eAjk −1 Pŷθ ]
                                      t+1
 Jensen-Shannon           −(t
                           √ + 1) 2ln( 2 ) + t ln t         πk [Ajk Pŷθ |sk + ln(2 − eAjk )Pŷθ ]
 Squared Hellinger        ( t − 1)                          πk [Ajk Pŷθ |sk + (A−1
                                                                                  jk + 2)Pŷθ ]



 As a result, Problem (3)
                        can be written as a linearly separable function of input data points (x
                                                                                               i ’s):
                       n
                    1 X
                                                      Ajk Fj (xi ; θ)1(si = k) − f ∗ (Ajk )πk Fj (xi ; θ) 
                                                 X h                                                     i
      min max             ℓ(ŷθ (xi ), yi ) + λ                                                                (5)
                                                                                                           
       θ     A      n i=1                        j∈Y,
                                                k∈S

Thus, evaluating the gradient of the objective function w.r.t. the variables θ and A over a random
batch of data points leads to an unbiased estimator of the gradient of the objective function.
In addition to providing an unbiased estimator of gradients, the reformulation (5) has another crucial
property: the objective function is concave in A. Therefore, optimization problem (5) falls under the
category of nonconvex-concave min-max optimization problems. That is, the objective is (possibly)
nonconvex in θ and is concave in A. Thus, we can borrow tools from the (stochastic) nonconvex-
concave min-max optimization literature (Lin et al., 2020; Razaviyayn et al., 2020a; Li et al., 2023)
to derive a convergent first-order stochastic algorithm as presented in Algorithm 1. We listed the
closed-form of f (·), f ∗ (·), for several widely-used f -divergence measures including KL-divergence,
Reverse KL-divergence, χ2 -divergence, Squared Hellinger distance, Jensen-Shannon divergence, and
total variation distance in Table 1. For the derivation, see Appendix E.

Algorithm 1 Stochastic Gradient Descent-Ascent (SGDA) for f -FERM
 1: Input: θ 0 ∈ Rdθ , step-sizes ηθ , ηα , fairness parameter λ ≥ 0, iteration number T , Batchsize b
 2: for t = 1, . . . , T do
 3:   Sample minibatch of data Bt = {(xt1 , yt1 ),  · · · , (xtb , ytb )}
      θ t = θ t−1 − ηbθ       ∇θ ℓ(ŷθ (x), y)−ηθ λ∇θ At−1                                       ∗ t−1
                          P
 4:                                                              jk P̂ŷθ ,s (j, k; Bt )−πk f (Ajk )P̂ŷθ (j; Bt )

 5:   Atjk = At−1jk     + η α ∇ A   A t−1
                                      jk  P̂ ŷθ ,s (j, k; Bt ) − π k f ∗
                                                                          (A t−1
                                                                             jk  )P̂ŷθ (j; B t )
 6: Return: θ T

Theorem 2.2. (Informal Statement) Assume that ℓ(·, ·) and Fj (·, θ) are Lipschitz continuous for
any given j and θ and their gradients are L-Lipshitz. Further, assume that P(s = k) > 0 for all
protected groups and P(ŷθ = j) > 0 at every iteration for all labels j. Then, for any given batch size
1 ≤ |B| ≤ n, Algorithm 1 finds an ϵ-stationary solution of (f -FERM) in O( ϵ18 ) for any given ϵ > 0.

Proof. The formal statement and proof are relegated to Appendix F.

Theorem 2.2 applies to all f -divergences listed in Table 1 for all batch-sizes (even as small as the batch
size of 1). More sophisticated algorithms can be used to obtain O(ϵ−6 ) iteration complexity Rafique
et al. (1810); Zhang et al. (2022). However, such algorithms use nested loops and require more
hyperparameter tunings. We provide an example of such an algorithm in Appendix G. If the f-
divergence leads to a strongly concave function in A or satisfies Polyak-Łojasiewicz condition (e.g.,
for χ2 divergence), a faster rate of O(ϵ−5 ) can be obtained for this algorithm (Appendix F). In
addition, if larger batch size of O(ϵ−2 ) is used, we can further improve this rate to O(ϵ−4 ) iteration
complexity (see Appendix F). Finally, when full batch size is used, then double/triple-loop algorithms
can lead to the iteration complexity bounds of O(ϵ−2 ) in the nonconvex-strongly concave setting and
O(ϵ−3 ) in the general nonconvex-concave setting; see (Kong & Monteiro, 2021; Nouiehed et al.,
2019; Ostrovskii et al., 2021b; Thekumparampil et al., 2019).
3 ROBUST f -FERM IN THE P RESENCE OF D ISTRIBUTION S HIFTS
In the previous section, we assumed that the training and test domains have the same distribution.
However, this assumption is not necessarily valid in certain applications (Fang et al., 2020). In


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


particular, a model that behaves fairly on the training data distribution may have an unfair performance
in the test phase. To address this issue, this section develops stochastic algorithms for fair empirical
risk minimization via f -divergences in the presence of the distribution shifts.
Assume that P̂s,y (s, ŷ) is the joint distribution of sensitive attributes and predictions on the training
data. The distributionally robust fair empirical risk minimization via f -divergences is formulated as:
                   n
                1X
          min          ℓ(ŷθ (xi ), yi ) s.t. max Df P(ŷθ (x), s)|| P(ŷθ (x)) ⊗ P(s) ≤ κ.              (6)
           θ    n i=1                           P∈B
B = B(P̂, δ) is the distributional uncertainty set defined as a certain ball around the training distri-
bution P̂ with radius δ. This formulation guarantees that the model fairness is preserved (up to a
violence of f-divergence less than κ) even when the test distribution slightly changes. With a slight
change of notation, P̂ refers to the training distribution, whereas P is the optimization parameter.
One can define the uncertainty set through an ϵ neighborhood around the joint distribution of the
training data characterized by a distance measure such as ℓp norms, Wasserstein distance, or MMD
distance. While these distributionally robust uncertainty sets are thoroughly analyzed for empirical
risk minimization (ERM) (Kuhn et al., 2019; Blanchet et al., 2019; Levy et al., 2020), the DRO
formulation for ERM is limited to the Wasserstein distance for the fair logistic regression (Taskesen
et al., 2020) and MMD distance (Wang et al., 2023) on the distribution curvature as a heuristic for
robustness. Unfortunately, none of these approaches offer a convergent algorithm with stochastic
updates. Further, some of these approaches are limited to special loss functions and heuristics. On
the other hand, we study imposing the distributionally robust fairness via f -divergences for a general
loss function where the uncertainty set is characterized by ℓp norms (Section 3.1) or f -divergences
(Section 3.2). Our results show that the former approach is more suitable when lower levels of
robustness for fairness are required, and the latter works better for handling larger distribution shifts.
3.1 ROBUST f -FERM U NDER ℓp N ORMS AND S MALL D ISTRIBUTION S HIFTS
This section focuses on the widely studied ℓp norms as the uncertainty set for the distributional
distance between the training and test domains. In this case, Problem (6) can be written as:
                             n
                         1X
                   min          ℓ(ŷθ (xi ), yi ) s.t.    max Df (P||Q) ≤ κ,                  (7)
                     θ n                               ||P−P̂||p ≤δ
                            i=1
                                                             ||Q−Q̂||p ≤δ

where P̂ represents the joint distribution of the sensitive attributes and predictions and Q̂ denotes the
Kronecker product of the marginal distributions between sensitive attributes and predictions.
Since handling non-convex constraints is challenging, as it is standard in training machine learning
models, we consider the Lagrangian relaxation of Problem (7) as follows:
                               n
                            1X
                        min       ℓ(ŷθ (xi ), yi ) + λ max Df (P||Q)                             (8)
                         θ n                           ∥P−P̂∥p ≤δ
                              i=1
                                                              ∥Q−Q̂∥p ≤δ
This problem falls under the nonconvex-nonconcave, min-max optimization category and is most
likely to be computationally hard for general uncertainty sets (Daskalakis et al., 2021). However,
such a min-max optimization problem can be solved to stationarity when the diameter of set B is
small (i.e., under small domain shift), see (Ostrovskii et al., 2021a). The core idea is to approximate
the inner maximization problem with the Taylor approximation, leading to a nonconvex-concave
min-max optimization, which is easier to solve (Daskalakis et al., 2021; Razaviyayn et al., 2020b).
This idea has been used and been successful in machine learning (see Foret et al. (2020) for its use in
Sharpness-aware minimization). Utilizing this idea, Problem (8) can be approximated as: !
                                        n
                                     1X
     min max         h(θ, U, V) :=         ℓ(ŷθ (xi ), yi ) + λ⟨U, ∇P Df (P̂||Q̂)⟩ + λ⟨V, ∇Q Df (P̂||Q̂)⟩ ,    (9)
       θ   ∥U∥p ≤δ                   n i=1
           ∥V∥p ≤δ

where we used the change of variables U := P − P̂ and V := Q − Q̂. Equivalently,
                     n
                  1X
             min        ℓ(ŷθ (xi ), yi ) + λδ∥∇P Df (P̂||Q̂)∥q + λδ∥∇Q Df (P̂||Q̂)∥q ,                        (10)
               θ n
                    i=1
where ∥ · ∥q is the dual of the ℓp norm with p1 + 1q = 1.
Proposition 3.1. Assume that the gradient of the loss function is L-Lipshitz, and the second-order
derivative of the loss exists. Then, a given ϵ−approximate stationary solution of Problem (10) is an
O(ϵ)−approximate stationary solution of Problem (8) whenever Lδ ≲ ϵ.


                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


This proposition, which is an immediate application of Ostrovskii et al. (2021a, Theorem 3.1), states
that if the desired training accuracy ϵ is comparable with the distribution shift amount δ (i.e. small
distribution shift regime), then one can solve problem (10) instead of (8). Thus, in this regime, we
need to solve (10) or equivalently (9). To this end, we need to obtain the (sub)-gradients of the
objective function in (9) w.r.t the θ, U, and V variables. First, notice that
 ∇U h(θ, U, V) = ∇P Df (P̂||Q̂) = α∗ (P̂, Q̂) and ∇V h(θ, U, V) = ∇Q Df (P̂||Q̂) = f ∗ (α∗ (P̂, Q̂)),

where α∗ (P̂, Q̂) ∈ arg maxα j αj p̂j (θ) − q̂j (θ)f ∗ (αj ). Here we invoked Danskin’s theorem on
                                P

the variational form of Df ; p̂j (θ) and q̂j (θ) is the j-th element of P̂ and Q̂, respectively. Next, we
need to compute ∇θ h(θ, U, V). Notice that the derivative of the first term in h(·) w.r.t. θ is easy to
compute. We next calculate the derivative of the second term of h(θ, U, V) w.r.t. θ. As the derivative
of the third term can be computed similarly, we omit its derivation here.
                                                        X q̂j (θ)∇θ p̂j (θ) − p̂j (θ)∇θ q̂j (θ)
     ∇θ ⟨U, ∇P Df (P̂||Q̂)⟩ = ∇θ ⟨U, α∗ (P̂, Q̂)⟩ =         uj 2                                     (11)
                                                                q̂ (θ) × (f ∗ )′′ (α)|
                                                                j                  α=α∗
                                                        j                             j (P̂,Q̂)


where in the last equation, we used the implicit function theorem to compute the derivative of α∗ w.r.t.
θ. Notice that an implicit assumption here is that f is differentiable (which holds for KL-divergence,
χ2 divergence, reverse KL, Jensen-Shannon, and Squared Hellinger distance). Having access to the
gradients, we can apply the standard [sub-]gradient descent-ascent algorithm to obtain a solution to
Problem (10) (see Appendix H for the details).

A semi-stochastic memory-efficient first-order training algorithm. To apply (stochastic) gradient
descent-ascent algorithm (Lin et al., 2020) to problem (9), we need to have unbiased estimator of
the function h(θ, U, V) w.r.t. θ, U, and V variables. While it seems challenging to obtain unbiased
estimator w.r.t. all variables, one can notice that if p̂j (θ) and q̂j (θ) can be computed easily with one
forward pass over all data points (i.e., in O(m × n) memory requirement). Consequently, the gradient
of h(θ, U, V) w.r.t. U and V can be computed with one forward pass over all data points (without
the need for doing backpropagation). On the other hand, one can easily obtain unbiased estimator
of ∇θ p̂j (θ) and ∇θ q̂j (θ) in (11) using a small mini-batch of data. Such a task requires O(b × d)
memory with d being the number of parameters (i.e., θ ∈ Rd ) and b being the batch size. Combining
this unbiased estimation with the computed values of p̂j (θ) and q̂j (θ) leads to an unbiased estimator
of the objective of (9) w.r.t. θ variable. To summarize, we need to do one forward propagation to
obtain gradients w.r.t. U and V, and we only do backpropagation for computing gradients w.r.t. θ
over the mini-batch of data. Such an algorithm requires O(mn + bd) memory requirement and thus
can be used for training large models (with d, n ≫ b, m). It is known that memory requirements are
the major limiting factors in training large models such as LLMs (Malladi et al., 2023).
3.2 ROBUST f -FERM U NDER ℓ∞ N ORMS AND P OTENTIALLY L ARGE D ISTRIBUTION S HIFTS
The developed framework in the previous section assumes the distribution shift is small (the uncer-
tainty set diameter is smaller than a certain threshold). When preserving fairness in the presence of
large distribution shifts is a priority, our previous methodology might not work well. As discussed
before, the formulation (8) leads to a nonconvex-nonconcave min-max optimization problem and this
class of problems is hard to solve computationally in general (even to stationarity notions). Thus, we
need to exploit the structure of the problem. In this section, we show that we can exploit the structure
to develop a first-order algorithm under large distribution shifts. Particularly, we focus on the case
where the uncertainty set is ℓ∞ ball and the divergence satisfies certain assumptions (i.e., f ∗ (α∗ ) > 0
and α∗ > 0, which is satisfied for KL divergence).
Since the function Df is convex in P and Q, under ℓ∞ uncertainty set on P and Q, the optimal solution
of the maximization problem in (8) will be at an extreme point. Moreover, under the assumption that
f ∗ (α∗ ) > 0 and α∗ > 0 (which is satisfied for KL divergence), one can easily see that the optimal
pj = min{p̂j + δ, 1} and qj = max{qˆj − δ, 0} (see Appendix I for the exact proof). Notice that we
need to relax the probability simplex constraint to obtain this efficient, optimal closed-form solution.
Thus under this assumption, problem (8) can be reformulated as
                         n
                      1X
                 min         ℓ(ŷθ (xi ), yi ) + λDf (min{P + δ, 1}|| max{Q − δ, 0}),              (12)
                   θ n
                        i=1
which is a regular minimization problem and (sub)gradient descent can be utilized to solve it.

                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4     E XPERIMENTS
We use three popular notions of group fairness: demographic parity, equalized odds, and equality of
opportunity violations (see Appendix A for definitions) to measure the fairness of trained models.
To run Algorithm 1, we set ηθ and ηα to 10−5 and 10−6 respectively in all experiments. Further, by
changing λ, we get different points in the trade-off curve between accuracy and fairness. The range
of λ depends on the f -divergence (see Appendix J for more information on tuning hyper-parameters).
In the inference phase of our experiments, we use the standard maximum likelihood decoding based
on the output of the softmax layer, i.e., the predicted label is the label with the highest logit value.
As we will see in this section, several f -divergence measures lead to reasonable fairness/accuracy
tradeoffs and can outperform existing benchmarks. However, no single f -divergence measure
uniformly outperforms other measures in all the experiments. Thus, we believe in applications, the
choice of the f -divergence can be viewed as a hyperparameter that can be tuned by cross-validation.
4.1 FAIRNESS -ACCURACY T RADEOFFS ON B ENCHMARK DATASETS
In the first set of experiments, we compare different f -
divergence formulations for (f -FERM) to each other
and several state-of-the-art approaches supporting
multiple sensitive attributes. Figure 1 demonstrates
the given tradeoff on the adult dataset (Becker &
Kohavi, 1996) with gender and race as the sensitive
attributes (black-female, black-male, white-female,
white-male). To measure fairness, we use the demo-
graphic parity violation defined as:
  DPV = max |P(ŷ = 1|s = i) − P(ŷ = 1|s = j)|
           i,j∈S
In the case of binary sensitive attributes (e.g., gen- Figure 1: Performance of different f -divergences
der), there is no significant variation between dif- as the regularizers. The experiment is on the
ferent f -divergences. However, when we have 2 adult dataset with gender and race as sensitive
sensitive attributes and the batch size is small (8 in attributes. While the offered tradeoffs are close
Figure 1), the results significantly differ for various f - to each other for small demographic parity viola-
divergences. Interestingly, KL-divergence for smaller tions, KL-divergence shows an extraordinary per-
λ values shows improvement in fairness violation and formance for a low-fairness high-accuracy regime.
accuracy simultaneously. We do not observe such a We do not display the performance for larger batch
phenomenon for other f -divergences and state-of-the- sizes or when only one sensitive attribute is avail-
art approaches in the literature. Further, in Figure 2, able due to the insignificant difference between the
                                                            performance of different f -divergences.
we compare one of the f -divergences (reverse KL)
to several SOTA methods including Mary et al. (2019); Baharlouei et al. (2020); Cho et al. (2020).
Other approaches such as the pre-processing method of Zemel et al. (2013), post-processing approach
of Hardt et al. (2016), and several in-processing methods including Zafar et al. (2017); Donini et al.
(2018); Jiang et al. (2020) demonstrate lower performance compared to the ones depicted in Figure 2
and are removed from the figure. While our approach demonstrates consistently good performance
across different batch sizes (full-batch, 64, 8, 2), the performances of other methods drop significantly
for smaller ones. For further experiments on other datasets (German and COMPAS) and other fairness
measures (equality of opportunity and equalized odds violations), see Appendix K.


Figure 2: Performance of the trained fair models on Adult Dataset with gender and race as two sensitive
attributes with different Batch-sizes. The red dashed line represents the Naïve baseline where the model outputs
zero with probability p. By increasing p, the model becomes fairer at the cost of the loss in accuracy.
4.2   FAIRNESS -ACCURACY T RADEOFFS IN THE P RESENCE OF THE D ISTRIBUTION S HIFT
We perform two experiments to evaluate the Algorithms developed in Section 3. In the first experiment,
we randomly switch the label of genders for n% of the data points (n ranges from 1 to 20) in the


                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Adult dataset. Then, we train models on the new datasets with a proportion of corrupted sensitive
attributes and evaluate the performance on the test data. Figure 3 is obtained by training different
models to achieve 80% accuracy on the test data and comparing their demographic parity violation.
By increasing the percentage of corrupted sensitive attributes, we see that both f -DRO and f -infinity
achieve less DP violation than SOTA approaches in the literature. In this specific experiment,
f -DRO works better than f -infinity, and there is no significant difference between choosing KL-
divergence or χ2 as the function f . Among the papers designed for handling distribution shifts, Rezaei
et al. (2021) and Wang et al. (2020) were the only options with the available implementation.
In a more recently collected dataset (new
adult) (Ding et al., 2021), the users are sepa-
rated based on their living state. We train differ-
ent fair models in a single state and evaluate the
fairness-accuracy tradeoff in other states. Fig-
ure 4 depicts the performance of different meth-
ods. For each method, the center point is the av-
erage of accuracy and fairness among 50 states.
The horizontal and vertical lines show the 25-
percentile to 75-percentile range of performance
among the states. The training fairness violation
is set to 0.02 for all methods. We observe that
f -infinity preserves the fairness level better than
other approaches. In comparison, f -DRO has
a better accuracy. Depending on the applica- Figure 3: Performance of different state-of-the-art ap-
tion, we suggest using f -infinity if preserving proaches and our two methods for handling distribution
a high level of fairness is a priority and f -DRO shift. The dataset is adult, and the sensitive attribute
for the cases when a better tradeoff between fair- is gender. We randomly flip the label of a proportion
ness and accuracy is expected. Note that both of gender entries (from 0 to 20%). As we observe, our
approaches offer better fairness-accuracy trade- approach demonstrates more robustness against the drop
offs compared to the SOTA approaches in the in DP violation compared to other approaches.
literature.


Figure 4: Performance of the trained fair models on new Adult Dataset. The model is trained on one state
(California or Texas) and evaluated in 50 states. The distribution of each state dataset is different than others.
Thus, the IID assumption does not hold among datasets of different states.

5    C ONCLUSION
This paper presented a unified stochastic framework for fair empirical risk minimization via f -
divergences (f -FERM). The key idea is to reformulate the objective function as a min-max op-
timization problem using Legendre-Fenchel duality of f -divergence. This enables us to develop
an unbiased gradient estimator and a convergent stochastic first-order algorithm. Furthermore, we
robustified f -FERM using ℓp norm balls as the uncertainty set against distributional changes. While
our empirical investigation delves into the performance and fairness distinctions among various
f -divergences, a more comprehensive analysis is warranted to determine the optimal f -divergence
concerning the tradeoff between performance and fairness, faster convergence, and asymptotic behav-
iors. Furthermore, the distributionally robust formulation of fair empirical risk minimization and the
advantages of each formulation can be explored beyond f -divergences as the measure of fairness
violation and ℓp norm balls as uncertainty sets.


                                                        9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by the NSF CAREER Award CCF2144985, the AFOSR Young Investigator
Program Award FA9550-22-1-0192, a gift from the USC-Meta Center for Research and Education in
AI, and a gift from Google.

R EFERENCES
Civil Rights Act. Civil rights act of 1964. Title VII, Equal Employment Opportunities, 1964.
Sina Aghaei, Mohammad Javad Azizi, and Phebe Vayanos. Learning optimal and fair decision
  trees for non-discriminative decision-making. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial
  intelligence, pp. 1418–1426, 2019.
Muhammad Aurangzeb Ahmad, Carly Eckert, and Ankur Teredesai. Interpretable machine learning
 in healthcare. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM international conference on bioinformatics,
 computational biology, and health informatics, pp. 559–560, 2018.
Ahmad Ajalloeian and Sebastian U. Stich. Analysis of SGD with biased gradient estimators. CoRR,
  abs/2008.00051, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2008.00051.
Wael Alghamdi, Hsiang Hsu, Haewon Jeong, Hao Wang, Peter Michalak, Shahab Asoodeh, and
 Flavio Calmon. Beyond adult and compas: Fair multi-class prediction via information projection.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:38747–38760, 2022.
Julia Angwin, Jeff Larson, Surya Mattu, and Lauren Kirchner. Machine bias. In Ethics of Data and
  Analytics, pp. 254–264. Auerbach Publications, 2016.
Martin Arjovsky, Léon Bottou, Ishaan Gulrajani, and David Lopez-Paz. Invariant risk minimization.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.02893, 2019.
Sina Baharlouei, Maher Nouiehed, Ahmad Beirami, and Meisam Razaviyayn. Rényi fair inference.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Sina Baharlouei, Fatemeh Sheikholeslami, Meisam Razaviyayn, and Zico Kolter. Improving adver-
  sarial robustness via joint classification and multiple explicit detection classes. In Francisco Ruiz,
  Jennifer Dy, and Jan-Willem van de Meent (eds.), Proceedings of The 26th International Confer-
  ence on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 206 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 11059–11078. PMLR, 25–27 Apr 2023.
Yogesh Balaji, Swami Sankaranarayanan, and Rama Chellappa. Metareg: Towards domain gen-
  eralization using meta-regularization. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31,
  2018.
Barry Becker and Ronny Kohavi. Adult.            UCI Machine Learning Repository, 1996.           DOI:
  https://doi.org/10.24432/C5XW20.
Alexandre Belloni, Victor Chernozhukov, and Lie Wang. Square-root lasso: pivotal recovery of
  sparse signals via conic programming. Biometrika, 98(4):791–806, 2011.
Jose Blanchet, Yang Kang, and Karthyek Murthy. Robust wasserstein profile inference and applica-
  tions to machine learning. Journal of Applied Probability, 56(3):830–857, 2019.
Roberto Boselli, Mirko Cesarini, Fabio Mercorio, and Mario Mezzanzanica. Classifying online job
  advertisements through machine learning. Future Generation Computer Systems, 86:319–328,
  2018.
Joy Buolamwini and Timnit Gebru. Gender shades: Intersectional accuracy disparities in commercial
  gender classification. In Conference on fairness, accountability and transparency, pp. 77–91.
  PMLR, 2018.
Nicholas Carlini and David Wagner. Towards evaluating the robustness of neural networks. In 2017
  IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), pp. 39–57, 2017. doi: 10.1109/SP.2017.49.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alessandro Castelnovo, Riccardo Crupi, Greta Greco, Daniele Regoli, Ilaria Giuseppina Penco,
  and Andrea Claudio Cosentini. A clarification of the nuances in the fairness metrics landscape.
  Scientific Reports, 12(1):4209, 2022.

Jie Chen and Ronny Luss. Stochastic gradient descent with biased but consistent gradient estimators.
   CoRR, abs/1807.11880, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1807.11880.

Jaewoong Cho, Gyeongjo Hwang, and Changho Suh. A fair classifier using kernel density estimation.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:15088–15099, 2020.

Imre Csiszár. Information-type measures of difference of probability distributions and indirect
  observation. studia scientiarum Mathematicarum Hungarica, 2(4):229–318, 1967.

Jessica Dai and Sarah M Brown. Label bias, label shift: Fair machine learning with unreliable
  labels. In NeurIPS 2020 Workshop on Consequential Decision Making in Dynamic Environments,
  volume 12, 2020.

Constantinos Daskalakis, Stratis Skoulakis, and Manolis Zampetakis. The complexity of constrained
  min-max optimization. In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of
  Computing, pp. 1466–1478, 2021.

Yuyang Deng, Mohammad Mahdi Kamani, Pouria Mahdavinia, and Mehrdad Mahdavi. Distributed
  personalized empirical risk minimization. In International Workshop on Federated Learning for
  Distributed Data Mining, 2023.

Frances Ding, Moritz Hardt, John Miller, and Ludwig Schmidt. Retiring adult: New datasets for fair
  machine learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:6478–6490, 2021.

Michele Donini, Luca Oneto, Shai Ben-David, John S Shawe-Taylor, and Massimiliano Pontil.
 Empirical risk minimization under fairness constraints. Advances in neural information processing
 systems, 31, 2018.

Wei Du and Xintao Wu. Fair and robust classification under sample selection bias. In Proceedings of
 the 30th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management, pp. 2999–3003,
 2021.

Cynthia Dwork, Moritz Hardt, Toniann Pitassi, Omer Reingold, and Richard Zemel. Fairness through
  awareness. In Proceedings of the 3rd innovations in theoretical computer science conference, pp.
  214–226, 2012.

Gideon Elford. Equality of Opportunity. 2023.

Tongtong Fang, Nan Lu, Gang Niu, and Masashi Sugiyama. Rethinking importance weighting for
  deep learning under distribution shift. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
  11996–12007, 2020.

Pierre Foret, Ariel Kleiner, Hossein Mobahi, and Behnam Neyshabur. Sharpness-aware minimization
  for efficiently improving generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.01412, 2020.

Stephen Giguere, Blossom Metevier, Bruno Castro da Silva, Yuriy Brun, Philip S Thomas, and Scott
  Niekum. Fairness guarantees under demographic shift. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2021.

Vincent Grari, Sylvain Lamprier, and Marcin Detyniecki. Fairness-aware neural rényi minimization
  for continuous features. In Twenty-Ninth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  and Seventeenth Pacific Rim International Conference on Artificial Intelligence {IJCAI-PRICAI-
  20}, pp. 2262–2268. International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Organization, 2020.

Moritz Hardt, Eric Price, and Nati Srebro. Equality of opportunity in supervised learning. Advances
 in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hisham Husain. Distributional robustness with ipms and links to regularization and gans. In
  H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 11816–11827. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2020.    URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/
  file/8929c70f8d710e412d38da624b21c3c8-Paper.pdf.
Aleksandr Davidovich Ioffe and Vladimir Mihajlovič Tihomirov. Theory of extremal problems.
  Elsevier, 2009.
Ray Jiang, Aldo Pacchiano, Tom Stepleton, Heinrich Jiang, and Silvia Chiappa. Wasserstein fair
  classification. In Uncertainty in artificial intelligence, pp. 862–872. PMLR, 2020.
Faisal Kamiran and Toon Calders. Data preprocessing techniques for classification without discrimi-
  nation. Knowledge and information systems, 33(1):1–33, 2012.
Weiwei Kong and Renato DC Monteiro. An accelerated inexact proximal point method for solving
 nonconvex-concave min-max problems. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 31(4):2558–2585, 2021.
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep convolu-
  tional neural networks. Communications of the ACM, 60(6):84–90, 2017.
Daniel Kuhn, Peyman Mohajerin Esfahani, Viet Anh Nguyen, and Soroosh Shafieezadeh-Abadeh.
 Wasserstein distributionally robust optimization: Theory and applications in machine learning. In
  Operations research & management science in the age of analytics, pp. 130–166. Informs, 2019.
Tosca Lechner, Shai Ben-David, Sushant Agarwal, and Nivasini Ananthakrishnan. Impossibility
  results for fair representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03483, 2021.
Daniel Levy, Yair Carmon, John C Duchi, and Aaron Sidford. Large-scale methods for distributionally
  robust optimization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:8847–8860, 2020.
Jiajin Li, Linglingzhi Zhu, and Anthony Man-Cho So. Nonsmooth nonconvex-nonconcave minimax
   optimization: Primal-dual balancing and iteration complexity analysis, 2023.
Tian Li, Ahmad Beirami, Maziar Sanjabi, and Virginia Smith. Tilted empirical risk minimization.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.01162, 2020.
Tianyi Lin, Chi Jin, and Michael Jordan. On gradient descent ascent for nonconvex-concave minimax
  problems. In Hal Daumé III and Aarti Singh (eds.), Proceedings of the 37th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  6083–6093. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/
  lin20a.html.
Andrew Lowy, Sina Baharlouei, Rakesh Pavan, Meisam Razaviyayn, and Ahmad Beirami. A
  stochastic optimization framework for fair risk minimization. tmlr, 2022.
Yiwei Lu, Guojun Zhang, Sun Sun, Hongyu Guo, and Yaoliang Yu. $f$-MICL: Understanding and
  generalizing infoNCE-based contrastive learning. Transactions on Machine Learning Research,
  2023. ISSN 2835-8856. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=ZD03VUZmRx.
Luo Luo, Haishan Ye, Zhichao Huang, and Tong Zhang. Stochastic recursive gradient descent ascent
  for stochastic nonconvex-strongly-concave minimax problems. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 33:20566–20577, 2020.
Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu.
  Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.06083,
  2017.
Subha Maity, Debarghya Mukherjee, Mikhail Yurochkin, and Yuekai Sun. Does enforcing fairness
  mitigate biases caused by subpopulation shift? Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34:25773–25784, 2021.
Sadhika Malladi, Tianyu Gao, Eshaan Nichani, Alex Damian, Jason D Lee, Danqi Chen, and Sanjeev
  Arora. Fine-tuning language models with just forward passes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17333,
  2023.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jeremie Mary, Clément Calauzènes, and Noureddine El Karoui. Fairness-aware learning for con-
  tinuous attributes and treatments. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of Pro-
  ceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 4382–4391. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/mary19a.html.

Alan Mishler and Niccolò Dalmasso. Fair when trained, unfair when deployed: Observable fairness
  measures are unstable in performative prediction settings. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.05049, 2022.

Maher Nouiehed, Maziar Sanjabi, Tianjian Huang, Jason D Lee, and Meisam Razaviyayn. Solving
 a class of non-convex min-max games using iterative first order methods. Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.

Dmitrii M Ostrovskii, Babak Barazandeh, and Meisam Razaviyayn. Nonconvex-nonconcave min-max
 optimization with a small maximization domain. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.03950, 2021a.

Dmitrii M Ostrovskii, Andrew Lowy, and Meisam Razaviyayn. Efficient search of first-order nash
 equilibria in nonconvex-concave smooth min-max problems. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 31
 (4):2508–2538, 2021b.

Yury Polyanskiy and Yihong Wu. Information theory: From coding to learning. Book draft, 2022.

Flavien Prost, Hai Qian, Qiuwen Chen, Ed H Chi, Jilin Chen, and Alex Beutel. Toward a better
  trade-off between performance and fairness with kernel-based distribution matching. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1910.11779, 2019.

H Rafique, M Liu, Q Lin, and T Yang. Non-convex min–max optimization: provable algorithms and
  applications in machine learning (2018). arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.02060, 1810.

Hassan Rafique, Mingrui Liu, Qihang Lin, and Tianbao Yang. Weakly-convex–concave min–max
  optimization: provable algorithms and applications in machine learning. Optimization Methods
  and Software, 37(3):1087–1121, 2022.

Meisam Razaviyayn, Tianjian Huang, Songtao Lu, Maher Nouiehed, Maziar Sanjabi, and Mingyi
 Hong. Nonconvex min-max optimization: Applications, challenges, and recent theoretical advances.
 IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 37(5):55–66, 2020a. doi: 10.1109/MSP.2020.3003851.

Meisam Razaviyayn, Tianjian Huang, Songtao Lu, Maher Nouiehed, Maziar Sanjabi, and Mingyi
 Hong. Nonconvex min-max optimization: Applications, challenges, and recent theoretical advances.
 IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 37(5):55–66, 2020b.

Ashkan Rezaei, Anqi Liu, Omid Memarrast, and Brian D Ziebart. Robust fairness under covariate
  shift. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 9419–9427,
  2021.

Jessica Schrouff, Natalie Harris, Oluwasanmi Koyejo, Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin, Eva Schnider, Krista
  Opsahl-Ong, Alex Brown, Subhrajit Roy, Diana Mincu, Christina Chen, et al. Maintaining fairness
  across distribution shift: do we have viable solutions for real-world applications? arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2202.01034, 2022.

Changjian Shui, Gezheng Xu, Qi Chen, Jiaqi Li, Charles X Ling, Tal Arbel, Boyu Wang, and Christian
  Gagné. On learning fairness and accuracy on multiple subgroups. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 35:34121–34135, 2022.

Harvineet Singh, Rina Singh, Vishwali Mhasawade, and Rumi Chunara. Fairness violations and
  mitigation under covariate shift. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness,
 Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 3–13, 2021.

Aman Sinha, Hongseok Namkoong, and John Duchi. Certifying some distributional robustness with
 principled adversarial training. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Matthew Staib and Stefanie Jegelka. Distributionally robust optimization and generalization in
 kernel methods. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and
 R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Asso-
 ciates, Inc., 2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
 2019/file/1770ae9e1b6bc9f5fd2841f141557ffb-Paper.pdf.
Bahar Taskesen, Viet Anh Nguyen, Daniel Kuhn, and Jose Blanchet. A distributionally robust
  approach to fair classification, 2020.
Kiran K Thekumparampil, Prateek Jain, Praneeth Netrapalli, and Sewoong Oh. Efficient algorithms
  for smooth minimax optimization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Berk Ustun, Yang Liu, and David Parkes. Fairness without harm: Decoupled classifiers with
  preference guarantees. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6373–6382. PMLR,
  2019.
Mingyang Wan, Daochen Zha, Ninghao Liu, and Na Zou. Modeling techniques for machine learning
 fairness: A survey. CoRR, abs/2111.03015, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.
 03015.
Haotao Wang, Junyuan Hong, Jiayu Zhou, and Zhangyang Wang. How robust is your fairness?
  evaluating and sustaining fairness under unseen distribution shifts. Transactions on Machine
  Learning Research, 2023. ISSN 2835-8856. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=11pGlecTz2.
Serena Wang, Wenshuo Guo, Harikrishna Narasimhan, Andrew Cotter, Maya Gupta, and Michael
  Jordan. Robust optimization for fairness with noisy protected groups. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 33:5190–5203, 2020.
Yang Xin, Lingshuang Kong, Zhi Liu, Yuling Chen, Yanmiao Li, Hongliang Zhu, Mingcheng Gao,
  Haixia Hou, and Chunhua Wang. Machine learning and deep learning methods for cybersecurity.
  Ieee access, 6:35365–35381, 2018.
Ke Yan, Lu Kou, and David Zhang. Learning domain-invariant subspace using domain features and
  independence maximization. IEEE transactions on cybernetics, 48(1):288–299, 2017.
Muhammad Bilal Zafar, Isabel Valera, Manuel Gomez Rogriguez, and Krishna P Gummadi. Fairness
 constraints: Mechanisms for fair classification. In Artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 962–970.
 PMLR, 2017.
Rich Zemel, Yu Wu, Kevin Swersky, Toni Pitassi, and Cynthia Dwork. Learning fair representations.
  In International conference on machine learning, pp. 325–333. PMLR, 2013.
Xuan Zhang, Necdet Serhat Aybat, and Mert Gurbuzbalaban. Sapd+: An accelerated stochastic
  method for nonconvex-concave minimax problems. Advances in Neural Information Processing
 Systems, 35:21668–21681, 2022.
Meiyu Zhong and Ravi Tandon. Learning fair classifiers via min-max f-divergence regularization,
 2023.


                                                  14
