Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S OCIO D OJO : B UILDING L IFELONG A NALYTICAL
AGENTS WITH R EAL - WORLD T EXT AND T IME S ERIES
 Junyan Cheng                                          Peter Chin
 Thayer School of Engineering                          Thayer School of Engineering
 Dartmouth College                                     Dartmouth College
 Hanover, NH 03755, USA                                Hanover, NH 03755, USA
 jc.th@dartmouth.edu                                   pc@dartmouth.edu



                                             A BSTRACT

         We introduce SocioDojo, an open-ended lifelong learning environment for de-
         veloping ready-to-deploy autonomous agents capable of performing human-like
         analysis and decision-making on societal topics such as economics, finance, pol-
         itics, and culture. It consists of (1) information sources from news, social media,
         reports, etc., (2) a knowledge base built from books, journals, and encyclope-
         dias, plus a toolbox of Internet and knowledge graph search interfaces, (3) 30K
         high-quality time series in finance, economy, society, and polls, which support
         a novel task called “hyperportfolio”, that can reliably and scalably evaluate so-
         cietal analysis and decision-making power of agents, inspired by portfolio opti-
         mization with time series as assets to “invest”. We also propose a novel Analyst-
         Assistant-Actuator architecture for the hyperportfolio task, and a Hypothesis &
         Proof prompting for producing in-depth analyses on input news, articles, etc.
         to assist decision-making. We perform experiments and ablation studies to ex-
         plore the factors that impact performance. The results show that our proposed
         method achieves improvements of 32.4% and 30.4% compared to the state-of-
         the-art method in the two experimental settings.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Autonomous agents based on large language models (LLMs) have made considerable progress in
task-oriented settings, such as software development (Qian et al., 2023), web navigation (Zhou et al.,
2023), and robot planning (Chen & Chang, 2023). These tasks usually require only task-specific
skills rather than open-ended knowledge about human society. For instance, to make economic and
financial decisions, one must keep track of the latest events and trends as well as have a broad un-
derstanding of how society works. Such scenarios are ubiquitous in the human world from personal
finance and business planning to social science studies and public affairs. Therefore, it is essential to
develop agents that can comprehend, analyze, and make decisions in an open-ended human society
to achieve human-centered AI.
Human society is built on information. We create SocioDojo, a lifelong learning environment that
emulates the historical development of society with real-world texts and time series. SocioDojo has
three components: information sources, time series, and a knowledge base & toolbox. It uses a
continuous stream of messages from multiple sources, such as news, articles, etc., to simulate the
dynamics of society. Agents are constantly updated with the latest messages to keep track of changes
in society. Time series from finance, economics, search trends, and poll tracking are used to depict
the inner states of society. The knowledge base, made up of books, journals, and encyclopedias,
along with a toolbox that provides Internet access, gives the necessary background knowledge. The
use of real data also allows SocioDojo to automatically extend and the agents developed on it to be
transferred into real applications without any gaps.
A scalable way to assess the societal analysis and decision-making capabilities of agents is needed,
as the popular question-answering approach is expensive in generating up-to-date and high-quality
questions that keep up with societal changes. We introduce the hyperportfolio task, which evaluates
the agent through their “investment” decisions over time, which requires a thorough understanding


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Illustration of the hyperportfolio task in SocioDojo. The agent begin with an initial cash
of one million on October 1, 2021. Messages from information sources will be continually popping
out to the agent, with the current time set as the published time of the newly popped message. The
agent can “invest” the “assets” that correspond to the time series which “price” is the current value
in the time series, based on the message, knowledge base, and tools. The goal is to maximize the
total asset by the end time, August 1, 2023.


of society and sophisticated analysis even for human experts. We extend investable assets from
financial assets to all kinds of time series in SocioDojo. An illustration of the hyperportfolio task is
shown in Figure 1.
SocioDojo presents three unique open challenges. (1) Spatiotemporal and entity information.
The time, place, and entity involved in an event are essential. Agents may need to link clues from
multiple times, locations, and entities to reach a conclusion. (2) Expert knowledge in the open
domain. To make an analysis or a decision about society, agents may require expert knowledge in
multiple undetermined domains. (3) Complex and hybrid reasoning. Agents need both logical and
numerical reasoning and the use of tools, including even machine learning models, to perform in-
depth analysis. Addressing these challenges also facilitates the exploration of general intelligence.
We also present a novel Analyst-Assistant-Actuator architecture and Hypothesis-Proof prompting
for the hyperportfolio task, which improves the state-of-the-art method by 32.4% and 30.4% in two
settings in our experiment. We also conduct ablation studies on information sources and foundation
models. Our key contributions are as follows.

       • We create SocioDojo with Hyperportfolio task, the first large-scale and easily scalable en-
         vironment built with real-world texts, time series, and search interfaces, enabling develop-
         ment and reliable assessment of the analytical and decision-making agents for real society;
       • We propose Analyst-Assistant-Actuator architecture and Hypothesis-Proof prompting for
         producing in-depth analyses supporting high-quality decision-making;
       • We perform experiments and ablation studies to explore factors that impact performance.

Our code and data are available at https://github.com/chengjunyan1/SocioDojo.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Agent Learning Environment. Most learning environments focus on the execution of specific
tasks. For example, Zhou et al. (2023); Yao et al. (2023a) created simulated environments to develop


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


web agents that perform web browsing tasks. Toyama et al. (2021) proposed the use of an Android
simulator to learn phone operations. Puig et al. (2018); Shridhar et al. (2020; 2021) aimed to train
embodied agents to reason in a home environment. Non-task-specific open-ended agents have been
researched through video games. Fan et al. (2022); Johnson et al. (2016); Shah et al. (2021) pro-
posed the use of the open-world MineCraft game to study a skill set of exploration, planning, etc.
for agents, while Vinyals et al. (2017) attempted to use the real-time strategic game StarCraft II to
promote strategic thinking and multi-agent planning. Simulated human societies have been stud-
ied in empire-building games, with Branavan et al. (2011) developed agents in the Civilization II
environment. However, the analytical skills learned in games largely deviate from real society.

Reasoning in Large Language Model Agent. Reasoning is a fundamental skill for agents per-
forming analysis. Wei et al. (2022) encourages the model to reason step by step. Yao et al. (2023b)
further introduces tree search into the reasoning process. Wang et al. (2023b) suggests using multi-
ple reasoning paths instead of a single greedy approach to ensure better self-consistency. However,
these approaches assume that the analysis process can be broken down into atomic steps, which may
not be applicable to open-ended problems. Yao et al. (2023c) proposes a framework that allows
the agent to adjust its actions based on the effects of those actions. Shinn et al. (2023) introduces
reinforcement learning to refine the adjustment. However, this method requires immediate rewards,
which are not available in our setting. Press et al. (2023) encourages the agent to ask questions that
are beneficial to problem-solving. Wang et al. (2023a) allows the agent to devise a plan before trying
to solve a problem. However, the questions and steps in such plans are usually simple fact checks or
atomic operations such as calculations, which are not essential for open-ended analysis.

Time-series Forecasting in Social Science. Predictability in finance has been studied under the
efficient market hypothesis (Fama, 1970) which implies that it takes time for information to be
reflected in the price, leaving room for predicting the price at some future time. Financial prediction
has been studied in various fields, such as machine learning (Krollner et al., 2010; Kelly & Xiu,
2023; Kim, 2003), deep learning (Sezer et al., 2020), LLMs (Lopez-Lira & Tang, 2023), and natural
language processing, which is used to capture sentiment levels and other features (Xing et al., 2018;
Lukauskas et al., 2022). Unlike pure time series forecasting, SocioDojo prohibits "day trading",
forcing the agent to predict long-term trends that rely on information beyond historical time series
data towards a stronger form of the efficient market. Time series forecasting has also been studied
in economics (Granger & Newbold, 2014), polls (Lewis-Beck, 2005), and search trends (Xu &
Berkely, 2014; Choi & Varian, 2012). To make reliable predictions on these topics, it is necessary
to access a variety of sources of information, which can be found in SocioDojo.

3     S OCIO D OJO
In this section, we first formulate the Hyperportfolio task in the Partial-observable Markov Decision
Process (POMDP) framework in Section 3.1. Then we introduce the construction of SocioDojo,
which serves as the environment for the POMDP in Section 3.2.

3.1     H YPERPORTFOLIO TASK

Most existing learning environments are designed for embodied agents that learn to take the right
sequence of actions to interact with the environment, which can be smoothly assessed by checking
the immediate outcomes of the agent’s actions. On the contrary, our aim to comprehend and analyze
society is not easily quantifiable. People use exams to measure such capabilities, but creating good
exam questions necessitates the involvement of experts and regular updates to keep up with the
ever-evolving society. We therefore propose a hyperportfolio task, based on POMDP, which (1)
evaluates agents in a scalable manner using the ever-updating real-world time series, and (2) provides
a reliable indicator of the level of analytical power and understanding of the real society.

3.1.1    S OCIETY U NDERSTANDING AS D ECISION - MAKING
The society can be modeled as a hidden Markov process P (ωt |st ), where st is the current hid-
den world state, ωt is the observation. Understanding society is to estimate the hidden world state
denoted as P (st |ωt ). Humans perceive society through multiple sources of information, such as


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


newspapers, social media, websites, etc. The world state, on the other hand, is portrayed by the
time series of different facets of society. For instance, economic and financial time series illustrate
production, trade, consumption, activities, etc., search trends uncover the public’s interests, and po-
litical and opinion poll trackers demonstrate people’s views on politics and public issues. These
time series were designed to probe the world state as accurately as possible through statistical tech-
niques and social science studies. Therefore, we can regard those high-quality time series as a near
approximation of the hidden world state. We use probe set Yt ∈ RN consisting of the latest values
of a set of time series at time t, where N is the number of selected time series, as the approximate
current world state. Consequently, estimating the probe set can be used as a substitute task for the
estimation of the current hidden-world state, where P (st |ωt ) ≈ P (Yt |ωt ).
However, it is not possible to accurately estimate the current probe set given the current observations.
Probe values are delayed, denoted as P (yt |st′ ) where yt ∈ Yt and t′ < t. Economic statistics and
public polls take time, financial data need time to reflect the latest information, and search trends
need to wait until a topic is broadcast before it becomes a spike in the time series. The observations
are also delayed, denoted P (ωt |st′′ ) where ωt ∈ Ωt and t′′ < t. Since news cannot be perfectly
real-time due to production and delivery time. Furthermore, a newly published message may not
necessarily talk about the latest world. As a result, the probes and observations are mismatched, and
we can only approximately estimate the probe value at an undetermined future time point.
Inspired by portfolio optimization, we convert the precise estimation problem to a surrogate
decision-making task, the hyperportfolio, which largely relies on the estimation power of the world
state, i.e. the capacity to understand and analyze society. Modern portfolio theory has been intro-
duced in financePto maximize the expected return of a combination of financial assets expressed as
                    n
max E(Rp ) = i=1 wi E(Ri ), where wi is the proportion of the i−th asset in the total investment
                                                                                             yisell −yibuy
value, Ri is the return of the asset i, its definition can be complex, a simple model is         yibuy
                                                                                                           ,
where yibuy is the buying price of an asset, b denotes the buy time, and yisell is the selling price, the
price is the value in the time series with buying or selling time.
In hyperportfolio, all high-quality time series that accurately probe the world state, not only financial
ones, are investable assets. The current price of an asset is determined by the most recent value in the
corresponding time series. An agent needs to make investment decisions over time and maximize its
assets to show its analysis power and understanding level of society. As we assume wise investment
decisions that maximize the expected return should rely on a good estimation of the dynamics of the
world state. To ensure this condition, we design mechanisms that will be discussed later in Section
3.2.2 based on our robustness analysis in Appendix C, to reduce the chance of unwanted speculation
activity and the factor of “luck”. This task is easily scalable, as time series, information sources,
and knowledge bases are constantly updated in the real world, which also ensures that the agent
developed in SocioDojo can be immediately applied in real life.

3.1.2   POMDP OF H YPERPORTFOLIO
A hyperportfolio H = {(ci , wi )}, where ci ∈ C is the ID of an asset, in SocioDojo, each time
series has a unique ID, C is the set of all IDs, and wi is the ratio of this asset in the portfolio. For
convenience, we consider cash (c0 , w0 ) an asset in a hyperportfolio whose values do not change
over time for simplicity. The hyperportfolio for each agent will be initialized as cash only, which
means H0 = (c0 , 1). We formulate the hyperportfolio task in POMDP
                                       (S, A, T, R, Ω, O, γ, Z)                                        (1)

where S is the hidden state space, Ω is the observation space, A is the action space contains the
hyperportfolio adjustments (ci , λ), i > 0, where −1 ≤ λ ≤ 1 is the ratio to the total asset, the sum
of cash and the portfolio value. A positive λ indicates “buy”, which requires ci ∈ C, and λi ≤ w0
to ensure there is sufficient cash. A negative λ represents “sell”, which requires ci ∈ CH , the
holding assets, and λi ≤ wi , where the sell value should not exceed the owned value. λ = 0 means
no action. We do not introduce some financial actions like leverage and short for simplicity. The
reward R = E(Rh′ )−E(Rh ) is the change in the expected returns of the hyperportfolio after taking
action. T is the conditional state transition function, we assume T (st+1 |st , at ) = T (st+1 |st )
where actions do not impact the transition of the world state which is driven by the human society
itself. O is the conditional observation function; similarly, we assume that O(ot |st ), which is


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


driven by the media in the real world, is independent of the action. The discount factor γ is 0
since we do not care about historical improvements to the hyperportfolio. Additionally, context Z
is introduced, as the observation may not contain the necessary context for analysis.

3.2     S OCIO D OJO E NVIRONMENT

SocioDojo uses three components - Information Sources, Time series, and Knowledge base & Tools
- based on ∼30 GB of high-quality real-world data that we have collected, to create a simulated
environment for POMDP in equation 1. With these building blocks, two key modules, the World
Runner and the Broker, are used to implement the work process of the hyperportfolio POMDP.
Details about how we reduce biases and filter sources can be found in the Appendix B.

3.2.1    C OMPONENTS
Information Sources. This component composed the observation space Ω with high-quality real-
world media collected from the Internet and manually filtered to reduce noise and bias between
October 1, 2021 (the date of the most recent knowledge of GPT-3.5 and GPT-4) and August 1, 2023.
Sources cover various types of information, such as newspapers, social media, public reports and
insights, research papers, website articles, etc. The distribution of types and topics for each type
can be found in Table 1 and Appendix A.1 respectively, while Appendix A.2 shows the distribu-
tion of topics of messages over time. The information sources were stored in a unified structure
(index,metadata,messages) called channels which include the datetime, metadata, and
contents of the messages in each channel, respectively. Agents can customize information sources
as a queue of messages (datetime,metadata,content), ascending ordered by time, with
channels. We follow the terms of use to curate our data, and for the few copyrighted contents that
did not allow distribution, we provide metadata including the content URLs to minimize the effort
for researchers to rebuild the environment in their local settings.

      Type       Num       Avg. Tok.    Avg. Per day
Newspapers      175.2K        674            262
Social media    259.8K         50            388
  Reports       19.5K         4926            29
  Papers         6.2K        26939             9
   Other        32.7K        1596             49

Table 1: Statistics of information sources by type.

      Type        Keys      Tokens     Avg. Tok.
Encyclopedia      57.4K     14.8M         258
   Books         167.5K     41.0M         245
   Papers         1.7M      392.4M        228         Figure 2: Statistics of time series by topic. Num-
                                                      ber of time series shown in the bracket.
 Table 2: Statistics of knowledge base by type.

Real-world Time Series. This component provides the probe set Y discussed in Section 3.1.1 to
approximate the world state S. We collect time series on a variety of topics for a comprehensive
probe of the world state, including financial data from Yahoo Finance, economic time series from
the St. Louis Federal Reserve Economic Data Database (FRED) with a popularity rating of more
than 50%, Google trends of free trending keywords from Exploding Topics, a society trend tracking
service, political polls from FiveThirtyEight, a famous political analysis website, and public opinion
poll trackers from YouGov, an online survey platform. We remove any time series that contain
nonpositive values. We also rescale Google trends with a random number from 0.1 to 10, since
Google trends use a relative scale from 0 to 100 which could potentially leak future information to
the agent. The distribution of topics is shown in Figure 2 and is detailed in the Appendix A.3.

Knowledge Base & Tools. This component complements the agent with the necessary context Z
that is not available from the input messages. Open resources on the Internet such as Fincyclopedia,
Concise Encyclopedia of Economics, Ballotpedia, textbooks, and journal articles on economics,


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


finance, business, society, etc. are used to build the knowledge base. The texts are segmented,
randomly shuffled, and ready for the retrieval-based knowledge base to avoid the distribution of
original copies. The toolbox includes search engines and knowledge graph interfaces, which filter
search results by current time during the hyperportfolio task to avoid leaking future information.
The statistics of the knowledge base can be found in Table 2 and further detailed in Appendix A.4.

3.2.2    W ORK P ROCESS
World Runner. World Runner consistently pops the messages from the message queue discussed
above. When a message pops out, the world runner sets the world time to the published time of the
message and sends it to the agent. The agent runs its internal loop, which involves access to the
knowledge base, historical time series, and tools, and interacts with the Broker module to send its
trading instructions. The world runner pops all messages up to the end time, i.e. Aug. 1, 2023, from
the queue and then calculates the hyperportfolio returns at the end time as the result.

Broker. The broker manages the “account” for the agent, executes the trading instructions, and
returns the results, including potential errors, to the agent. We introduce 4 mechanisms to alleviate
undesired returns: Forbid day trading, Commission fee, Overnight fee, and Return bound. The
detailed definition of these mechanisms, as well as our study of the volatilities of time series and
random walk tests to find the optimal overnight rate and bound, can be found in the Appendix C.


4     AGENT ARCHITECTURE AND H YPOTHESIS & P ROOF PROMPTING

We present our Analyst-Assistant-Actuator (AAA) agent architecture to tackle the hyperportfolio
task in Section 4.1 and an overview can be found in Appendix E. Subsequently, we discuss the
Hypothesis & Proof prompting technique for generating high-quality analysis in Section 4.2.

4.1     A NALYST-A SSISTANT-ACTUATOR ARCHITECTURE

We break down the analysis and decision-making process into three distinct roles with varying duties
and access to the three components of SocioDojo: analyst, assistant, and actuator. To (1) save
tokens for each role, (2) have each role concentrate on a particular task with a precise context, which
could enhance the precision of the subtasks, and (3) provide better flexibility, we can use different
foundation models for different roles to save cost, we do an ablation study for this in Section 5.3.

Analyst. The analyst is the entry for messages. First, it reads the metadata, which may include
the title, description, and category, to determine whether it is necessary to read the full content or
not to save costs. If it is decided to read the full content, the analysis loop, a multi-round dialogue
between the analyst and the assistant, will begin. The analyst can use the ask function to request the
assistant to seek information to complete the analysis and the done function to finish the analysis.
The system will then prompt the analyst to provide a final analysis report. Finally, the analyst
can decide whether to send the report to the actuator or not, depending on whether there is any
immediate useful information for the actuator to adjust the hyperportfolio. The user can specify a
maximum number of steps beyond which the agent must provide its final report to balance cost and
performance. In our experiment, we set this number to 4.

Assistant. The assistant has access to the knowledge base, tools, and historical time series. It
answers queries ranging from simple data requests to more complex questions such as “Will some
event impact the economy?”. The query is handled iteratively through a multi-round dialog response
loop with a max step of 3 in our experiment. It can call one of the query interfaces to find resources
at each step. The knowledge base and the time series base are implemented as two vector databases
by ChromaDB with Instructor-XL (Su et al., 2023) as the embedding model. The natural language
query is embedded by the model, then its inner product distance is computed to the embeddings of
snippets stored in the database, and the top candidates are returned. For the knowledge base, the
snippets are segmented texts discussed in Section 3.2.1; for the time series, the snippet is the code of
a time series and its description, allowing the agent to find the code of a desired time series. When
the assistant gets sufficient information, it can call the done function to return the final answer.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Actuator. The actuator interacts with the broker. It initiates a multi-round dialog action loop with
a max step of 5 in our experiment when an analysis report is received. It can query the assistant or
send trading instructions, which are written in a multiline script. Each line of the script follows the
format BUY/SELL [CODE] [VALUE], and the done function is called to complete the loop.

4.2   H YPOTHESIS & P ROOF PROMPTING

Existing prompting techniques optimize reasoning in scenarios where the query can be broken down
into clear procedures. For example, Self-Ask (Press et al., 2023) encourages the agent to ask ques-
tions to collect information during reasoning, while Plan & Solve (Wang et al., 2023a) guides the
agent to devise a plan to address the problem. Such an iterative approach encourages a more thor-
ough reasoning process. Nevertheless, the analysis process cannot be partitioned into distinct steps,
and it is not clear what questions can enhance the depth of analysis which can extrapolate more
useful indicators that can direct investment decisions in the context of hyperportfolio; moreover, it
is hard to devise samples that prompt the agent in a few-shot way like most existing methods.
Inspired by the scientific research process, we propose the zero-shot Hypothesis & Proof (H&P)
prompting. This meta-thinking framework encourages the agent to come up with hypotheses beyond
the domain of the input and to search for evidence to prove or disprove them. The prompting is
provided as additional context for the analyst, who will make hypotheses, such as "cold weather
will reduce people’s willingness to shop", and ask the assistant to find evidence to support or refute
it. The analyst will then decide whether to accept or reject the hypothesis based on the evidence
returned. If there is no sufficient support, the analyst can choose to keep it as an intuition. In the
final report, the analyst will clearly list the hypotheses, proofs, intuitions, and references to the
evidence. Detailed promptings can be found in the Appendix F.
We provide an example of a full H&P analysis process and compare it with the P&S prompting in
Appendix G. The analyst can iteratively propose more in-depth hypotheses that gradually uncover
deeper insights from the input step by step. This allows the analyst to be more sensitive and notice
subtle trends that may be overlooked by other analysts who only ask fact-search questions. We
evaluate them and discuss the results in Section 5.2.


5     E XPERIMENT

In Section 5.1, we present our experimental setup. We then evaluate our proposed H&P prompting
and compare it with other state-of-the-art prompting techniques in Section 5.2. Finally, we discuss
the results of the ablation studies in Section 5.3.

5.1   E XPERIMENT S ETTING

We designed two experiment settings. Strandard allows the agent to freely configure its hyper-
portfolio and Tracking, which limits the assets of the hyperportfolio to a list of 100 selected time
series, including the Dow Jones 30 and other popular financial assets, 20 most popular time series
in FRED, national polls, and a few Google Trend keywords, to evaluate the ability of agents to
comprehensively analyze the major trends of society. The list is provided with the dataset.
We compare H&P with the following state-of-the-art methods. All methods use AAA architecture,
one news channel as the information source, GPT-3.5-Turbo series as foundation models with a
low temprature=0.2 for a more deterministic experiment result.
Plan & Solve (P&S) (Wang et al., 2023a) guides the agent to design a plan first and then execute
it to solve a problem. P&S is zero-shot, so we consider it as a major baseline and utilize it in the
analyst by replacing “answering the question” with “analyzing the article” in the prompt.
Self-Ask (Press et al., 2023) is a few-shot prompt that leads the agent to ask questions to search
during question-answering. We use it with assistant as few-shot samples for the analyst are unclear.
ReAct (Yao et al., 2023c) allows the agent to refine its actions by observing the results of previous
activities, such as searching or using tools. ReAct is also few-shot, thus we employ it in the assistant.


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                H&P (Ours)                                                               Vanilla
                                   P&S1     Self-Ask2     ReAct3     AutoGPT4
              full    w/o AAA                                                      w/ Ask     w/o Ask
      Fin     15.3       13.0       12.4       11.8         10.9         9.8         10.4           6.1
      Econ     5.5       4.5         1.0        3.6          2.2         -6.3        1.8            0.2
      Web     15.0       13.8       11.1        9.4          9.5         8.3         10.2          -4.5
S.
      Poll     3.6       2.2         4.1       -2.9         1.7           3.1        -1.2           2.5
      All     14.3       11.9       10.8        9.9          9.4         8.9          9.8          3.1
      S       3.21       2.91       2.90       2.60         2.15        2.77         2.16          1.20
      Fin     15.6       13.9       12.0       11.6         10.3        8.6          10.7          8.0
      Econ     2.8       -4.2       -3.2       -1.1         -1.7         1.0         N/A           0.2
      Web     13.7       14.9        8.7        4.3          4.9        13.3         3.8           7.3
T.
      Poll     3.1       2.7        N/A        1.4          -1.1        2.3          0.1           -6.7
      All     15.0       13.1       11.5       10.6          8.8        10.3         10.0           6.6
      S       3.07       2.42       2.68       2.15         2.43        2.45         2.35          1.67

Table 3: Percentage returns in hyperportfolio task of agents including ours, 1. Wang et al. (2023a), 2.
Press et al. (2023), 3. Yao et al. (2023c), 4. Richards (2023), and a vanilla analyst without additional
prompting. “S.” and “T.” represent “Standard” and “Tracking” settings respectively. “AAA” means
Analyst-Assistant-Actuator architecture. “Ask” means whether the agent can access the Internet
and knowledge base. “All” means the overall return, and “Fin”, “Econ”, “Web”, “Poll” denotes the
returns of the assets in those topics. “N/A” means the agent does not invest assets in that topic. “S”
is percentage Sharpe ratio, as a reference, S&P 500 in the same period is 1.53, Apple stock is 4.73.



AutoGPT (Richards, 2023) is the state-of-the-art LLM agent framework that encapsulates tools and
prompts that allow automatic planning and completion of a given task, which is analysis in our case.
We also tested our method without the AAA architecture, in which a single agent plays all roles, a
vanilla analyst without any extra prompting and one without access to the knowledge base & tools.

5.2   E VALUATING AGENTS

Table 3 displays the results. Our H&P prompting had the highest returns with 14.3% for the standard
setting and 15.0% for the tracking setting, which is a 32.4% and 30.4% improvement over the P&S,
the second-best performing method. H&P also outperforms most of the topic-wise returns. We also
                                                                     (r¯ −r¯ )
provide the Sharpe ratio to measure risk-adjusted returns by S = pσp f , where r¯p and σp are the
mean and standard deviation of the daily percentage change in the hyperportfolio value, and r¯f is
the risk-free return, which is assumed to be 0 in our setting (see Appendix C). It is important to note
that SocioDojo uses publicly available daily close data for financial assets, which cannot be directly
interpreted as or compared to real financial returns. We discuss the potential impact of this and the
returns adjusted by the commercial minute-level financial data from AlphaVantage in Appendix D.
Both H&P and P&S benefited from augmenting the analyst,
which can be attributed to their iterative approach. H&P fur-                 H&P P&S Other
ther encourages the agent to explore more deeply by forming            Mean 1.91 0.72           0.52
out-of-domain hypotheses. For example, H&P learns to com-              Std.    0.98 0.88        0.85
pare similar situations in history to discover potential indica-
tors that are not directly available from the input, as shown in Table 4: Number of ask calls
Appendix G. In contrast, P&S does not ask questions outside made by agents in our experiments.
of the input. Specifically, a H&P analyst is likely to ask ques-
tions such as “what is the potential impact of X on Y?” or “what is the significance of X in Y?”,
while baselines tend to ask questions such as “what is X?”. The statistics in Table 4 demonstrate that
our H&P agent made a significantly higher number of valid ask calls, indicating that it is able to
form more in-depth hypotheses. In contrast, the P&S agent only had a slight increase in ask calls,
likely due to its inability to construct useful questions. Other baselines augment the assistant. How-
ever, the analyst’s lack of in-depth questioning and early termination of the analysis prevented the


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


improvement from being demonstrated. Furthermore, the vanilla agent without access to the knowl-
edge base and tools performs poorly due to the lack of the latest background of the current world,
for example, the world before and after COVID is largely different. Thus, we can conclude that the
analyst plays a key role in making high-quality plans and utilizing the assistant more effectively.

5.3     A BLATION S TUDY

    Type       Fin    Econ    Web    Poll    All       Model     Fin    Econ    Web     Poll   All
    News.      15.3    5.5    15.0    3.6   14.3       GPT-3.5   15.3   5.5     15.0    3.6    14.3
                                                       GPT-4     17.2   7.3     16.7    4.2    16.8
    +Social.   14.3    5.3    15.3    2.3   14.1
    +Report    15.9    6.3    14.2    3.9   14.7       Assis.    15.9   5.8     16.4    4.3    15.2
    +Papers    15.3    6.7    15.0    3.4   14.6       Actua.    15.8   6.0     15.3    3.1    14.9
    +Other     15.0    5.3    14.9    4.9   14.4       Analy.    16.9   6.8     16.2    4.4    15.9
    Mixed      15.5    5.8    15.4    4.0    14.7 Table 6: Ablation study on foundation models by
                                                  replacing “GPT-4” for all roles or for each of “As-
     Table 5: Ablation study of types of sources. sistant”, “Actuator”, “Analyst”.

Information sources. We add additional sources of different types to the basic setting above. The
topic distribution of each type can be found in the Appendix A.1. Table 5.3 shows the results, which
indicate that the inclusion of more information sources does not necessarily lead to better perfor-
mance. This could be due to the fact that different sources require different analysis techniques; for
instance, reading papers is different from reading news, and some messages, such as papers, were
truncated to fit the token length limit. Furthermore, information sources may also introduce noise,
such as fake news or unverified opinions in social media, even though we have filtered out relatively
reliable publishers. Therefore, we conclude that high-quality information sources are essential, and
domain-specific analysis techniques are necessary.

Foundation models. We substitute the foundation model with GPT-4 for all roles or for each
role. The results are presented in Table 5.3. We can observe a marked improvement over GPT-4,
which can be attributed to its more comprehensive knowledge of social science, as evaluated by
multiple human tests (OpenAI, 2023). We also note that the most significant improvement is seen
in the analyst, which is the main bottleneck. Enhancing the actuator also yields an improvement,
though not as prominent, indicating that the bottleneck does not come from the actuator. In contrast
to baselines, improving the assistant gives a boost, which can be explained by the fact that the
questions asked by a H&P analyst are more complex and require more capability. Therefore, we
conclude that the analyst is critical for the hyperportfolio task and also has an effect on the gains
from the assistant, while a well-executed actuator is also beneficial but not the highest priority.

6     C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduce SocioDojo, a lifelong learning platform for developing ready-to-deploy
agents that are capable of analyzing and making decisions about the dynamics of human society.
SocioDojo is composed of real-world news, articles, papers, etc. over time from diverse information
sources, time series from economics, finance, search trends, and polls that support the hyperportfo-
lio, a decision-making task that can evaluate agent analysis and decision-making power in a reliable
and scalable way, and a knowledge base of books, journals, encyclopedias along with the search
interfaces. Our Analyst-Assistant-Actuator architecture and Hypothesis & Proof prompting achieve
improvements of 32.4% and 30.4% in two experiment settings compared to the state-of-the-art meth-
ods, which is a promising start for the development of lifelong analytical agents for human society
that aim to achieve human-centered AI.

7     R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We ensure the reproducibility and completeness of this paper by introducing the hyperparameters
and experiment settings in the main paper. To make the results more deterministic and reproducible,


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


we use a low temperature for LLMs. We also design mechanisms to make the results stable and
provide details including two key hyperparameters, overnight rate, and return bound in the Appendix
C. Furthermore, we provide all the promptings for our architecture and details about the analysis
process in Appendix F. To enable readers to reproduce our work, we make our code and data publicly
available.

R EFERENCES
S. R. K. Branavan, David Silver, and Regina Barzilay. Non-linear monte-carlo search in civilization
   ii. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Second International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence
   - Volume Volume Three, IJCAI’11, pp. 2404–2410. AAAI Press, 2011. ISBN 9781577355151.
Po-Lin Chen and Cheng-Shang Chang. Interact: Exploring the potentials of chatgpt as a cooperative
  agent, 2023.
Hyunyoung Choi and Hal Varian. Predicting the present with google trends. Economic record, 88:
  2–9, 2012.
Eugene F. Fama. Efficient capital markets: A review of theory and empirical work. The Journal
  of Finance, 25(2):383–417, 1970. ISSN 00221082, 15406261. URL http://www.jstor.
  org/stable/2325486.
Linxi Fan, Guanzhi Wang, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Yuncong Yang, Haoyi Zhu, Andrew
  Tang, De-An Huang, Yuke Zhu, and Anima Anandkumar. Minedojo: Building open-ended em-
  bodied agents with internet-scale knowledge. In Thirty-sixth Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2022. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=rc8o_j8I8PX.
Clive William John Granger and Paul Newbold. Forecasting economic time series. Academic press,
  2014.
Matthew Johnson, Katja Hofmann, Tim Hutton, and David Bignell. The malmo platform for
 artificial intelligence experimentation. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth International Joint
 Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI’16, pp. 4246–4247. AAAI Press, 2016. ISBN
 9781577357704.
Bryan T Kelly and Dacheng Xiu. Financial machine learning. Technical report, National Bureau of
  Economic Research, 2023.
Kyoung-jae Kim. Financial time series forecasting using support vector machines. Neurocomputing,
  55(1-2):307–319, 2003.
Bjoern Krollner, Bruce Vanstone, and Gavin Finnie. Financial time series forecasting with machine
  learning techniques: A survey. In European Symposium on Artificial Neural Networks: Compu-
  tational Intelligence and Machine Learning, pp. 25–30, 2010.
Michael S Lewis-Beck. Election forecasting: Principles and practice. The British Journal of Politics
 and International Relations, 7(2):145–164, 2005.
Alejandro Lopez-Lira and Yuehua Tang. Can chatgpt forecast stock price movements? return pre-
  dictability and large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07619, 2023.
Mantas Lukauskas, Vaida Pilinkienė, Jurgita Bruneckienė, Alina Stundžienė, Andrius Grybauskas,
 and Tomas Ruzgas. Economic activity forecasting based on the sentiment analysis of news.
 Mathematics, 10(19), 2022. ISSN 2227-7390. doi: 10.3390/math10193461. URL https:
 //www.mdpi.com/2227-7390/10/19/3461.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.
Ofir Press, Muru Zhang, Sewon Min, Ludwig Schmidt, Noah A. Smith, and Mike Lewis. Mea-
  suring and narrowing the compositionality gap in language models, 2023. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=PUwbwZJz9dO.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xavier Puig, Kevin Ra, Marko Boben, Jiaman Li, Tingwu Wang, Sanja Fidler, and Antonio Tor-
  ralba. Virtualhome: Simulating household activities via programs. In Proceedings of the IEEE
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8494–8502, 2018.
Chen Qian, Xin Cong, Wei Liu, Cheng Yang, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Yufan Dang, Jiahao Li,
  Juyuan Xu, Dahai Li, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Communicative agents for software de-
  velopment, 2023.
Toran Bruce Richards. Autogpt - the next evolution of data driven chat ai, Mar 2023. URL https:
  //auto-gpt.ai/.
Omer Berat Sezer, Mehmet Ugur Gudelek, and Ahmet Murat Ozbayoglu. Financial time series fore-
 casting with deep learning: A systematic literature review: 2005–2019. Applied soft computing,
 90:106181, 2020.
Rohin Shah, Cody Wild, Steven H Wang, Neel Alex, Brandon Houghton, William Guss, Sharada
  Mohanty, Anssi Kanervisto, Stephanie Milani, Nicholay Topin, et al. The minerl basalt competi-
  tion on learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.01969, 2021.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Beck Labash, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu
  Yao. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning, 2023.
Mohit Shridhar, Jesse Thomason, Daniel Gordon, Yonatan Bisk, Winson Han, Roozbeh Mottaghi,
 Luke Zettlemoyer, and Dieter Fox. Alfred: A benchmark for interpreting grounded instructions
 for everyday tasks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
 recognition, pp. 10740–10749, 2020.
Mohit Shridhar, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Côté, Yonatan Bisk, Adam Trischler, and Matthew
 Hausknecht. ALFWorld: Aligning Text and Embodied Environments for Interactive Learning. In
 Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021. URL
 https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.03768.
Hongjin Su, Weijia Shi, Jungo Kasai, Yizhong Wang, Yushi Hu, Mari Ostendorf, Wen-tau
  Yih, Noah A. Smith, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Tao Yu. One embedder, any task: Instruction-
  finetuned text embeddings. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL
  2023, pp. 1102–1121, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.findings-acl.71. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.
  findings-acl.71.
Daniel Toyama, Philippe Hamel, Anita Gergely, Gheorghe Comanici, Amelia Glaese, Zafarali
  Ahmed, Tyler Jackson, Shibl Mourad, and Doina Precup. AndroidEnv: A reinforcement learn-
  ing platform for android. abs/2105.13231, 2021. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2105.
  13231.
Oriol Vinyals, Timo Ewalds, Sergey Bartunov, Petko Georgiev, Alexander Sasha Vezhnevets,
  Michelle Yeo, Alireza Makhzani, Heinrich Küttler, John Agapiou, Julian Schrittwieser, John
  Quan, Stephen Gaffney, Stig Petersen, Karen Simonyan, Tom Schaul, Hado van Hasselt, David
  Silver, Timothy Lillicrap, Kevin Calderone, Paul Keet, Anthony Brunasso, David Lawrence, An-
  ders Ekermo, Jacob Repp, and Rodney Tsing. Starcraft ii: A new challenge for reinforcement
  learning, 2017.
Lei Wang, Wanyu Xu, Yihuai Lan, Zhiqiang Hu, Yunshi Lan, Roy Ka-Wei Lee, and Ee-Peng
  Lim. Plan-and-solve prompting: Improving zero-shot chain-of-thought reasoning by large lan-
  guage models. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 2609–2634, Toronto, Canada, July 2023a. As-
  sociation for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.147. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.147.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V Le, Ed H. Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha
  Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language
  models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023b. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=1PL1NIMMrw.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
Frank Z Xing, Erik Cambria, and Roy E Welsch. Natural language based financial forecasting: a
  survey. Artificial Intelligence Review, 50(1):49–73, 2018.
Selene Yue Xu and CU Berkely. Stock price forecasting using information from yahoo finance and
  google trend. UC Brekley, 2014.
Shunyu Yao, Howard Chen, John Yang, and Karthik Narasimhan. Webshop: Towards scalable
  real-world web interaction with grounded language agents, 2023a.
Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Thomas L. Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik
  Narasimhan. Tree of Thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models, 2023b.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The Eleventh International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations, 2023c. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=WE_vluYUL-X.
Shuyan Zhou, Frank F. Xu, Hao Zhu, Xuhui Zhou, Robert Lo, Abishek Sridhar, Xianyi Cheng,
  Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, Uri Alon, and Graham Neubig. Webarena: A realistic web environ-
  ment for building autonomous agents, 2023.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     S OCIO D OJO S TATISTICS

A.1    D ISTRIBUTION OF TOPICS FOR EACH TYPE OF INFORMATION SOURCE


      Figure 3: Distribution of topics for each type of information source by number of tokens.



A.2    D ISTRIBUTION OF TOPICS FOR INFORMATION SOURCES OVER TIME


Figure 4: The x-axis indicates the date, and each bar represents the distribution of the number of
messages for each topic over a 14-day period beginning with that data. The graph displays how the
topics of messages have been distributed over time in all information sources.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.3    D ISTRIBUTION TOPICS OF TIME SERIES FOR EACH DOMAIN


    Figure 5: Distribution of topics in different domains of time series by number of time series.


A.4    D ISTRIBUTION OF TOPICS FOR KNOWLEDGE BASE SOURCES


       Figure 6: Distribution of topics for each knowledge base source by number of tokens.


B     M ETHODS IN C REATING S OCIO D OJO

News media have political biases, so to reduce the influence of these biases on our information
sources, we refer to the Media Bias Ratings and Charts from Allsides, which provides a rating from
-6 to 6. We only choose media with ratings between -3 and 3, and as close to neutral as possible.
We also balance the ratings by letting the summation of the ratings of all selected media be as close
to 0. Additionally, we refer to the media rank from Stony Brook University to pick highly ranked


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


media. We use Google Scholar venue rankings to screen for reliable sources of academic papers.
We filter social media accounts by the number of followers and then manually remove accounts that
show clear biases. We manually search for reputable institutions in different domains to obtain their
publicly available reports. We also select textbooks from the Internet that have good ratings. To
prevent information leakage, the materials in the knowledge base are published before the start date
of the environment 2021-10-01, and we assume that the knowledge base information is timeless and
valid throughout the experiment period as we manually pick only the highest-rated sources from the
Internet. Finally, we also consulted experts and librarians in economics and other domains to verify
the reliability and diversity of our applied sources.

C    ROBUSTNESS ANALYSIS OF S OCIO D OJO

Robustness is used to describe the ability of a system to withstand disturbances that could potentially
affect its functioning. In the context of SocioDojo, which is responsible for assessing the societal
analytical and decision-making capabilities of agents, robustness can be determined by whether an
agent can achieve a high return without relying on high-quality analysis and sound decisions.


Figure 7: The volatility and mean changes under different sampling periods for time series in differ-
ent sources. 0.1 on the y-axis means 10% return.


We introduce four mechanisms to alleviate undesired returns: (1) Forbid day trading, that an asset
cannot be sold within 5 days of purchase to avoid profiting from short-term patterns. Moreover, it
balances the agent’s information advantage as we use close prices in finance which do not reflect
the latest news in real-time. (2) Commission fee, charged for each transaction to avoid frequent
trading and encourage considered decisions. We use 1% of the trading value in our experiments. (3)
Overnight fee, calculated as rate × size × y t /360 where size = vbase /y buy and vbase are the cash
used to buy the asset, charged daily for some assets. Since some assets are almost ever-growing,
such as GDP, which leads to risk-free returns, we wish all returns to come with risk, thus requiring
good analysis to achieve a better risk-return trade-off. We use 0.1 for economics and 0.05 for search


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


trends. (4) Return bound, limited the returns of an asset by −bound × vbase ≤ Ri ≤ bound × vbase ,
thus avoiding extreme value and alleviating speculation from high volatility. We use a bound of 5 in
our setting.
We begin by studying the volatility of the time series from various sources, as seen in Figure 7.
FIN stands for finance, FRD is the economic time series from the FRED database, YGV is the poll
trackers from YouGov, and FTE is the political poll data from FiveThirtyEight. The “Poll” type
in the SocioDojo time series is a combination of the YGV and FTE time series. WEB is Google
Trends.
Volatility is a measure of the standard deviation of changes in a time series with a given sam-
pling
q period,      such as the standard deviation of the weekly change. It is calculated as σP =
    1
       Pdn −P P           2
   NP     i=d0 (vi − v¯P ) , where d0 is the first day and dn is the last day of the time series, P is the
sampling period, viP = yi+P − yi is the change in value during a period of length P beginning on
                                                                                        Pdn −P viP
the day i, NP is the number of spans under the period of P in this time series and v¯P = i=d 0 NP
is the mean change under the sampling period of P . High volatility usually indicates a high risk,
while a high mean usually implies a high potential return.
FRD shows high means for all its quartiles as some FRD time series, such as GDP and population,
are almost ever-growing, which presents both a risk to robustness that an agent may randomly invest
in an economic time series and still get a good return without conducting a thorough analysis. This
has motivated us to introduce an overnight rate to balance the risk-reward trade-off and reduce
speculation. We also introduce an overnight rate for the WEB since its high volatility leaves a
potential risk of speculation. However, the excessive volatility of FTE makes it too high risk, and
YGV has low volatility and return. Thus, we impose negative overnight rates of 0.05 on them
to rebalance risk and returns. We also do not apply overnight rates on FIN to align with the real
financial market.


Figure 8: Distribution of returns of random walk agent under different overnight rates for FRD and
WEB, the returns are truncated around -/+ 120%, 0.1 in y-axis means 10% return. 100 runs for each
setting.

The level of robustness for SocioDojo can be depicted by E(Ru ), the expected return of unexpected
behaviors. We use the random walk agent whose expected return should ideally be 0 to explore the
robustness of SocioDojo and find a suitable overnight rate. The agent sampled evenly from all assets
to buy with a value of 5000 to 50,000 and from owned assets to sell with a value of 0 to the owned
value in each step and had a probability of 0.5 to make no move. The random agent accepted the
same information source as the one used in the agent evaluation experiment in Section 5.2, although
the message was not actually read, to maintain the same action frequency. Different overnight rates


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


of FRD and WEB were tested, and each setting was run 100 times. The distribution of the returns is
visualized in Figure 8.
The WEB, FRD, and FIN assets display many outliers, so a boundary would significantly reduce
the likelihood that the agent will receive a high reward by chance. FRD: 0.05, WEB: 0.05,
and FRD: 0.10, WEB: 0.05 achieve an ideal mean return of 0. We can also observe that the
returns of FTE and YGV have a relatively high variation; however, due to the negative overnight
rate, they also have a relatively higher mean return. The FIN has a relatively high risk and a low
mean return; this is because the FIN includes all kinds of financial assets, including high-risk assets
such as cryptocurrency and pink stocks. Nevertheless, the nonrandom agents tend to invest in more
mainstream companies due to their greater presence in the information sources in practice; thus the
return has a large difference compared to a random-walk agent that evenly samples from the assets.


Figure 9: Distribution of final total value of random walk agent under different bound and overnight
rates for WEB and FRD. The x-axis shows the overnight rates for WEB, FRD. 100 runs for each
setting. Each run starts with 1e6 cash.


We further visualize the total return under different overnight rates and bounds in Figure 9. We can
see that a lower bound results in fewer outliers. We chose a bound of 5, as it is possible to achieve
a return of 5 times for a single asset without leverage in around 2 years, which is the time span of
SocioDojo. A bound of 10 is less robust and 1 is too strict. The overnight setting FRD: 0.10,
WEB: 0.05 shows a mean final value close to 1e6, which corresponds to an ideal zero return.
Therefore, we selected overnight rates of FRD: 0.10, WEB: 0.05, and a bound of 5 as our
experimental setting. Although our designs already provide good robustness, a better overnight rate
model based on advanced pricing theories can further enhance the robustness, and factors such as
dividends should also be taken into account. We leave them for future work.

D    A NALYSIS OF F INANCIAL T IME S ERIES R ESULTS

SocioDojo utilizes publicly accessible daily close price data for financial assets, as minute-level
historical data usually necessitate commercial licenses to access, and we assess the impact in Section
D.1 by adjusting the financial returns with minute-level data. We then employ the adjusted data to


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


delve into the returns obtained by the financial assets to gain more insight into the performance of
the agents in Section D.2.


D.1    R EAL - TIME DATA ADJUSTED RETURNS


                     H&P           P&S1     Self-Ask2     ReAct3     AutoGPT4            Vanilla
              full   w/o AAA                                                        w/ Ask     w/o Ask
      UA     15.3       13.0        12.4       11.8         10.9          9.8         10.4          6.1
 S.   A      11.0       10.1         9.7        8.0          7.9          8.4          8.0          3.3
      S      2.44       1.95        2.28       2.18         1.91         1.62         1.72         1.09
      UA     15.6       13.9        12.0       11.6         10.3          8.6         10.7          8.0
 T.   A      11.2        9.9         9.0        9.0          8.2          5.3          7.5          6.6
      S      2.36       2.05        2.32       2.19         1.71         1.44         1.80         1.25

Table 7: Percentage returns in financial time series before and after adjusted by minute-level data of
agents including ours, 1. Wang et al. (2023a), 2. Press et al. (2023), 3. Yao et al. (2023c), 4. Richards
(2023), and a vanilla analyst without additional prompting. “S.” and “T.” represent “Standard” and
“Tracking” settings respectively. “AAA” means Analyst-Assistant-Actuator architecture. “Ask”
means whether the agent can access the Internet and knowledge base. ’UA’ means not adjusted, ’A’
means adjusted. “S” means the percentage Sharpe ratio of adjusted returns, as a reference, S&P 500
in the same period is 1.53, Apple stock is 4.73.


In order to make SocioDojo available to the public, we have chosen to use the daily close price
data for financial assets. This has the risk of giving agents an undesired information advantage,
as they will be trading with prices that are not up-to-date and do not reflect the latest news. It
can be understood that the agent is always receiving a discounted price. Real-time, minute-level
historical financial data is not publicly available and requires a commercial license to access. To
evaluate the impact of using close price, we adjust the returns using minute-level data obtained from
AlphaVantage, a financial modeling platform that provides intra-day data including also before and
after market prices, adjusted for historical splits and dividend events. We change the trading price
from the latest daily close price to the latest minute price for each transaction in financial assets, and
then recompute the returns for each agent.
The adjusted results are presented in Table 7. After the adjustment, the performance of the agents
generally decreased without the information advantage, yet the comparative advantages among them
remained. This implies that the daily close price data may not be ideal for developing financial
models, but it is acceptable for our purpose of evaluating the agents’ understanding and decision-
making in the real world. This is further supported by Figure 10, which demonstrates that overall
trends and dynamics of the financial asset value are preserved in the unadjusted return of all assets.
With the rule of forbidding day trading, the agents cannot solely make profits through short-term
arbitrage, but rather through improvements in their analysis ability. This also suggests that the
SocioDojo returns only reflect the agents’ improvement in understanding and decision-making in
the real world, and should not be interpreted as real financial returns.


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.2   A NALYSIS OF R ETURNS


Figure 10: The value of hyperportfolio overtime in the “Standard” setting for our method (grey
dashed line) and the value of financial assets after adjustment by minute-level data for our method,
Plan & Solve agent, S&P 500, and FANG+ index trackers. We normalize the initial value of all
assets as 1 million for a clear comparison.


Figure 11: The top 5 gainer and loser stocks that made the most profits and losses respectively in
the invested financial assets for our method (left) and Plan & Solve (right). The y-axis denotes the
percentage contributions to profit and losses for stocks marked in the x-axis respectively.



We visualize the returns of financial assets over time in the “Standard” setting after adjustment for
our method, Plan & Solve, and the baselines including S&P 500 and FANG+ (the index that tracks
the top 10 largest technology companies that are also the main sources of returns for agents) in
Figure 10. Compared to our method, which performs a deeper analysis, Plan & Solve behaves in
a more passive style, highly correlated with the market, as reflected in S&P 500. It follows the
major trends obtained from the information sources to make decisions using little personal opinions
normally generated through an in-depth analysis. On the other hand, H&P agent is more aggressive,
which may be analogous to actively managed funds. This is further evidenced by the top 5 gainers
and losers for our method and P&S shown in Figure 11. The distribution of the top 5 gainers in H&P
is less even than P&S, indicating a more aggressive and less distributed investment.


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E     OVERVIEW OF A NALYST-A SSISTANT-ACTUATOR A RCHITECTURE


Figure 12: The overview of how the analyst, assistant, and actuator collaborate to analyze and make
decisions for one input from SocioDojo.


F     P ROMPTING
F.1    C ONTEXT OF H YPERPORTFOLIO

The context of the hyperportfolio task is shown below. The context will be input as the first system
message to the Analyst and Actuator before their role prompts. The Assistant uses a simplified
context in its role context that does not contain the detailed rules of the game.

    You are a helpful assistant working in a team playing a "hyperportfolio" game that aims to
    analyze and predict potential movement in real-life social, political, economic, or financial trends
    from real-time news and other information sources. The rule of the game is as follows:
    1. Every team has an initial account of 1 million cash, your team can use this cash to buy or
    sell assets to build a hyperportfolio; the target of the game is to maximize the asset, which is
    the summation of the remaining cash and the value of an asset you own.
    2. A hyperportfolio is composed of a set of assets that corresponds to time series in different
    domains from real-life covers financial market close prices, economic time series, Google search
    trends, and political and public opinion poll trackers.
    3. The game begins on 2021-10-01 and ends on 2023-08-01, after beginning, the time will
    move forward, and you will consistently receive real-life news about what is happening in the
    world, newly released opinions from the internet or social network, or reports from research
    institutes, financial institutions, and so on.
    4. Your team may choose to "buy" or "sell" an asset during the game. Each asset corresponds
    to a time series; the buy price will be the latest value of the time series at the current time.
    5. You need to pay a commission when you buy or sell an asset, the amount is about 1% of
    the buy or sell value.
    6. The value of an asset you own will update over time, calculated as (current price/buy
    price)*(investment amount).
    7. For example, you may read news about the Apple company performing well for this season,
    Based on your analysis, you may think it is a good indicator that Apple stock price will
    increase and decide to invest 10,000 cash on the Apple stock time series.



                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  8. Each time series is marked with an ICode. The ICode has the format "[DOMAIN]:[CODE]".
  For example, the Apple company stock price is "FIN:AAPL", FIN is the domain, and AAPL
  is the code. There are five domains, "FIN", "WEB", "FTE", "FRD", "YGV", interpretations
  for them:
      a) FIN: Close price time series of a financial instrument including stocks, ETFs, index
      funds, REITs, futures, currencies, indices, or cryptocurrencies
      b) WEB: The Google trend time series of a keyword, such as "Apple", "iPhone", "Bitcoin",
      etc.
      c) FTE: Political poll tracking time series, such as the president’s approval rating, the
      generic ballot, etc.
      d) FRD: Economic time series, such as GDP, PPI, unemployment rate, etc.
      e) YGV: Public opinion poll tracking time series, such as support for universal health care,
      how sustainability policies impact Americans’ purchase behavior, etc.
  9. You may receive or pay overnight interest or fees if you hold an asset overnight, computed
  as rate*size*current_price/360, size=amount/buy_price. The rate varies for different assets.


F.2   A NALYST

Context of the analyst. It will be input to the analyst agent as the second system message after the
hyperportfolio context.

  Your role in the group is as an analyst who watches and analyzes the latest information, such
  as news, articles, reports, etc.
  1. You will work with an actuator who is responsible for managing the hyperportfolio for the
  team and making buy or sell decisions.
  2. Your task is to provide a high-quality analysis for the actuator so that the actuator can
  make good decisions that optimize the hyperportfolio.
  3. You need to find any indicator of potential movement in social, political, economic, or
  financial trends from the given news.
  4. You can give general suggestions, like "Apple stock price will go up", "It is time to sell
  Apple stock".
  5. You can also give more precise buy or sell suggestions if you have confidence that "I think
  we should spend 10,000 on buying the GDP time series".
  6. If you cannot see any opportunity, you should also indicate that "I cannot see any indica-
  tors", or "I think we should wait for now".



Hypothesis & Proof prompting. It will be inputted to the analyst agent as the third system message
after the analyst context.

  In order to make a convincing analysis, you must clearly state your hypothesis and provide
  evidence to support your hypothesis:
  1. If your hypothesis cannot be supported by the facts, knowledge, and information you have,
  you should seek the help of another assistant agent on your team by calling the ask function.
  2. You should never make up facts, knowledge, or information, if you do not know, you should
  call the ask function to seek help from the assistant agent.
  3. The assistant agent will find evidence to support your hypothesis if you call the ask
  function and send the evidence to you. It can also search for general information, facts, and
  knowledge, as well as information on an ICode.


                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  4. The hypothesis can also be rejected by the evidence; in that case, you should give up the
  hypothesis and construct a new one.
  5. Your hypothesis may lack support for both acceptance and rejection; in that case, you can
  choose to insist on it as an intuition, but you should explain why you insist on it, or you can
  choose to give up it.
  6. When you are done, you should call the done function to finish the analysis.
  7. You must call one function done or ask in each step of the analysis.
  Here are some tips for you to make a hypothesis:
  1. A hypothesis is like a guess, assumption, or intuition, it is a statement that you think is
  true, but you do not have enough evidence to support it yet.
  2. For example, "interest increase in technology will cause the technology stock to increase",
  "sale of lipstick indicates a potential drop of the economy", "the president’s approval rate will
  increase if the economy is good", etc.
  3. The hypothesis can be microscopic or macroscopic, it can be about a specific asset or a
  general trend.
  Now, progressively analyze the given news, article, report, etc. in a multi-round dialog between
  you and the ask function. When you think that you get enough information to give the final
  analysis report, call the done function to end the dialog with the ask function, and aggregate
  the progress as a final analysis report when the system asks you to give your final analysis
  report. You must call one of the done or ask functions in your response.


F.3   A SSISTANT

Context of the assistant. It will be inputted to the assistant agent as the first system message without
hyperportfolio context.

  You are a helpful assistant working in a team playing a game of "hyperportfolio" that aims to
  analyze and predict the potential movement in real-life social, political, economic, or financial
  trends from real-time news and other information sources.
  Your role in the team is the assistant who helps the analyst find evidence to support or reject
  the hypothesis or search for the facts, knowledge, information, or data demanded by the analyst:
  1. You can access the search engine or database.
  2. You need to understand the demand from the analyst and generate the query for the search
  engine or database that can best meet the analyst’s demand.
  3. If the request is a hypothesis and you do not get ideal evidence from your search, you may
  need to reason and decompose it into subhypotheses, and then search for the subhypotheses
  to find evidence to support the original hypothesis.
  4. When you are finished, call the done function to complete the analysis.
  5. You can give your opinions, but the main role is to give evidence from your search results.
  Here are the tips for using the search engine or database:
  1. You can use Google search by calling the googlesearch function to find general infor-
  mation or facts.
  2. You can use Google Knowledge Graph Search by calling the gkgsearch function to find
  knowledge about a specific entity.
  3. You can use the Wikipedia search by calling the wikisearch function to find knowledge
  of a term, concept, or topic.
  4. You can use the database by calling the askdb function to find theoretical support from
  encyclopedias, textbooks, and research papers.


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  5. You can use the probe function to find historical time series and related information, the
  probe function accepts ICode with the format "[DOMAIN]:[CODE]", for example, the Apple
  company stock price is "FIN:AAPL", FIN is the domain, AAPL is the code. The ICode can
  be queried by calling the query_icode function, you should never make up an ICode. There
  are five domains, "FIN", "WEB", "FTE", "FRD", "YGV", interpretations for them:
      a) FIN: Close price time series of a financial instrument including stocks, ETFs, index
      funds, REITs, futures, currencies, indices, or cryptocurrencies.
      b) WEB: The Google trend time series of a keyword, such as "Apple", "Trump", "Bitcoin",
      etc.
      c) FTE: Political poll tracking time series, such as the president’s approval rating, the
      generic ballot, etc.
      d) FRD: Economic time series, such as GDP, PPI, unemployment rate, etc.
      e) YGV: Public opinion poll tracking time series, such as support for universal health care,
      how sustainability policies impact Americans’ purchase behavior, etc.


F.4   ACTUATOR

Context of the actuator. It will be inputted to the actuator agent as the second system message after
the hyperportfolio context.

  Your role in the team is the actuator that manages the hyperportfolio of the team:
  1. You need to use your strategy to adjust and optimize your team’s portfolio by making
  buy, sell, query, or wait for decisions based on the analysis of the latest news and information
  provided by the analyst, and the current status of the account which includes the holdings of
  assets and the excess cash.
  2. In order to buy or sell assets, you need to call the trade function, you should pass the
  trading instructions to the function:
      a) You should write one instruction per line.
      b) There are two kinds of instruction: BUY [ICode] [amount], SELL [ICode] [amount], all
      instructions should follow this format.
     c) For example, if you wish to buy ICode FIN:AAPL with 2000 amount of cash, then sell
     8000 amount of FIN:GOOG, the instructions should be: BUY FIN:AAPL 2000\nSELL
     FIN:GOOG 8000
  3. When you decide to buy or sell an asset, you usually first need to query the ICodes of
  the related asset by calling the query function unless you already know the ICode from the
  context.
  4. The query function will return the ICodes for the best match assets after execution, then
  you need to decide the amount and pass an ICode and amount to call the trade function.
  5. If there are no assets you want from the query, you can query again with a different query
  content.
  6. You need to make your judgments based on the analysis, your action history and account
  status, and make function calls about what to do next, such as query related assets, buy or
  sell an asset, or wait.
  7. You should always make one function call in your response.
  8. You can use the probe function to obtain historical time series and related information to
  help you make your decision. The probe function accepts ICode as input, and ICode can be
  queried by calling the query function. You should never make up an ICode.
  Here are some tips for making the decision:
  1. The asset you buy should have a valid ICode you know of or from the query.
  2. The amount should always be positive.


                                                 23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  3. The asset you sell must be the one you own, and the amount should be less than its current
  value.
  4. Use your cash wisely, invest more if you see a good opportunity and you have confidence,
  invest less when you do not confirm, and learn to leave some cash for future opportunities,
  when you see a risk, sell the assets, the higher risk, the more you sell.
  5. Higher profit opportunities always come with higher risk, which may cause a higher loss.
  6. Here are some empirical principles when you decide the amount to buy or sell:
      a) Usually if the asset value occupies less than 5% of your total asset, it is low and low
      risk.
      b) The asset value that occupies between 5%~25% of your total asset will give you moderate
      risk.
      c) The asset value that occupies between 25%~50% of your total asset will give you high
      risk.


F.5   S YSTEM MESSAGES

In addition to the prompts that tell the agent their role and context, there are system messages that
guide their work process.

State messages. When the analyst receives the latest news, article, etc., the system will inform it
current time of the world, for example:

  [System] Current time is 2021-10-02 04:01:00+00:00.



The actuator is also informed by the system about the account status including the hyperportfolio
details at the beginning and after trading instructions are executed:

  [System] Current status of the account: {account status}



Error handling. The analyst, assistant, and actuator all work in a loop manner, every step needs
to call a function, if the agent does not call a function, the system will notify it, taking the analyst as
an example:

  [System] You do not call any function. You must call one of ask or done.



There are also other kinds of errors, such as the wrong function calling, or wrong action (e.g. the
value of a trading instruction is negative), there will be a system message similar to:

  [System] You caused an error {error message}. Please, retry.



Final response. When the analyst calls the done function, the system will prompt the analyst to
provide the final full analyst report:

  [System] Now, give the final full analysis report of the news, article, etc. based on your dialog
  with the ask function, you should use the returned evidence and information and make explicit
  references; you should leave a reference section with the sources listed there unless you have no



                                                    24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    reference. You should also include a summary of the given news, article, etc. at the beginning
    of your report to give the context of your analysis, at the end of your report, you should give
    some advice to the actuator. You should never make up any facts, evidence, or information.


For Hypothesis & Proof analyst, there is an additional sentence in the prompt:

    You should clearly state your hypothesis and proof and your intuitions.



When the assistant call done, it will be prompted:

    [System] Now, based on the search results, give your final reply to the query from the analyst
    "{query}". You must clearly reference the search results returned by the function calls.



End of step. The system will prompt the agent what to do next after successfully executing an
action after each step, for example:

    [System] Now you can stop and wait for more news and opportunities, or you can continue to
    give more buy or sell instructions based on the analysis, current status of the account, and
    your action history.
    [System] You may choose to buy an asset from them or sell an asset you own based on the
    query result, the current status of the account and the analysis, or perform another query, or
    wait.
    [System] Now based on the results, accomplish the query. If there is an error such as an
    incorrect ICode when calling the probe, handle it, and retry. You can also perform a further
    search or decompose the query. When you finish, call done function.



G     E XAMPLE OF H YPOTHESIS & P ROOF A NALYST AND COMPARISON WITH
      P LAN & S OLVE
We demonstrate the full analysis process of our proposed Hypothesis & Proof (H&P) prompting
and the Plan & Solve (P&S) prompting, the state-of-the-art prompting technique that can be applied
to the analyst. Both methods are given the same input as shown in G.1. The H&P analyst then
makes three queries with increasingly complex hypotheses to the assistant, as shown in G.2.1, while
the P&S analyst makes only one fact-related query presented in G.2.2. Finally, the H&P and P&S
analysts generate the final analysis report as seen in G.3.1 and G.3.2 respectively.

G.1    I NPUT MESSAGE

    Current time is 2021-10-08 23:49:00+00:00, here is the latest news:
    Category: TECH
    Headline: Apple Filing Notice of Appeal in Epic Antitrust Case, Looks to Stay In-App In-
    junction
    Subheadline: The iPhone maker wants a stay on judge’s order to open in-app communications
    that could allow cheaper payment options
    Datetime: 2021-october-8 7:49 PM ET
    Told a federal judge on Friday it plans to appeal a verdict in its high-profile antitrust case
    against Epic Games Inc., a contest that has brought new attention to how big technology


                                                  25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  companies manage software and applications on their platforms. The iPhone maker also is
  seeking to put on hold an order by U.S. District Judge Yvonne Gonzalez Rogers that requires
  Apple to loosen some restrictions on how App Store developers seek payments for their online
  offerings. Epic, the maker of the popular game “Fortnite,” already had filed a notice of appeal
  to the Sept. 10 verdict issued by the Oakland, Calif., federal court following the 16-day bench
  trial in May. An Epic spokeswoman declined to comment on Apple’s plan to appeal. The
  case put on trial the ways in which companies such as Apple control access to their users.
  Lawmakers and regulators in the U.S., European Union and beyond are closely monitoring
  the issue. Apple faced a deadline to file its notice of appeal, a routine procedure that doesn’t
  include details of its argument against the one of 10 claims that the judge ruled on. Most of
  Epic’s claims were rejected by the judge, including that Apple was an improper monopoly in its
  control of distribution of software onto the iPhone and its requirement that forces developers
  to use its in-app payment system. Apple collects what Epic calls an unfair commission of as
  high as 30%. Apple had argued its rules protected users and its fees were in line with industry
  norms and fair for the services it provides. Following the original verdict, Apple has cheered
  the findings as a “resounding victory”. Still, it wasn’t a complete win. The judge ruled that
  Apple was wrong to prohibit developers from using in-app and out-of-app communications
  with users to send them to alternative payment methods. She issued an injunction to force
  Apple to stop this ban.
  Apple wants a stay on the injunction while it works on a solution. The company already had
  agreed to a settlement in another case to allow out-of-app communications, but it remains
  unclear how Apple wants to address in-app communications. “The company understands and
  respects the Court’s concerns regarding communications between developers and consumers,”
  the company said in a court filing. “Apple is carefully working through many complex issues
  across a global landscape, seeking to enhance information flow while protecting both the
  efficient functioning of the App Store and the security and privacy of Apple’s customers”.
  Some legal observers have said they think an appeal to the Ninth U.S. Circuit Court of
  Appeals could take a year or more, and the case is likely to ultimately go to the U.S. Supreme
  Court, the nation’s top court. Epic co-founder Tim Sweeney has suggested the process could
  take five years. Meanwhile, Apple isn’t allowing Epic back on its developer platform until the
  appeals process is completed. The legal battle emerged in August 2020, when Epic sneaked
  an in-app payment into its popular “Fortnite” videogame that violated Apple’s rules. In
  response, Apple booted the game from the App Store, and Epic’s lawsuit followed. The case
  gave a unique window into Apple’s secretive App Store business, revealing that about one
  fifth of operating income in fiscal 2019 came from its cut of app revenue, according to a Wall
  Street Journal analysis of court records that were made public as part of the trial. Apple has
  said that the released figures were flawed and too high; still, it has acknowledged that much
  of its App Store revenue came from videogames.
  Now, give your analysis that can help the actuator optimize the hyperportfolio of the team by
  buying or selling assets for this news.


G.2     A NALYSIS P ROCESS

G.2.1    H YPOTHESIS & P ROOF
The first ask called by the Hypothesis & Proof analyst:

  [Analyst] Ask assistant: What is the potential impact of Apple filing notice of appeal in the
  Epic antitrust case?
  [Assistant] Based on the search results, Apple has filed a notice of appeal in the Epic Games
  antitrust case. The filing of this appeal could potentially delay any changes to the App Store
  rules that were ordered by the court. According to CNBC, in September, federal judge Yvonne
  Gonzalez Rogers ruled in favor of Apple for nine out of ten counts in the antitrust trial brought
  by Epic Games, the maker of Fortnite (source: [CNBC](https://www.cnbc.com/2021/10/08/
  apple-files-appeal-in-epic-games-case-that-could-delay-changes-.html)). This ruling was seen
  as a resounding victory for Apple in the case. Bloomberg Law also reports that Epic
  Games has filed a notice of appeal, indicating their intention to challenge the court’s
  ruling (source: [Bloomberg Law](https://news.bloomberglaw.com/antitrust/ epic-games-v-
  apple-ruling-antitrust-litigation-takeaways)).


                                                 26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  While there is no specific information available about the potential impact of the appeal, it is
  clear that both Apple and Epic Games are actively involved in the legal proceedings and are
  seeking resolution in their favor. Further monitoring of this case and any subsequent court
  decisions or actions would provide more insights into the potential impact of Apple filing a
  notice of appeal in the Epic antitrust case.
  [Analyst] Based on the news that Apple has filed a notice of appeal in the Epic Games antitrust
  case, it indicates that the legal battle between Apple and Epic Games is ongoing and that
  Apple is seeking to challenge the court’s ruling. This development suggests that there may be
  potential implications for Apple’s business practices and the App Store’s rules in the future.
  As an analyst, it is challenging to determine the exact impact of this appeal on Apple’s
  stock price or the overall financial market. However, it is worth noting that legal proceedings
  and regulatory actions can have a significant impact on the performance of companies in the
  technology sector. Investors and market participants may closely monitor the developments
  in this case to assess the potential risks and opportunities associated with Apple’s business.
  Given the uncertainty surrounding the outcome of the appeal and its potential impact on
  Apple, it may be prudent for the actuator to closely monitor the progress of the case and
  assess any updates or rulings that may arise in the future. The actuator can consider incorpo-
  rating this information into their decision-making process, especially if they have a significant
  exposure to Apple stock or related assets in the hyperportfolio.
  Ultimately, the decision to buy or sell assets related to Apple or adjust the hyperportfolio
  should be based on a comprehensive evaluation of various factors, including the outcome of
  the appeal, market conditions, and the actuator’s risk tolerance and investment strategy.


The second ask called by the Hypothesis & Proof analyst:

  [Analyst] Ask assistant: Has there been any significant market reaction to the news of Apple
  filing an appeal in the Epic Games antitrust case?
  [Assistant] Based on the search results, there is no direct evidence of any significant market
  reaction to the news of Apple filing an appeal in the Epic Games antitrust case. However, it is
  important to note that market reactions can be complex and influenced by various factors. To
  get a comprehensive understanding of any market reactions, it would be beneficial to analyze
  the stock price of Apple (AAPL) over time and compare it to the timeline of the news and
  events related to the Epic Games antitrust case. Additionally, monitoring the news and expert
  opinions related to Apple’s legal battles and antitrust concerns can provide further insights
  into potential market reactions.
  [Analyst] Based on the information available, there is no direct evidence to indicate a specific
  market reaction to Apple filing an appeal in the Epic Games antitrust case. However, it is
  important to note that market reactions can be influenced by a multitude of factors and may
  not always be immediate or easily observable. News and legal developments related to major
  companies like Apple can have an impact on investor sentiment and market dynamics over
  time.
  To gain a better understanding of the potential market reaction, it may be useful to monitor
  any updates or developments related to the court case, as well as any commentary or analysis
  from industry experts and market observers. This ongoing analysis can help inform investment
  decisions and portfolio management strategies.
  It is also important to consider that individual stock movements are influenced by various
  factors, including company-specific news, broader market conditions, and investor sentiment.
  Therefore, it is crucial to conduct comprehensive research and analysis when making invest-
  ment decisions and managing a hyperportfolio.
  As an analyst, it can be helpful to keep track of any new information and developments related
  to the Apple-Epic Games case and its potential impact on market sentiment and Apple’s
  business operations. This ongoing monitoring can provide valuable insights for optimizing the
  hyperportfolio.



The third ask called by the Hypothesis & Proof analyst:


                                                 27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  [Analyst] Ask assistant: Is there any evidence of market reactions to legal proceedings or
  appeals in similar antitrust cases involving large technology companies?
  [Assistant] Based on the search results, I found information regarding antitrust cases involving
  large technology companies, specifically the case against Microsoft Corporation in 1998. In
  this case, Microsoft was accused of using its significant market share in the personal computer
  operating systems business to prevent competition and maintain a monopoly. The case re-
  sulted in a federal district judge ruling that Microsoft should be broken into two technology
  companies, but this decision was later reversed on appeal by a higher court.
  Unfortunately, I couldn’t find specific market reactions to legal proceedings or appeals in
  similar antitrust cases involving large technology companies in the search results provided.
  It’s possible that more specific information or analysis on market reactions in such cases may
  require further research or analysis.
  Please note that the search results provided are limited and may not encompass all relevant
  information. Further research or analysis may be necessary to gather comprehensive evidence
  on market reactions to legal proceedings or appeals in similar antitrust cases involving large
  technology companies.
  [Analyst] Based on the available information, there is limited evidence regarding the market
  reactions to legal proceedings or appeals in similar antitrust cases involving large technol-
  ogy companies. The search results did not yield specific information or analysis on market
  reactions to legal proceedings or appeals in cases such as the Microsoft antitrust case in 1998.
  However, it is important to note that market reactions to legal proceedings can be complex
  and influenced by various factors, including the specific details of the case, the potential
  impact on the company’s operations and profitability, investor sentiment, and broader market
  conditions. Market reactions may also vary depending on the outcome or ruling of the legal
  proceedings.
  To gain a comprehensive understanding of potential market reactions to legal proceedings
  or appeals in antitrust cases involving large technology companies, it may be beneficial to
  conduct further research and analysis, including examining historical precedent or consulting
  industry experts and market analysts.
  In the context of Apple filing an appeal in the Epic Games antitrust case, monitoring future
  developments in the case, as well as any updates or expert opinions, may provide insights into
  potential market reactions. This information can help inform the actuator’s decision-making
  process regarding the hyperportfolio and the management of Apple-related assets.
  Ultimately, investment decisions should be based on a thorough analysis of various factors,
  including legal proceedings, market conditions, company performance, and risk tolerance.
  Regular monitoring and evaluation of relevant news and events can help optimize the hyper-
  portfolio and respond to potential market movements.
  I’m ready to give the final analysis report now.



G.2.2   P LAN & S OLVE
The only ask called by the Hypothesis & Proof analyst:

  [Analyst] Ask assistant: What is the Epic antitrust case against Apple about?
  [Assistant] The Epic antitrust case against Apple, officially known as Epic Games v. Apple,
  is a lawsuit brought by Epic Games against Apple in August 2020. The case was filed in
  the United States District Court for the Northern District of California. According to the
  search results from the wikisearch, Epic Games filed the lawsuit against Apple for antitrust
  violations and anti-competitive behavior, along with a similar lawsuit against Google. The
  lawsuit alleges that Apple’s app store practices violate antitrust laws. More information about
  the case can be found in the search results.
  [Analyst] Thank you for the information. Based on the news article, it seems that Apple is
  planning to appeal the verdict in the Epic antitrust case. The article mentions that Apple


                                                28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  wants to stay on the judge’s order to open in-app communications that could allow cheaper
  payment options. The case focuses on how big technology companies, like Apple, control
  access to their platforms and the restrictions they impose on app developers.
  From an investment perspective, this news may have implications for Apple’s business oper-
  ations and its relationship with app developers. It is worth monitoring how this legal battle
  unfolds and any potential changes in Apple’s App Store policies. Any significant developments
  in the case could impact Apple’s reputation and potentially its stock performance.
  At this point, it does not provide a clear indication to buy or sell Apple stock. However, it is
  essential to keep an eye on any updates regarding the case and how it might impact Apple’s
  financials and market position.
  I’m ready to give the final analysis now.


G.3     A NALYSIS R EPORT

G.3.1    H YPOTHESIS & P ROOF
                                              Summary
  The news reveals that Apple has filed a notice of appeal in the Epic Games antitrust case.
  This appeal comes after a high-profile trial where a federal judge ruled in favor of Apple on
  most counts but issued an injunction requiring Apple to loosen some restrictions on how App
  Store developers seek payments. Both Apple and Epic Games have filed notices of appeal,
  indicating their intentions to challenge the court’s ruling. While the news does not provide
  specific details about the potential impact of the appeal, it highlights the ongoing legal battle
  between Apple and Epic Games and the implications for the App Store’s rules and business
  practices.

                                              Hypothesis

  1. The appeal in the Epic Games antitrust case could lead to potential changes in Apple’s
  App Store rules and business practices.
  2. The outcome of the appeal could have implications for Apple’s financial performance and
  its stock price.

                                                Proof

  1. The news confirms that Apple has filed a notice of appeal in the antitrust case against Epic
  Games, indicating their intention to challenge the court’s ruling and potential changes to the
  App Store’s rules.
  2. The trial and the subsequent appeal have drawn significant attention from lawmakers,
  regulators, and market participants, highlighting the potential impact on Apple’s business
  practices.

                                              Intuitions

  1. The ongoing legal battle and uncertain outcome of the appeal may create volatility and
  uncertainty for Apple and its stakeholders, including investors.
  2. Market reactions to legal proceedings and appeals in high-profile antitrust cases involving
  technology companies can be complex and influenced by various factors such as investor
  sentiment, broader market conditions, and the specific details of the case.

                                               Advice

  1. The actuator should closely monitor the progress of the appeal and any updates or rulings
  related to the case.


                                                 29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  2. Considering the potential impact on Apple’s business practices, it is important for the
  actuator to assess the potential risks and opportunities associated with Apple’s stock and
  related assets in the hyperportfolio.
  3. Stay informed about the developments in the Epic Games antitrust case and seek expert
  opinions and analysis to make informed decisions regarding the hyperportfolio, taking into
  account factors such as the outcome of the appeal and market conditions.

                                           References

  - WSJ: "Apple Filing Notice of Appeal in Epic Antitrust Case, Looks to Stay In-App Injunc-
  tion" (Author: Tim Higgins)
  - CNBC: "Apple files appeal in Epic Games case that could delay changes" (Oct 8, 2021)
  - Bloomberg Law: "Epic Games v. Apple Ruling: Antitrust Litigation Takeaways" (source:
  Bloomberg Law)


G.3.2   P LAN & S OLVE


                                            Summary
  The news article discusses Apple’s plan to appeal the verdict in the Epic antitrust case. The
  case revolves around Apple’s App Store practices and restrictions imposed on app developers.
  Apple is seeking to stay a judge’s order to open in-app communications that could allow
  cheaper payment options for developers. This legal battle has drawn attention to how big
  technology companies control access to their platforms.

                                            Analysis

  1. Legal Implications: The outcome of the Epic antitrust case will have legal implications
  for Apple. If Apple’s appeal is successful, it could reinforce the company’s control over its
  App Store and the restrictions it imposes. On the other hand, if the appeal is denied, Apple
  may be required to make changes to its App Store policies, potentially impacting its revenue
  streams.
  2. App Store Business Model: Apple’s App Store is a significant source of revenue for the
  company. The article mentions that approximately one-fifth of Apple’s operating income in
  fiscal 2019 came from its cut of app revenue. Any changes in App Store policies or regulations
  could have financial implications for Apple.
  3. Developer Relations: The outcome of the case could also impact Apple’s relationship
  with app developers. If Apple is required to allow cheaper payment options, it may affect the
  revenue generated by in-app purchases and subscriptions. Developers may have more flexibility
  and potentially lower costs, which could impact their willingness to continue developing for
  Apple’s platform.

                                        Recommendation

  Based on the current information available, it is difficult to determine the impact of the
  Epic antitrust case on Apple’s stock price or financial performance. It would be prudent to
  closely monitor any developments in the case and the reactions of the market and industry.
  Additionally, keeping an eye on any potential changes in Apple’s App Store policies and their
  implications for developers can provide insight into future opportunities or risks.

                                           References

  - WSJ article: [insert link]
  - Summary of Epic antitrust case against Apple: [insert reference]
  - Impact of App Store revenue on Apple’s financials: [insert reference]



                                               30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H     E XAMPLES OF A SSISTANT
We show the process of how the assistant handles the three queries made by the H & P analyst in the
example in Appendix G here.
The process of the first query from the H&P analyst:

    [Analyst] What is the potential impact of Apple filing notice of appeal in the Epic antitrust
    case?
    [Assistant] Search_google("potential impact of Apple filing notice of appeal in the Epic antitrust
    case")
    [Function] Return for your query potential impact of Apple filing notice of appeal in the Epic
    antitrust case:
     {’top 1 result’: {’url’: ’https://www.cnbc.com/2021/10/08/
    apple-files-appeal-in- epic-games- case-that-could-
    delay-changes-.html’, ’title’: ’Apple files appeal in Epic Games
    case that could delay ...’, ’description’: ’Oct 8, 2021 -- In
    September, federal judge Yvonne Gonzalez Rogers ruled in favor of
    Apple for nine of 10 counts in an antitrust trial brought by Epic,
    the maker of Fortnite.’}, ’top 2 result’: ... (omitted here)}
    [Assistant] Based on the search results, Apple has filed a notice of appeal in the Epic Games
    antitrust case. The filing of this appeal could potentially delay any changes to the App Store
    rules that were ordered by the court. According to CNBC, in September, federal judge Yvonne
    Gonzalez Rogers ruled in favor of Apple for nine out of ten counts in the antitrust trial brought
    by Epic Games, the maker of Fortnite (source: [CNBC](https://www.cnbc.com/2021/10/08/
    apple-files-appeal-in-epic-games-case-that-could-delay-changes-.html)). This ruling was seen
    as a resounding victory for Apple in the case. Bloomberg Law also reports that Epic
    Games has filed a notice of appeal, indicating their intention to challenge the court’s
    ruling (source: [Bloomberg Law](https://news.bloomberglaw.com/antitrust/ epic-games-v-
    apple-ruling-antitrust-litigation-takeaways)).
    While there is no specific information available about the potential impact of the appeal, it is
    clear that both Apple and Epic Games are actively involved in the legal proceedings and are
    seeking resolution in their favor. Further monitoring of this case and any subsequent court
    decisions or actions would provide more insights into the potential impact of Apple filing a
    notice of appeal in the Epic antitrust case.



The process of the second query from the analyst:

    [Analyst] Has there been any significant market reaction to the news of Apple filing an appeal
    in the Epic Games antitrust case?
    [Assistant] Search_google("Apple filing appeal in Epic Games antitrust case news")
    [Function] Return for your query Apple filing appeal in Epic Games antitrust case news:
     {’top 1 result’: {’url’: ’https://news.bloomberglaw.com/
    antitrust/ epic-games-v- apple-ruling- antitrust-
    litigation-takeaways’, ’title’: ’Epic Games v. Apple Ruling:
    Antitrust Litigation Takeaways’, ’description’: "Oct 6, 2021 --
    The federal judge overseeing the antitrust suit brought by Epic Games
    against Apple mostly sided with the iPhone maker, including ruling
    that Apple’s App\xa0..."}, ’top 2 result’: ... (omitted here)}
    [Assistant] Query_data("FIN:AAPL")
    [Function] Return for your query FIN:AAPL:
    {’current’: 140.3759460449,


                                                   31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  ’history’:
  datetime                        value
  2020-10-28 04:00:00+00:00 109.225708
  2020-11-03 05:00:00+00:00 108.479187
  ... (omitted 46 lines here)
  2021-09-30 04:00:00+00:00 139.881683
  2021-10-06 04:00:00+00:00 140.375946,
  ’information’: ... (omitted here)}
  [Assistant] Based on the search results, there is no direct evidence of any significant market
  reaction to the news of Apple filing an appeal in the Epic Games antitrust case. However, it is
  important to note that market reactions can be complex and influenced by various factors. To
  get a comprehensive understanding of any market reactions, it would be beneficial to analyze
  the stock price of Apple (AAPL) over time and compare it to the timeline of the news and
  events related to the Epic Games antitrust case. Additionally, monitoring the news and expert
  opinions related to Apple’s legal battles and antitrust concerns can provide further insights
  into potential market reactions.


The process of the third query from the analyst:

  [Analyst] Is there any evidence of market reactions to legal proceedings or appeals in similar
  antitrust cases involving large technology companies?
  [Assistant] Query_KB("market reactions to antitrust cases involving large technology compa-
  nies")
  [Function] Return for your query market reactions to antitrust cases involving large technology
  companies:
   {’ids’: [[’1004962’, ’377417’, ’1874968’, ’154887’, ’53772’]],
  ’distances’: [[0.23472154140472412, 0.2480563521385193,
  0.24832972884178162, 0.25399601459503174, 0.2581632435321808]],
  ’documents’: [[’ Microsoft wasstimulated largely by complaints
  from AOL and Netscape, Microsoft’s maincompetitors in Web browser
  technology.\n4.The relationship between concentration and prices
  is debatable. A core tenet\nof antitrust economics is that
  anticompetitive market behavior follows from in-creased concentration
  in an industry. Judge Richard Posner complained, how-ever, that
  there was not enough “empirical guidance from industrialorganization
  economists,”... (omitted here)}
  [Assistant] Query_data("FIN:MSFT")
  [Function] Return for your query FIN:MSFT:
  {’current’: 293.1099853516,
  ’history’:
  datetime                        value
  2020-10-28 04:00:00+00:00 201.221588
  2020-11-03 05:00:00+00:00 204.944611
  ... (omitted 46 lines here)
  2021-09-30 04:00:00+00:00 281.920013
  2021-10-06 04:00:00+00:00 293.109985,
  ’information’: ... (omitted here)}


                                                   32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    [Assistant] Based on the search results, I found information regarding antitrust cases involving
    large technology companies, specifically the case against Microsoft Corporation in 1998. In
    this case, Microsoft was accused of using its significant market share in the personal computer
    operating systems business to prevent competition and maintain a monopoly. The case re-
    sulted in a federal district judge ruling that Microsoft should be broken into two technology
    companies, but this decision was later reversed on appeal by a higher court.
    Unfortunately, I couldn’t find specific market reactions to legal proceedings or appeals in
    similar antitrust cases involving large technology companies in the search results provided.
    It’s possible that more specific information or analysis on market reactions in such cases may
    require further research or analysis.
    Please note that the search results provided are limited and may not encompass all relevant
    information. Further research or analysis may be necessary to gather comprehensive evidence
    on market reactions to legal proceedings or appeals in similar antitrust cases involving large
    technology companies.



I     E XAMPLE OF ACTUATOR
I.1    I NPUT

    This is the analysis report of the latest news, article, etc. from the analyst:
    Context:
    The given news article highlights the impact of the Apple App Store on Apple Inc.’s business
    and profitability. It emphasizes the central role of the App Store in driving Apple’s profits,
    particularly in the gaming sector. The article discusses the App Store’s dominance in the
    gaming economy, revenue generated from games, potential threats to Apple’s position, and
    the increasing scrutiny from lawmakers and regulators.
    Hypothesis:
    The news about the App Store’s impact on Apple’s business will have a positive effect on the
    stock price of Apple Inc. (AAPL).
    Evidence:
    1. The growth of the App Store: The news mentions that the App Store has experienced
    significant growth, reaching 2 million apps by 2018 (Apple Insider). This growth indicates
    the increasing popularity of apps and suggests a positive impact on Apple’s business, which
    could potentially affect the stock price of AAPL.
    2. Significance of the App Store: The article emphasizes the dominant role of the App Store in
    the gaming economy, where Apple takes a 30% cut of sales from thousands of games. It states
    that Apple raked in more profits from games than gaming giants Microsoft, Nintendo, and
    Sony combined (WSJ). This reinforces the importance of the App Store in Apple’s business
    model and implies a potential positive impact on AAPL’s stock price.
    Proof and Intuition:
    Based on the evidence provided, including the growth of the App Store and its significance
    in Apple’s business, it is reasonable to infer that the news about the App Store’s impact will
    likely have a positive effect on the stock price of AAPL. The strong revenue generated from
    games and Apple’s dominance in the gaming economy further support this hypothesis.
    However, it is important to consider that stock prices are influenced by various factors, and
    the relationship between news and stock prices can be complex. Other factors such as overall
    market conditions, financial performance, product launches, and investor sentiment should
    also be considered for a comprehensive analysis.
    Summary:
    The news article highlights the App Store’s crucial role in driving Apple’s profits, particularly
    in the gaming sector. It emphasizes Apple’s dominance, revenue generated from games, and
    the potential threats and challenges facing the company. The growth and significance of the


                                                    33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  App Store suggest a positive impact on Apple’s business and potentially on the stock price of
  AAPL.
  Advice:
  Based on the analysis, it would be prudent for the actuator to consider the positive impact
  of the App Store on Apple’s business and its potential influence on the stock price of AAPL.
  However, it is recommended to conduct further analysis, consider other factors that influence
  stock prices, and monitor market conditions for a holistic understanding of AAPL’s perfor-
  mance.
  Current status of the account:
   {’account’: {’account name’: ’default’, ’cash’: 989900.0,
  ’cash ratio’: 0.99, ’assets value’: 10000.0, ’assets ratio’:
  0.01, ’total value’: 999900.0, ’portfolios’: {’default’:
  {’total’: 10000.0, ’FIN:HCA’: {’symbol’: ’FIN:HCA’, ’name’:
  ’HCA Healthcare Inc. Common Stock’, ’value’: 10000.0, ’price’:
  251.7129516602, ’unrealize’: 0.0, ’base’: 10000.0, ’size’:
  19.863896, ’overnight_total’: 0.0, ’ratio’: 0.01}, ’recent
  transactions’: ... (omitted here)}
  Now, do your judgments, make decisions, and do function callings. Remember to include the
  reasoning steps in your judgments and decision-making process.


I.2   ACTIONS

  [Actuator] Query_icode("Apple stock")
  [Function] Here are the top 3 candidates for the query "Apple stock":
  1. Code: FIN:AAPL (distance 0.22227655351161957)
  This item is the close price time series of a financial instrument including stocks, ETFs, index
  funds, REITs, futures, currencies, indices, or cryptocurrencies, information about this financial
  instrument is listed below:
  - Name: Apple Inc. Common Stock
  ... (omitted here)
  [Actuator] Based on the analysis report and the current status of the account, it is recom-
  mended to hold the current asset, FIN:AAPL (Apple Inc. Common Stock), as the news article
  suggests a positive impact on Apple’s business and potentially on the stock price of AAPL.
  The analysis highlights the growth of the App Store, its significance in Apple’s business, and
  the strong revenue generated from games.
  Considering the current cash ratio of 0.99, it would be wise to allocate some additional cash
  to increase the position in FIN:AAPL. However, we need to ensure that the asset value
  represented by FIN:AAPL does not exceed the risk level we are comfortable with. As per the
  empirical principles mentioned earlier, having the asset value between 5% to 25% of the total
  portfolio is considered a moderate risk.
  You may allocate a portion of the remaining cash to buy more of FIN:AAPL, but be mindful
  of the commission cost and the risk associated with concentrating too much in a single asset.
  It is important to maintain a diversified portfolio to mitigate risk.
  [Actuator] Trade("BUY FIN:AAPL 49900")
  [Function] Succeed. All instructions are executed. After executing the instruction, the current
  status of the account ... (omitted here)
  [Actuator] Given the current status of the account and the recent purchase of additional shares
  of FIN:AAPL, it is recommended to continue monitoring market conditions and news related
  to Apple Inc. and the App Store for any potential changes that may affect the stock price of
  AAPL.
  [Actuator] Query_icode("Google search trends for ’iPhone’")


                                                 34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  [Function] Here are the top 3 candidates for the query "Google search trends for ’iPhone’":
  1. Code: WEB:SWTUI (distance 0.23514001071453094)
  This item is a Google trend time series that reveals the popularity of a keyword in internet
  search, information about this keyword is listed below:
  - Keyword: Swiftui
  - Description: Toolset for building user interfaces for Apple platforms. It simplifies the coding
  process and provides a side-by-side preview.
  - Category: Software, Technology, Design
  - Related topics: Server Side Tracking, User Interface Design, User Engagement, User Inter-
  views
  ... (omitted here)
  [Actuator] Based on the information provided, the top candidates for the query "Google search
  trends for ’iPhone’" are not directly related to the Apple Inc.’s iPhone product. The search
  trends are focused on other keywords such as "SwiftUI," "Mobile Developer," and "Mobile
  Revenue." These keywords may not provide direct insights into the popularity or demand for
  the iPhone.
  Considering the current status of the account and the information available, it is recommended
  to wait for more relevant information or opportunities before making any further decisions
  regarding asset purchases or sales.


                                                 35
