Investigating the effective dimensionality of a model
using a thermodynamic learning capacity
       Anonymous authors
       Paper under double-blind review



                                               Abstract
         We use a formal correspondence between thermodynamics and inference, where the
         number of samples can be thought of as the inverse temperature, to study a quantity
         called “learning capacity” which is a measure of the effective dimensionality of
         a model. We show that the learning capacity is a useful notion of the complexity
         because (a) it is a tiny fraction of the number of parameters for many deep networks
         trained on typical datasets and correlates well with the test loss, (b) it depends
         upon the number of samples used for training, (c) it is numerically consistent with
         notions of capacity obtained from PAC-Bayes generalization bounds, and (d) the
         test loss as a function of the learning capacity does not exhibit double descent. We
         show that the learning capacity saturates at very small and very large sample sizes;
         the threshold that characterizes the transition between these two regimes provides
         guidelines as to when one should procure more data and when one should search for
         a different architecture to improve performance. We show how the learning capacity
         can be used to provide a quantitative notion of capacity even for non-parametric
         models such as random forests and nearest neighbor classifiers.


1   Introduction
Deep networks often have many more parameters than the number of training data. Classical results
in statistical learning theory suggest that such models can overfit, i.e., they can make inaccurate
predictions on data outside the training set. In practice, these networks seem to defy this accepted
statistical wisdom and work extremely well across a large class of problems. In fact, the test error for
typical networks often improves as models with more and more parameters are fitted upon the same
dataset. Resolving this paradox is one of the biggest open questions in theoretical analysis of deep
learning today. §4 discusses various techniques that have been used to understand this phenomenon.
       The existing body of work on this problem has found that the number of parameters is often
a poor indicator of the complexity of functions that can be learned by this model on typical data,
and thereby the test loss. There are a number of alternative quantities that have been proposed to
rectify this, e.g., improved estimates of VC-dimension, different kinds of norms that more accurately
count the actual number of parameters that make predictions (Fisher norm, spectral norm, path
norm), quantities that characterize the sensitivity of the loss to perturbations of the trained weights
(sharpness-based metrics, PAC-Bayes bounds), quantities that characterize the sensitivity of the
solution to perturbations of the training data (stability-based bounds), etc. Jiang et al. (2019) argue that
PAC-Bayes bounds most accurately reflect the test performance of typical deep networks compared to
other quantities.
       In this paper, we offer a different perspective of PAC-Bayes generalization bounds, and using
this perspective we develop techniques to calculate a kind of “learning capacity” (akin to heat capacity
in thermodynamics). The contributions of this work are as follows.
       We develop a Monte Carlo-based procedure to calculate the learning capacity of machine
learning models ranging from deep networks with different architectures (fully-connected, convolu-
tional, residual, RNNs and LSTMs) fitted on image classification and text prediction tasks for multiple
datasets, to non-parametric models such as random forests and k-nearest neighbor classifiers fitted to
tabular data. We show that in almost all these cases, the learning capacity correlates well with the test
loss, e.g., for the same sample size, models with a smaller learning capacity has a better test loss.
This suggests that the learning capacity can be used faithfully used as a model selection criterion.
       We show that the test loss when plotted against the learning capacity does not exhibit
double descent. The test loss monotonically increases with the learning capacity for small sample
sizes. For many deep networks, the learning capacity is a tiny fraction (∼ 2%) of the total number of
weights.


                                                     1
      We develop a connection between the learning capacity and PAC-Bayes generalization
bounds. We show that the learning capacity is mathematically close to a notion of effective
dimensionality gleaned from PAC-Bayes theory, and also corroborate this via experiments. This
makes the analogy from thermodynamics rigorous and relevant to statistical learning theory. Using
singular learning theory, we also discuss the relationship of learning capacity to quantities that
characterize model complexity for probabilistic models with symmetries in the parameter space
in Appendix C.
      We show a “freezing” phenomenon in machine learning. The learning capacity saturates for
very small (equivalent to high temperature) and very large (equivalent to low temperature) sample
sizes N . Models with different architectures and number of weights trained on the same dataset have
the same learning capacity for small N —one should procure more data to improve the test loss in this
regime. For large N , our formulae indicate a regime of diminishing returns where the test loss is
proportional to N −1 (this has also been noticed in the literature on scaling laws). In this regime, one
should search for different architectures to improve the test loss—we show that in this regime, fixed
the value of N , smaller the learning capacity, the better the test loss.


2    Methods
Consider a dataset D = {(xi , yi )}N              d
                                   i=1 where x ∈ R denotes the input and y ∈ {1, . . . , m} denotes the
ground-truth label for m different categories. The probabilistic model of the labels given the input is
denoted by pw (y | x) where w ∈ Rd are the weights, or parameters. For every weight configuration w,
we can assign an energy
                                                       N
                                                  1 X
                                     Ĥ(w) = −        log pw (yi | xi ),                                    (1)
                                                  N
                                                       i=1
which is the negative log-likelihood of the training dataset given the weights w, e.g., the cross-entropy
loss for classification. If φ(w) denotes a prior distribution on the weight space, then the marginal
likelihood, also known as the partition function in physics or the evidence in statistics, is
                                                 Z
                                       Z(N ) =        dw φ(w)e−N Ĥ(w) .                                    (2)

This is the normalizing constant of a probability distribution ∝ φ(w)e−N Ĥ(w) ; under this distribution
weight configurations that have a small energy Ĥ(w), i.e., a small cross-entropy loss, are more likely.
LaMont & Wiggins (2019) noticed that the partition function above resembles the partition function
for a constant temperature ensemble in statistical physics
                                                  Z
                                        Z(T ) =       ds e−E(s)/(kB T )
where the probability of finding the system at a state s is given by the Boltzmann distribution
ρ(s) ∝ exp (−E(s)/(kB T )); with kB being the Boltzmann constant, T the temperature and E(s) the
energy of a state s. The normalizing factor of this distribution is Z(T ). This suggests that we can
think of the inverse temperature in statistical physics (assuming that we work in natural units with
kB = 1) as the number of samples:
                                            β = T −1 ≡ N.                                            (3)
At a small sample size N , many weight configurations under the prior φ(w) (i.e., many models in the
hypothesis class) are consistent with the training data; this is similar to how at high temperatures
many states s are likely under the Boltzmann distribution. As the number of samples N → ∞, fewer
and fewer weight configurations can fit the training data; this is similar to how a physical system
reaches the ground state with minimal energy mins E(s) as the temperature goes to zero∗.
      In thermodynamics, the partition function contains all the information about the system; many
quantities of interest can beRwritten down in terms of the partition function. For example,
                                                                                    R       the average
energy in physics is U = ds ρ(s)E(s) = −∂β log Z(β), the entropy is S = − ds ρ(s) log ρ(s) =
βU + log Z(β) and the heat capacity is C = −β 2 ∂U/∂β is the rate at which average energy changes
with temperature β −1 . The correspondence between inverse temperature β and number of samples N


    ∗We should emphasize that (3) is just a pattern matching exercise between elementary concepts in statistical
inference and thermodynamics, both of which have been studied for more than a century. The factor of N in the
exponent of (2) is an algebraic manipulation of the average over the data points in (1). This analogy is neither
new nor unique; see Appendix A.


                                                        2
allows us to interpret these quantities in the context of machine learning:
                                                         .
                               Average Energy: U (N ) = −∂N log Z(N )
                                                             .
                              Learning Capacity: C(N ) = −N 2 ∂N U                                         (4)
                                                             = N 2 ∂N
                                                                    2
                                                                      log Z(N ).
The average energy U is the average loss of weight configurations sampled from the Boltzmann
distribution φ(w)e−N Ĥ(w) while the quantity C which we can define to be “learning capacity” is the
rate at which the average energy increases with temperature N −1 . It will help to bear in mind for
now that average energy ≡ test loss and learning capacity ≡ effective dimensionality. We will make
this correspondence rigorous. Roughly speaking, just like the heat capacity in thermodynamics is
the amount of heat required to produce a unit change in the temperature, the learning capacity of a
statistical model is proportional to the rate of drop in the test loss as more and more samples (from the
same probability distribution, with standard assumptions of independence) are added to the training
dataset.
       It will be useful to explain why we would like to think of the learning capacity as a measure of the ef-
fective dimensionality of a model. Suppose we have a convex energy Ĥ(w) = 1/2 ⟨w − w∗ , A(w − w∗ )⟩
with A ∈ Rp×p .
         • If the Hessian A ≻ 0, for any proper uniform prior, the learning capacity C equals half the
           number of parameters p/2.
         • If A ⪰ 0 with Rrank(A) = K , then so long we have a proper Boltzmann distribution on the
           weights, e.g., dw φ(w)1{Aw = 0} < ∞, the learning capacity C equals half the effective
           number of parameters K/2. This suggests that the learning capacity could be effective in
           discounting the symmetries in neural architectures because it ignores the combinations of
           parameters that lie in the null space of the Hessian.
         • If the eigenvalues of the Hessian are λi (A) and we have a Gaussian prior φ(w) = N(w∗ , ϵ−1 I),
           then the learning capacity is
                                                     p
                                              C = − ϵ HM−1 (λi (A))                                        (5)
                                                     2
         where HM(λi (A)) is the harmonic mean of the eigenvalues of A ∗. For example, if eigenvalues
         λi (A) = 1/i, then HM−1 (λi (A)) ≈ −N −1 log(λmax /λmin ). If the eigenvalues of A are small
         (large HM−1 ) or if the condition number of Hessian A is large then the learning capacity
         can be much smaller than total number of parameters—in both cases, there exist directions
         in the weight space such that perturbations along them do not affect the loss much.
     In the coming sections, we will make such statements more precise and connect the concept of
learning capacity to PAC-Bayes theory.

2.1   Estimating the average energy U and learning capacity C
The Bayesian predictive log-likelihood of a new datum x is†
                                dw pw (y | x)φ(w)e−N Ĥ(w)
                                R
        log p(y | x, D) = log                               = log Z(N + 1) − log Z(N ) ≈ −U,        (6)
                                     dw φ(w)e−N Ĥ(w)
                                   R

where in the first step we sent the likelihood of the new datum pw (y | x) into the exponent. The final
approximation is reasonable because unlike statistical physics where the inverse temperature is a
scalar, our inverse temperature N takes integer values. This shows that the average test likelihood of a
datum (up to a constant that is the entropy of the true labels) is
                       −    E       [log p(y | x, D)] ≈ U = log Z(N + 1) − log Z(N );                      (7)
                           x,y∼P
where f = Ex,y∼P [f (x, y)] for any function f . This is an important identity: the rate of increase of
the log-partition function with respect to the number of samples N in the training dataset D is equal
to the average test negative log-likelihood. The leave-one-out cross-validation estimator (LOOCV)
allows us to estimate the average over the probability distribution P , i.e.,
                                                                         N
          U = −∂N log Z(N ) ≈ log Z(N − 1) − log Z(N ) = −N −1                 log p(yi | xi , D(−i) ),
                                                                         X
                                                                                                           (8)
                                                                         i=1


    ∗This calculation uses a perturbation approximation of the eigenvalues: λi (A + ϵI/N ) ≈ λi (A) + ϵ/N .
    †We introduce the setup for classification problems but these expressions can also be written down
for regression: if targets yi ∈ R and if fw (x) is the prediction on the input x, we use log pw (y | x) =
             2
− (y−f2σ
       w (x))
         2     + constant, for some non-zero standard-deviation σ to calculate the energy in (1).


                                                         3
where D(−i) denotes a training dataset of (N − 1) samples with the ith sample removed. Given an
estimate for the average energy U (N ) for different values of N , we will estimate the learning capacity
C by taking its derivative.
     Estimating the test loss using the LOOCV estimator will require us to fit N different models to
calculate each of the terms in the summation above. In practice, we do so for large datasets and large
models using the k-fold cross-validation.

2.2   Numerical estimates of the average energy and learning capacity using Monte Carlo
For each model class and dataset, e.g., different deep
networks, random forests and different datasets, we
perform the following steps to first estimate the av-
erage energy (averaged over multiple sample sets)
U (N ). For each value of N , sub-sample n different
            (i)
datasets DN     ⊆ D for i ∈ {1, . . . , n} with replacement
(i.e., bootstrapped versions of the datasets), each with
                                                            (i)
N samples. Create k-folds within each dataset DN                         (a)                 (b)
                                                     (i)
and for each fold. Let the j th fold be ξ (j) ⊂ DN       ; this
has (1 − 1/k)N samples in the training set and N/k
samples in the test set. For each fold, train m models,
say denoted by parameters w(l) ; l ∈ {1, . . . , m} from
different initializations (random seeds in practice) and
calculate
                     n    k                    m
              1 XX                  X          X
                                                                       (c)                   (d)
U (N ) = −                                   log pw(l) (y | x)
             nmN
                    i=1 j=1 (x,y)∈ξ (j) ⊂D (i) l=1         Figure 1: (a,c) show the average energy (U (N ))
                                          N
                                                   (9) for one-hidden-layer fully-connected network with
For all experiments, we set the the number of boot- 100 neurons and LeNet on MNIST (binary clas-
                                                           sification) and the ALLCNN and Wide-ResNet
strapped datasets n = 4, the number of folds k = 5, on CIFAR-10 (10-class classification in this case).
and the number of different models trained on each (b,d) shows the learning capacity (C(N )) estimated
fold m = 5. For each value of N (we roughly use 15 by fitting a seventh-order polynomial to U with
values; close by at small sample sizes and far apart constraints on it being monotonically decreasing
for large sample sizes), this amounts to training 100 and a constraint on C increasing monotonically.
models to estimate U .
      Given these estimates of the average energy, we could now calculate C = −N 2 ∂N U but it
is difficult to do so because the noise in the estimation of U gets amplified when we take the
finite-difference derivative. In preliminary experiments, we used a polynomial model to fit U (N )
(with the constraint that it decreases monotonically with N since it is the test loss) and calculated the
analytical derivative of this polynomial to obtain C(N ); this procedure also gives an estimate of the
uncertainty on both U and C . This works reasonably well (Fig. 1).
      But we also noticed that the learning capacity C(N ) typically looks like a sigmoid, i.e., it
saturates at both very small and very large sample sizes with a sharp rise at some intermediate value.
We therefore fit a sigmoid
                                                       a
                                   C(N ) =                                                       (10)
                                                     1 + exp(−c log N + b)
with coefficients a, b, c and the independent variable N . One may think of the coefficient a as the
maximal learning capacity of the model with N → ∞. We analytically integrate this expression to get
            RN
U (N ) = − 1 dk k−2 C(k) in terms of the unknown coefficients. We fit this expression to the data
using the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm and obtained accurate fits with small uncertainties. Using
the sigmoid circumvents the need to choose sensitive hyper-parameters such as the degree of the
polynomial. We found that both polynomial regression and this sigmoid-based technique give similar
estimates of the learning capacity for all the experiments in this paper. We have also developed an
alternative way to estimate U and C using Markov chain Monte Carlo in Appendix B which obtains
comparable results.

2.3   Interpreting the learning capacity in the PAC-Bayesian framework
The PAC-Bayesian framework (Langford & Seeger, 2001; McAllester, 1999) estimates the population
error of a randomized hypothesis with a distribution Q using its empirical error and its KL-divergence
with respect to some prior φ. For any δ > 0, with probability at least 1 − δ over draws of the samples


                                                          4
in the training dataset, we have
                                                               KL(Q, φ)
                                          e(Q) ≤ ê(Q) +                                                   (11)
                                                                    N
where e(Q) is the average population error of hypotheses sampled from Q and ê(Q) is the analogously
defined training error. We have purposely used a loose version of the bound (the usual one has
a square root on the complexity term) because we will need it soon. PAC-Bayes theory has been
fruitfully used to calculate non-vacuous generalization bounds, even for deep networks (Dziugaite
& Roy, 2017; Wu et al., 2021). Jiang et al. (2019) have also argued that PAC-Bayes generalization
bounds correlate better with test error for deep networks than other quantities used to understand
generalization.
      For a Gaussian prior φ = N(w0 , ϵ−1 I) (which is a user-chosen parameter) and a Gaussian
posterior Q = N(w, Σq ) centered at a fixed weight configuration w (usually taken to be the weights
obtained at the end of the training process), Yang et al. (2022b) calculated the above version of the
PAC-Bayes bound analytically:
                                Pp(N,ϵ)
                                   i=1    log (2(N − 1)λi + ϵ) + 2/κ + ϵ∥w − w0 ∥22
                       e(Q) ≤                                                                              (12)
                                                     4(N − 1)
where κ is the largest constant such that the ratio of the eigenvalues (sorted by magnitude) of the
Hessian of the loss at w satisfies log λi /λr = −κ(i − r) beyond a threshold number of dimensions
                                               p
                                             . X                           ϵ
                                 r = p(N, ϵ) =   1 |λi | ≥                         .                       (13)
                                                                        2(N − 1)
                                                 i=1
In other words, if the eigenvalues of the Hessian at w decay quickly (large κ) after p(N, ϵ) dimensions,
then the PAC-Bayes bound is small. They also showed that the analytical expression in (12) is a
non-vacuous bound for fully-connected and LeNet architectures on MNIST. Effectively, the PAC-Bayes
posterior spreads its probability mass away from w in a subspace spanned by the small eigenvectors
of the Hessian—only p(N, ϵ) combinations of weights are strongly constrained by the training data.
The bound in (12) can be shown to be equal to
                                                     p
                                     O(p(N, ϵ)/N + p(N, ϵ)/N ).                                     (14)
And therefore, they proposed p(N, ϵ) as the “effective dimensionality” of a model.
R     For general non-Gaussian priors and posterior distributions, we can substitute e(Q) =
  dw Q(w)Ĥ(w) in (11) and simplify to get
                                  KL(Q, φ)          KL(Q, p(w | D)) log Z(N )
                      min ê(Q) +              = min                             −                ,
                        Q                N          Q               N                  N
where Z(N ) = dw φ(w)e−N Ĥ(w) like we have defined in (6) and the minimum is achieved when
                 R

Q = p(w | D). Therefore the looser version of the PAC-Bayes bound above is effectively calculating
(after taking a second order Taylor series approximation of the energy Ĥ(w), and using a perturbation
approximation of the eigenvalues of the posterior covariance)
                                                                                                      2
                                                                                 ϵ∥w∗ − w0 ∥
                                                P
                       log Z(N )   p log N          i log λi               ϵ
                                                                   X
                     −           ≈         +                   +               +
                           N          2N            2N                   2N λi        N
                                                                    i
                                               −1                                             2
                                                                                ϵ∥w∗ − w0 ∥
                                                               P
                                   p + ϵ HM (λi )               i log λi                                   (15)
                                 =                  +                       +
                                          2N                       2N                N
                                                     2
                                   C     ϵ∥w∗ − w0 ∥
                                 =    +                ,           from (5),
                        P          N          N
                                                                                       2   ∗
for ϵ = −2HM(λi )        i log λi where we have used the short-form λi ≡ λi (∇ Ĥ(w )) for the
eigenvalues of the Hessian of the loss at w ∗. In other words, the coefficient in the PAC-Bayes bound
                                            ∗

in front of 1/N is equal to the learning capacity C = −N 2 ∂N U up to a constant is proportional to
the distance of the solution from initialization. Our techniques to estimate the learning capacity are
computationally inexpensive ways to calculate PAC-Bayes bounds.

3    Results
We conducted a comprehensive investigation using a diverse range of models. These models include
traditional models (random forests and k-nearest neighbor classifiers) and different deep learning ar-

    ∗It may not seem appropriate to select a value of ϵ using the eigenvalues of the Hessian of the loss, but we
can imagine (like it is done for data-distribution depending PAC-Bayes calculations) that these eigenvalues are
estimated using some held-out samples.


                                                        5
 Architecture      Dataset      Test Accuracy     Test Loss    Weights (p)         Learning     C(N )/p   Kendall’s τ
                                          (%)       (U (N ))                 Capacity (C(N ))      (%)     coefficient
   FC-1-100                         97.6 ± 0.1   0.09 ± 0.01       78,902          609 ± 560        0.8
                   MNIST                                                                                         0.40
    LeNet                           98.9 ± 0.1   0.04 ± 0.01       43,746           231± 204        0.5
   ALLCNN                           88.9 ± 0.3   0.53 ± 0.02      262,238        4571 ± 1700        1.7
                  CIFAR-10                                                                                       0.22
  Wide-ResNet                       93.7 ± 0.1   0.43 ± 0.02      298,542        5805 ± 1145        1.9
     RNN                                     -   5.53 ± 0.02   13,480,817        5777 ± 1151       0.04
                 WikiText-2                                                                                     -0.03
    LSTM                                     -   4.86 ± 0.01   13,962,014       14762 ± 2345        0.1
                Synthetic (κ)
                    0.1             93.7 ± 0.2   0.20 ± 0.01                      1117 ± 221        1.4          0.15
                     1              93.9 ± 0.2   0.19 ± 0.01                       870 ± 338        1.1         -0.00
   FC-1-100                                                        78,902
                    10              98.1 ± 0.3   0.05 ± 0.00                        112 ± 39        0.1          0.10
                    20              98.8 ± 0.3   0.05 ± 0.00                         70 ± 19        0.1          0.09
Table 1: The learning capacity C(N ) is a tiny fraction of the total number of weights in the network for a wide
variety of architectures on different datasets N = 2M for WikiText-2 and N = 50K for all others. We evaluated
the utility of using the learning capacity as a model selection criterion by calculating Kendall’s τ coefficient
across different models at a fixed sample size N (the rightmost column reports the average over N ). For all
architectures on MNIST and CIFAR-10, learning capacity correlates well with the test loss; correlation is poor
for WikiText-2. We also calculated an “intra-architecture” Kendall’s τ coefficient (not shown in the table) where
for each dataset, we check the correlation of C and U over the bootstrapped datasets, different sample sizes, and
different architectures. This coefficient is more negative than -0.79 for all architectures which indicates that
the learning capacity is insensitive to these hyper-parameters (it is negative because if the architecture is held
fixed, higher the capacity smaller the test loss). Another pattern to note here is that larger the difficulty of the
dataset, larger the learning capacity (e.g., CIFAR-10 vs. MNIST, synthetic datasets with a small κ are harder).
See Appendix D for details.
chitectures (multi-layer perceptrons, convolutional networks including LeNet, AllCNN (Springenberg
et al., 2015), residual and wide-residual networks, recurrent models and LSTMs). These models are
trained under various settings using datasets such as MNIST, CIFAR-10, WikiText-2, multiple tabular
datasets and synthetic datasets. Appendix D gives more details∗.

3.1   Learning capacity for deep networks
Table 1 and Fig. 2 show the learning capacity for different deep learning architectures trained on
various datasets and a comparison with the number of weights in each architecture. In all cases, the
learning capacity C at the maximum sample size is a tiny fraction of the number of weights.
This observation is consistent many results in deep learning, e.g., pruning (Molchanov et al., 2019),
lottery ticket hypothesis (Frankle & Carbin, 2019), distillation (Hinton et al., 2015), and also with
many results in physics and systems biology (Transtrum et al., 2011). This shows that a surprisingly
few degrees of freedom are constrained by the data in these models even for large sample sizes.
      The networks in Fig. 2 exhibit a freezing phenomenon where the learning capacity saturates
at large and small sample sizes (except AllCNN and LSTM at large N ). Different architectures
have the same capacity at small sample sizes; this suggests that when the amount of information
in the training dataset is small, a small fraction of the degrees of freedom is constrained. Different
architectures have different capacities at large N for the same dataset. But fixed a sample size, even
across different architectures smaller the capacity the better the test loss (see Table 1, this trend
does not hold for WikiText-2). And therefore, we can fruitfully use the learning capacity for model
selection among different models trained on the same dataset. From the expressions in (4), we can
see that U decreases as ≈ 1/N if C is a constant. This suggests that we should search for different
architectures in the saturation regime when there are diminishing returns from increasing N if the
sample size is already large.
      We studied the test loss and learning capacity for fully-connected student networks fitted on
synthetic datasets of varying degrees of complexity labeled by a fixed random teacher in Fig. 2c.
Inputs of these datasets are sampled from a Gaussian with zero mean and a covariance matrix whose
eigenvalues decay exponentially with different slopes; larger the slope, smaller the effective rank of
the dataset and more (effectively) low-dimensional the true model. In Table 1, the learning capacity

    ∗These experiments required a lot of Monte Carlo and Markov Chain Monte Carlo runs. We present data
from about 35,000 networks of varying sizes and complexities, about 10,000 random forest and k-NN-based
classifiers were trained across multiple datasets. We also optimized a data-distribution dependent PAC-Bayes
bound using the approach of Dziugaite & Roy (2018); Yang et al. (2022b) and calculated the eigenvalues of the
Hessian for 2,800 models, both of which are very expensive computationally.


                                                          6
                2.0
                                                 FC1 (h=10)                                        1500                                                                 6                               ALLCNN                                                    7000    ALLCNN
                                                                                                          FC1 (h=10)                                                                                    Wide-ResNet
                                                 FC1 (h=50)                                               FC1 (h=50)                                                                                                                                              6000    Wide-ResNet
                1.5                              FC1 (h=100)                                       1250                                                                 5


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Learning Capacity (C)
                                                                           Learning Capacity (C)
                                                                                                          FC1 (h=100)                                                                                                                                             5000
                                                 LeNet


                                                                                                                                                        Test Loss (U)
Test Loss (U)
                                                                                                   1000   LeNet                                                         4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4000
                1.0                                                                                 750                                                                 3                                                                                         3000
                                                                                                    500                                                                 2                                                                                         2000
                0.5
                                                                                                    250                                                                                                                                                           1000
                                                                                                                                                                        1
                0.0                                                                                   0                                                                                                                                                              0
                               3                      4                                                             3                      4                                            3                   4                                                                     3                    4
                       10                        10                                                          10                       10                                           10                  10                                                                    10                   10
                               # samples (N)                                                                        # samples (N)                                                       # samples (N)                                                                             # samples (N)

                                                          (a) MNIST                                                                                                                                               (b) CIFAR-10
                                                                                             1400
                1.2                                       =0.1                                            =0.1                                                                                                                                                    17500
                                                                                             1200                                                                                                           LSTM                                                          LSTM
                                                          =1                                              =1                                                            6.5                                 RNN-TANH                                              15000   RNN-TANH
                1.0

                                                                     Learning Capacity (C)
                                                          =10                                             =10


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Learning Capacity (C)
                                                                                             1000
                                                          =20                                             =20                                                                                                                                                     12500
Test Loss (U)


                0.8


                                                                                                                                                        Test Loss (U)
                                                                                                   800                                                                  6.0                                                                                       10000
                0.6                                                                                600
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   7500
                0.4                                                                                400                                                                  5.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5000
                                                                                                   200
                0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2500
                                                                                                     0                                                                  5.0
                0.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                           3                 4                   5                                              3                 4                 5                                                                                                                                 3                    4
                      10                10                  10                                             10                10                10                             0   10000        20000   30000                 40000                                            10                      10
                               # samples (N)                                                                        # samples (N)                                                           # samples (N)                                                                             # samples (N)

                                                      (c) Synthetic data                                                                                                                                        (d) WikiText-2

Figure 2: Average energy U (N ) and learning capacity C(N ) for different architectures, datasets and input
modalities. Table 1 shows the rightmost point on these plots. The average energy decreases monotonically as a
function of the number of samples N in the training dataset. The learning capacity, which indicates the number
of constrained degrees of freedom in a model, increases with the number of training samples N . Architectures
with a smaller learning capacity have a smaller test loss. Different architectures trained on the same dataset
have different learning capacity. The learning capacity exhibits freezing at both very small and very large N for
many of these models. For synthetic data experiments in (c), the learning capacity of models with the same
architecture is smaller if the task is easier (large values of κ).
accurately reflects the difficulty of the task; the same architecture when trained on an easier task has
a smaller learning capacity. This trend is perfectly consistent with the experimental results using
PAC-Bayes generalization bounds on similar datasets by Yang et al. (2022b) who also find that simpler
the task, smaller the effective dimensionality p(N, ϵ) in (13) and that the same architecture uses more
degrees of freedom to make predictions on difficult tasks.
      Susceptibilities in thermodynamics (e.g., heat capacity or bulk modulus) quantify the changes
in an extensive property (e.g., the average energy) under variations of an intensive property (e.g,.
the temperature) and are very useful to systematically characterize materials. Our results show that
some architectures are better suited to some datasets than others, e.g., even if the wide residual
network is both bigger and regarded to be “better” than AllCNN, the latter may be better suited for
some problems in terms of how quickly the test loss decreases with the number of samples. While the
test loss/error of all the models on MNIST is quite similar at large sample sizes, the convolutional
network is using very few degrees of freedom to make accurate predictions.
3.2 Test loss as a function of the learning capacity does not exhibit double descent
Fig. 4 shows the test loss as a function of the learning capacity for    1200
                                                                                  FC1 (h=100)
a large variety of networks (fully-connected networks with number        1000     FC1 (h=100) (PAC-bayes)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Effective dimension (C)


                                                                                  LeNet
of hidden neurons ranging from 10 to 100 trained on MNIST using           800     LeNet (PAC-bayes)
samples ranging from N = 200 to N = 50, 000 each shown in a
                                                                          600
different color) and contrasts this with the double descent curve
for N = 50, 000. In all cases, the slope of a regression fitted to        400

the test loss (equivalent to average energy U ) as a function of the      200
learning capacity C is positive (except for N = 50, 000 where the           0
                                                                                           3               4
p-value for the slope being non-zero is not significant). This is a                     10              10
                                                                                          # samples (N)
strong validation of the fact that learning capacity can adequately
measure the complexity of a learned model. Indeed a good metric Figure 3: Learning capacity C
                                                                       (solid lines) is numerically con-
of complexity should be strongly correlated with the test loss. This sistent with the effective dimen-
is a reassurance that even in deep learning, we should select sionality obtained from a PAC-
models with a smaller complexity to obtain a small test loss— Bayes bound in (13) (dotted lines).
not necessarily a small number of weights but a small learning Kendall rank correlation between
capacity.                                                              the learning capacity and the PAC-
      The curve of test loss versus learning capacity is monotonic, as Bayes effective dimensionality is
opposed to a U-shaped curve in the bias-variance tradeoff. We expect 0.99 (p = 4E-9) for the fully con-
from statistical physics calculations (LaMont & Wiggins, 2019) that nected network and 0.2 (p = 0.37)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    for LeNet.

                                                                                                                                                        7
                                                                       2.0                                            45                                                        20

                0.14                                                                                                  40
                                                                       1.5                                                                                                      15


                                                                                                                                                                Test Loss (U)
                                                       Test Loss (U)
Test Loss (U)   0.12                                                                                                  35


                                                                                                         Test Error
                                                                       1.0                                                                                                      10
                                                                                                                      30
                0.10
                                                                       0.5                                            25                                                         5
                0.08
                                                                                                                      20
                                                                       0.0                                                                                                       0
                        25000   50000   75000 100000                         0             10
                                                                                                3
                                                                                                                           0       20         40           60                        0               10
                                                                                                                                                                                                          4
                                  # weights                                      Learning Capacity (C)                         ResNet 18 width parameter                                 Learning Capacity (C)

                                              (a) FCNs on MNIST                                                                               (b) ResNet18s on CIFAR10
Figure 4: (a) Left: double descent phenomenon for the test loss as a function of the number of weights for one
and two-layer fully-connected networks with different numbers of hidden neurons (10–100) trained on MNIST
with sample size N = 50,000. (a) Right: double descent phenomenon for ResNet18 with different width (1-64)
trained on CIFAR10 with sample size N = 50,000 and with noise rate 0.2. (b): when plotted against the learning
capacity the test loss does not exhibit double descent. Colors indicate different values of N (blue: 200, orange:
1000, green: 2000, red: 4000, purple: 10000, and brown: 50,000). Slope of all regressions is non-zero and
positive (p < 0.005) except the brown curve for which the p-value is not significant.
the test loss (average energy) should be monotonic in the learning capacity (heat capacity) so this is
not surprising per se. But it does seem unusual that even with our new way of measuring the capacity,
we still do not obtain the classical U-shaped curve. We believe this is because the learning capacity
estimates the capacity not of the entire model class, but a subset thereof—-we suspect that this is the
set of models that are reachable using stochastic optimization on samples from the training dataset.
Mao et al. (2022) have argued that the set of such reachable models is a very small fraction of the set
of all models. Effectively, our Monte Carlo based procedure to calculate learning capacity is only
integrating the log-partition function within this small set.


3.3                    Comparing learning capacity with PAC-Bayes-based effective dimensionality
We compute the effective dimensionality in (13) using eigenvalues of the Hessian of trained network
computed using a Kronecker-decomposition of the block-diagonal Hessian using Backpack (Dangel
et al., 2020). We then optimize the posterior of the (square root version) PAC-Bayes bound numerically
to compute the best scale ϵ for the prior φ = N(w0 , ϵ−1 I). See Dziugaite & Roy (2017) for details.
As Fig. 3 shows, our estimates for learning capacity are of the same order as the effective
dimensionality estimated from PAC-Bayes theory—and both are much smaller than the number of
weights in the network. This lends credence to our definition of the learning capacity.
       The learning capacity and the PAC-Bayes-based estimate of the effective dimensionality were
calculated in very different ways, e.g., the former trained models independently on different folds
of data whereas the latter optimized the posterior Q centered at a trained network; the former did
not optimize the prior from which weights were sampled while beginning training and the latter
explicitly optimized the prior to get a tighter bound, etc. The fact that the two quantities are consistent
with each other therefore also validates our procedure to compute the learning capacity. Optimizing
PAC-Bayes bounds numerically is very challenging technically and computationally. It has been
difficult to obtain non-vacuous bounds on datasets more complicated than MNIST. In contrast, the
learning capacity is much more straight-forward to compute.


3.4                    Learning capacity for non-parametric models
Our technique used to estimate the learning capacity is general and does not require explicit
representation of the parameters of the model. On three tabular datasets, Table 1 and Fig. 5 shows the
estimates of the learning capacity for non-parametric models such as k-nearest neighbor classifiers
and random forests. These estimates correlate well with the test loss. We observe freezing at small
sample sizes where the learning capacity is the same for all datasets but do not see freezing at large
sample sizes. For random forests, we can easily have situations when the number of leaves is as large
as 107 . The VC-dimension of a decision tree is proportional to the number of leaves (Leboeuf et al.,
2020), so such models are also highly over-parameterized when they are fitted on fewer samples
than the number of leaves. As we show in Fig. S.2, the learning capacity is typically much smaller
than the number of leaves irrespective of the dataset—by about 3 orders of magnitude. This is a
remarkable finding because models such as random forests and k-NNs do not have a well-defined
objective that is optimized; due to this the PAC-Bayes-based estimation of the effective dimensionality
or the log-canonical threshold cannot be defined for these models.


                                                                                                         8
                0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                            3500
                                                                                        20000                                                         0.9
                                                                                                Miniboone                                                                                                                             Miniboone
                0.7                                                                             Higgs                                                                                                                          3000   Higgs
                                                                                                                                                      0.8
                                                                                                NumerAI


                                                                Learning capacity (C)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NumerAI


                                                                                                                                                                                                       Learning Capacity (C)
                0.6                                                                     15000                                                                                                                                  2500
                                                                                                                                                      0.7
Test Loss (U)


                                                                                                                                      Test Loss (U)
                0.5                  Miniboone                                                                                                                                         Miniboone                               2000
                                     Higgs                                              10000                                                         0.6                              Higgs
                0.4                  NumerAI                                                                                                                                           NumerAI                                 1500
                                                                                                                                                      0.5
                0.3                                                                                                                                                                                                            1000
                                                                                         5000                                                         0.4
                0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                             500
                                                                                                                                                      0.3                                                                         0
                0.1                                                                         0
                             3                 4            5                                          3                 4        5                              3                 4               5                                          3                 4        5
                        10                10           10                                         10                10       10                             10                10              10                                         10                10       10
                                 # samples (N)                                                             # samples (N)                                             # samples (N)                                                                # samples (N)

                                                   (a) Random forest                                                                                                      (b) k-nearest neighbor classifier

Figure 5: Average energy U (N ) and learning capacity C(N ) for three tabular learning problems using random
forests and k-nearest neighbor classifiers. In both cases, the Miniboone dataset has the best test loss and both
models exhibit a lower learning capacity for this dataset (for the k-NN there is a large uncertainty in the estimate
in this case). As the random forest learns the Numerai dataset, its capacity (which is reflective of the number of
constrained degrees of freedom) increases sharply; in contrast the k-NN does not have a good test loss on this
dataset and its capacity is much smaller.
4                     Discussion and Related Work
Learning theory Although there is extensive work on model selection in both information theory,
e.g., (Rissanen, 1978) and machine learning (Friedman et al., 2001), performing effective model
selection for deep networks has proven difficult (Zhang et al., 2017). The key issue is that the number
of weights in a deep network do not directly relate to the complexity of the learned model (Bartlett
et al., 2017). Many quantities have been proposed to fix this, e.g., to estimate the complexity of the
hypothesis class (Liang et al., 2019; Neyshabur et al., 2016; Poggio et al., 2020), or that of the learned
model (Jiang et al., 2019; Shwartz-Ziv & Tishby, 2017; Achille & Soatto, 2019; Chaudhari et al.,
2017). There are many broad similarities between these approaches and our thermodynamics-based
approach, e.g., compression bounds perturb input using noise, flatness-based metrics perturb the
weights, while the learning capacity perturbs the number of samples; we also discuss the connection
to PAC-Bayes theory in §2.3 and singular learning theory in Appendix C.
       Double descent phenomenon There is an extensive body of theoretical work that studies the
double descent phenomenon (Belkin et al., 2019), e.g., using two-layer networks (Mei & Montanari,
2022; Mei et al., 2022), linear models (Hastie et al., 2019). The double descent phenomenon is
surprising for two reasons: the sharp increases in the variance of the estimator near the interpolation
threshold and the monotonic decrease in the test error as the number of parameters in the model
grows. The former can be eliminated by regularization (Nakkiran et al., 2020b) but to our knowledge
this paper presents the first demonstration that the latter can also be addressed. Our results show
that at small sample sizes, when the test loss is plotted against the learning capacity the test loss
grows with increasing capacity—this is akin to the later half of the classic U-shaped curve in the
bias-variance tradeoff. For large sample sizes, the test loss saturates as a function of the learning
capacity—this indicates that the learning capacity adequately captures the effective dimensionality of
the model and even if the number of bare parameters in the hypothesis class grows, the number of
degrees of freedom that are constrained by the data does not grow.
       Effective dimensionality from replica theory calculations in statistical physics For perceptron-
like models, calculations in statistical physics (Engel & den Broeck, 2001; Watanabe, 2009; Baldassi
et al., 2015) show that the generalization error (akin to our U ) is inversely proportional to the sample
size N , e.g., 0.625d/N and 0.442d/N for the so-called Gibbs and Bayes learning rules respectively.
The “effective dimensionality” of these rules can be calculated using (4) also saturates at large N .
Such insensitivity of the performance to the number of samples has also been noticed in the so-called
“deep bootstrap” phenomenon (Nakkiran et al., 2020a); this has also been studied theoretically using
kernel gradient flows (Ghosh et al., 2021; Simon et al., 2021). Our results show a more refined
phenomenon: the learning capacity, which is a good estimate of the test loss, saturates at both small
and high sample sizes and a sharp transition in between.
       Freezing phenomena in disordered systems The equipartition theorem says that a free particle
with p degrees of freedom confined to a volume has a heat capacity of p/2. As LaMont & Wiggins
(2019) discuss, in many physical systems, the heat capacity can be smaller. Such deviation from
the equipartition theorem is well-known. At very high temperatures, the degrees of freedom in a
system can become irrelevant and therefore stop contributing to the heat capacity. Similarly at very
low temperatures, there may not be sufficient energy to populate all energy levels and this again leads
to a deviation. In physical systems, such freezing can also occur at intermediate temperatures.
       See Appendix C and Appendix G for more discussion points.



                                                                                                                                      9
References
Alessandro Achille and Stefano Soatto. Where is the Information in a Deep Neural Network?
  arXiv:1905.12213 [cs, math, stat], June 2019.
Shun-ichi Amari, Tomoko Ozeki, Ryo Karakida, Yuki Yoshida, and Masato Okada. Dynamics of
  Learning in MLP: Natural Gradient and Singularity Revisited. Neural Computation, 30(1):1–33,
  January 2018. ISSN 0899-7667, 1530-888X.
C. Baldassi, C. Borgs, J. Chayes, A. Ingrosso, C. Lucibello, L. Saglietti, and R. Zecchina. Unreasonable
   effectiveness of learning neural networks: From accessible states and robust ensembles to basic
   algorithmic schemes. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
  America, 113(48):E7655–E7662, 2016.
Carlo Baldassi, Alessandro Ingrosso, Carlo Lucibello, Lucibello Saglietti, and Riccardo Zecchina.
  Subdominant dense clusters allow for simple learning and high computational performance in
  neural networks with discrete synapses. Physical review letters, 115(12):128101, 2015.
Peter L Bartlett, Dylan J Foster, and Matus J Telgarsky. Spectrally-normalized margin bounds for
  neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 6240–6249, 2017.
Mikhail Belkin, Daniel Hsu, Siyuan Ma, and Soumik Mandal. Reconciling modern machine-learning
 practice and the classical bias–variance trade-off. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
 116(32):15849–15854, 2019.
Kevin S Brown, Colin C Hill, Guillermo A Calero, Christopher R Myers, Kelvin H Lee, James P
  Sethna, and Richard A Cerione. The statistical mechanics of complex signaling networks: Nerve
  growth factor signaling. Physical biology, 1(3):184, 2004.
Pratik Chaudhari and Stefano Soatto. Stochastic gradient descent performs variational inference,
  converges to limit cycles for deep networks. In Proc. of International Conference of Learning and
  Representations (ICLR), 2018.
Pratik Chaudhari, Anna Choromanska, Stefano Soatto, Yann LeCun, Carlo Baldassi, Christian Borgs,
  Jennifer Chayes, Levent Sagun, and Riccardo Zecchina. Entropy-SGD: Biasing gradient descent
  into wide valleys. In Proc. of International Conference of Learning and Representations (ICLR),
  2017.
Gavin E. Crooks. Measuring thermodynamic length. Physical Review Letters, 99(10):100602,
  September 2007. ISSN 0031-9007, 1079-7114.
Didier Dacunha-Castelle and Elisabeth Gassiat. Testing in locally conic models, and application to
  mixture models. ESAIM: Probability and Statistics, 1:285–317, 1997. ISSN 1292-8100, 1262-3318.
Felix Dangel, Frederik Kunstner, and Philipp Hennig. BackPACK: Packing more into backprop. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Gintare Karolina Dziugaite and Daniel M. Roy. Computing Nonvacuous Generalization Bounds for
  Deep (Stochastic) Neural Networks with Many More Parameters than Training Data. In Proc. of
  the Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI), 2017.
Gintare Karolina Dziugaite and Daniel M Roy. Data-dependent PAC-Bayes priors via differential
  privacy. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems, pp. 8440–8450, 2018.
A. Engel and C. Van den Broeck. Statistical Mechanics of Learning. March 2001. ISBN 978-0-521-
  77479-6.
Rasool Fakoor, Jonas Mueller, Nick Erickson, Pratik Chaudhari, and Alexander J Smola. Fast,
  accurate, and simple models for tabular data via augmented distillation. In Proc. of Conference on
  Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
Pierre Foret, Ariel Kleiner, Hossein Mobahi, and Behnam Neyshabur. Sharpness-aware minimization
  for efficiently improving generalization. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2020.


                                                  10
Jonathan Frankle and Michael Carbin. The Lottery Ticket Hypothesis: Finding Sparse, Trainable
  Neural Networks. arXiv:1803.03635 [cs], March 2019.
Jerome Friedman, Trevor Hastie, and Robert Tibshirani. The Elements of Statistical Learning,
  volume 1. 2001.
Nikhil Ghosh, Song Mei, and Bin Yu. The three stages of learning dynamics in high-dimensional
  kernel methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.07167, 2021.
Ryan Gutenkunst. Sloppiness, Modeling, and Evolution in Biochemical Networks. PhD thesis, Cornell
  University, 2007.
Trevor Hastie, Andrea Montanari, Saharon Rosset, and Ryan J. Tibshirani. Surprises in High-
  Dimensional Ridgeless Least Squares Interpolation. arXiv:1903.08560 [cs, math, stat], November
  2019.
Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. NIPS
  Deep Learning and Representation Learning Workshop, 2015.
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al. Training
  compute-optimal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556, 2022.
Yiding Jiang, Behnam Neyshabur, Hossein Mobahi, Dilip Krishnan, and Samy Bengio. Fantastic
  generalization measures and where to find them. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2019.
A. Krizhevsky. Learning Multiple Layers of Features from Tiny Images. PhD thesis, Computer
  Science, University of Toronto, 2009.
Colin H. LaMont and Paul A. Wiggins. On the correspondence between thermodynamics and
  inference. Physical Review E, 99(5):052140, May 2019. ISSN 2470-0045, 2470-0053.
John Langford and Matthias Seeger. Bounds for averaging classifiers. 2001.
Jean-Samuel Leboeuf, Frédéric LeBlanc, and Mario Marchand. Decision trees as partitioning machines
  to characterize their generalization properties. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  33:18135–18145, 2020.
Yann LeCun, Bernhard E Boser, John S Denker, Donnie Henderson, Richard E Howard, Wayne E
  Hubbard, and Lawrence D Jackel. Handwritten digit recognition with a back-propagation network.
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 396–404, 1990.
Tengyuan Liang, Tomaso Poggio, Alexander Rakhlin, and James Stokes. Fisher-rao metric, geometry,
  and complexity of neural networks. In The 22nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  and Statistics, pp. 888–896, 2019.
Jialin Mao, Itay Griniasty, Han Kheng Teoh, Rahul Ramesh, Rubing Yang, Mark Transtrum, James P.
   Sethna, and Pratik Chaudhari. The Training Process of Many Deep Networks Explores the Same
   Low-Dimensional Manifold. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.01604, 2022.
David A McAllester. PAC-Bayesian model averaging. In Proceedings of the Twelfth Annual Conference
  on Computational Learning Theory, pp. 164–170, 1999.
Song Mei and Andrea Montanari. The generalization error of random features regression: Precise
  asymptotics and the double descent curve. Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics, 75
  (4):667–766, 2022.
Song Mei, Theodor Misiakiewicz, and Andrea Montanari. Generalization error of random feature and
  kernel methods: Hypercontractivity and kernel matrix concentration. Applied and Computational
  Harmonic Analysis, 59:3–84, 2022.
P Molchanov, S Tyree, T Karras, T Aila, and J Kautz. Pruning convolutional neural networks for
  resource efficient inference. In 5th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR
  2017-Conference Track Proceedings, 2019.


                                                11
Preetum Nakkiran, Gal Kaplun, Yamini Bansal, Tristan Yang, Boaz Barak, and Ilya Sutskever. Deep
  double descent: Where bigger models and more data hurt. CoRR, abs/1912.02292, 2019. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/1912.02292.
Preetum Nakkiran, Behnam Neyshabur, and Hanie Sedghi. The deep bootstrap framework: Good
  online learners are good offline generalizers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.08127, 2020a.
Preetum Nakkiran, Prayaag Venkat, Sham Kakade, and Tengyu Ma. Optimal regularization can
  mitigate double descent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.01897, 2020b.
B. Neyshabur, Y. Wu, R. Salakhutdinov, and N. Srebro. Path-normalized optimization of recurrent
  neural networks with ReLU activations. In NIPS, 2016.
Tomaso Poggio, Andrzej Banburski, and Qianli Liao. Theoretical issues in deep networks. Proceedings
  of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(48):30039–30045, December 2020. ISSN 0027-8424,
  1091-6490.
Rahul Ramesh, Jialin Mao, Itay Griniasty, Rubing Yang, Han Kheng Teoh, Mark Transtrum, James
  Sethna, and Pratik Chaudhari. A picture of the space of typical learnable tasks. In Proc. of
  International Conference of Machine Learning (ICML), 2023.
Jorma Rissanen. Modeling by shortest data description. Automatica, 14(5):465–471, 1978.
Ravid Shwartz-Ziv and Naftali Tishby. Opening the Black Box of Deep Neural Networks via
  Information. arXiv:1703.00810 [cs], April 2017.
James B. Simon, Madeline Dickens, and Michael Robert DeWeese. Neural tangent kernel eigenvalues
  accurately predict generalization. CoRR, abs/2110.03922, 2021.
Leslie N. Smith and Nicholay Topin. Super-Convergence: Very Fast Training of Neural Networks
  Using Large Learning Rates. arXiv:1708.07120 [cs, stat], May 2018.
Jost Tobias Springenberg, Alexey Dosovitskiy, Thomas Brox, and Martin Riedmiller. Striving for
  Simplicity: The All Convolutional Net. arXiv:1412.6806 [cs], April 2015.
Mark K. Transtrum, Benjamin B. Machta, and James P. Sethna. The geometry of nonlinear least
 squares with applications to sloppy models and optimization. Physical Review E, 83(3):036701,
 March 2011. ISSN 1539-3755, 1550-2376.
Sumio Watanabe. Almost all learning machines are singular. In 2007 IEEE Symposium on Foundations
  of Computational Intelligence, pp. 383–388, 2007.
Sumio Watanabe. Algebraic Geometry and Statistical Learning Theory. Number 25. 2009.
Max Welling and Yee W Teh. Bayesian learning via stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics. In ICML,
 pp. 681–688, 2011.
Yikai Wu, Xingyu Zhu, Chenwei Wu, Annie Wang, and Rong Ge. Dissecting Hessian: Understanding
  Common Structure of Hessian in Neural Networks. arXiv:2010.04261 [cs, stat], June 2021.
Greg Yang, Edward J Hu, Igor Babuschkin, Szymon Sidor, Xiaodong Liu, David Farhi, Nick Ryder,
  Jakub Pachocki, Weizhu Chen, and Jianfeng Gao. Tensor programs v: Tuning large neural networks
  via zero-shot hyperparameter transfer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.03466, 2022a.
Rubing Yang, Jialin Mao, and Pratik Chaudhari. Does the data induce capacity control in deep
  learning? In Proc. of International Conference of Machine Learning (ICML), 2022b.
Sergey Zagoruyko and Nikos Komodakis. Wide residual networks. In British Machine Vision
  Conference 2016, 2016.
Chiyuan Zhang, Samy Bengio, Moritz Hardt, Benjamin Recht, and Oriol Vinyals. Understanding
  deep learning requires rethinking generalization. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations (ICLR), 2017.


                                                12
A    Different analogies between thermodynamics and statistical inference
There have been many other attempts over the years to explore the conceptual similarities between
thermodynamics and Bayesian inference. The analogy between thermodynamics and statistical
inference is not unique. Depending upon our goal, it can take different forms that are unrelated to
each other.
A variational formulation of stochastic gradient descent A continuous-time model of stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) as a Langevin dynamics with state-dependent noise is
                                                                1/2
                                                        η
                           dw (t) = −∇Ĥ(w) dt +           D(w)     dB (t)
                                                        N0
where ∇Ĥ(w) is the gradient of the training objective (cross-entropy loss), η > 0 is the step-size or
learning rate of SGD, N0 < N is the mini batch-size, D(w) = Cov(∇Ĥ(w)) is the covariance of the
mini-batch gradient and B(t) is standard Brownian motion (Chaudhari & Soatto, 2018). We can
think of the factor η/N0 as a temperature; larger the learning rate larger the effective noise in the
SGD weight updates as compared to gradient descent, and larger the mini-batch size N0 smaller the
discrepancies between the SGD gradient and the full gradient. For this model, with some technical
assumptions, the probability density over the weight space ρ∗ induced by SGD is

                                                                     η
                         ρ∗ (w) = argmin F(ρ) :=        E [Φ(w)] −      H(ρ)
                                     ρ                 w∼ρ           N0
                 R
where H(ρ) = − dw ρ(w) log ρ(w) is the Shannon entropy of the density ρ and the first term is like
an average energy where the function Φ(w) gets minimized on average over draws of weights from
the probability density ρ∗ . For this setup, the free energy is F(ρ), the temperature is η/N0 and the
updates of SGD can be understood as performing Bayesian inference using a uniform prior over the
weight space, i.e., where the Kullback-Leibler divergence KL(ρ, φ) = H(ρ) when φ is uniform, say
on a compact set. The analogy above is useful to understand the steady-state distribution of SGD
using ideas from non-equilibrium thermodynamics.
A variant of Bayes law in singular learning theory Yet another variant is found in Watanabe’s
work which uses a different definition of Bayesian inference in his development of singular learning
theory (Watanabe, 2009). He studies situations when the likelihood term in Bayes law pw (y | x)
is modified to be pβw (y | x) for an arbitrary power β . This analogy is useful for the purposes of
numerically calculating Bayesian posteriors, e.g., using Markov chain Monte Carlo methods, because
the posterior is continuous in this new inverse temperature β . But this changes the definitions of the
average energy and it no longer corresponds to the test negative log-likelihood.

B    Estimating the learning capacity using Markov chain Monte Carlo
The procedure discussed above to estimate the learning capacity is computationally expensive because
it requires us to fit many models with different weight initializations, on different sample sets for
each sample size N to calculate the average energy U . We also investigated a different technique to
estimate the learning capacity using Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods that we describe
next. The posterior distribution on the weights can be written as
                                                 1
                                  p(w; N ) =         e−N Ĥ(w) φ(w).
                                               Z(N )
using (1) and (2). Observe that
            U (N ) = −∂N log Z(N )
                        1
                   ≈        (Z(N ) − Z(N + 1))
                     Z(N )
                            Z
                        1
                   =           dw e−N Ĥ(w;N ) − e−(N +1)Ĥ(w;N +1) φ(w)
                     Z(N )
                            Z
                        1
                   =           dw e−N Ĥ(w;N ) 1 − e−(N +1)Ĥ(w;N +1)+N Ĥ(w;N ) φ(w)             (16)
                     Z(N )
                                 e−N Ĥ(w;N )
                     Z
                   = dw φ(w)                  (1 − pw (yN +1 | xN +1 ))
                                    Z(N )
                          m
                      1 X
                   ≈        (1 − pw(i) (yN +1 | xN +1 ))
                     m
                         i=1


                                                  13
                             2.00
                                                                      FC1 (h=100)                                          3000            FC1 (h=100)
                             1.75                                     LeNet                                                                LeNet


                                                                                                Effective Dimensions (C)
                             1.50                                                                                          2500


             Test Loss (U)
                             1.25                                                                                          2000
                             1.00                                                                                          1500
                             0.75                                                                                          1000
                             0.50
                                                                                                                            500
                             0.25
                                                                                                                              0
                             0.00          2               3               4                                                           2              3            4
                                      10           10                 10                                                          10             10           10
                                                   # samples (N)                                                                                # samples (N)
                                                                                     (a) MNIST

                                                                              ALLCNN                                 30000                 ALLCNN
                             7                                                                                                             ResNet
                                                                              ResNet                                 25000


                                                                                          Effective Dimensions (C)
                             6
                                                                                                                     20000
             Test Loss (U)


                             5
                             4                                                                                       15000

                             3                                                                                       10000
                             2                                                                                             5000
                             1                                                                                                0
                                      2                3                  4                                                            2                  3            4
                                 10               10                 10                                                           10             10              10
                                                 # samples (N)                                                                                   # samples (N)
                                                                                  (b) CIFAR-10

Figure S.1: (a,c) show the estimate of the average energy U (N ) for different architectures, for MNIST and
CIFAR-10 datasets respectively. The numerical estimates of the average energy are higher than those in Fig. 2
and we also see marked jitter on these curves. This noise in the derivative translates to much higher estimates of
the learning capacity C in (b,d) than those in Fig. 2. Even in this case, some of the broad patterns are preserved,
e.g., the learning capacity is a tiny fraction of the number of weights, it saturates at both small and high sample
sizes; there is no low-temperature saturation for CIFAR-10.
where w(i) are samples from a Markov chain that draws samples from p(w; N ) and that is why we
can approximate the integral using the m samples. We can also calculate an average version of this
expression to get
                                                                                 m
                                                                          1 X
                                                               U (N ) =         E [1 − pw(i) (y | x)] .
                                                                          m   (x,y)
                                                                                i=1
This expression is an alternative to (8) with the key difference that we are drawing samples from the
posterior p(w; N ) using a Markov chain instead of the leave-one-out cross-validation procedure in (8).
This new expression is computationally more convenient because we only need to run one MCMC
chain to draw all the samples. We implement the MCMC chain using stochastic gradient Langevin
dynamics (SGLD) (Welling & Teh, 2011).
     The learning capacity C = −N 2 ∂N U depends on the derivative of U which allows us to calculate
                                          −N −2 C = ∂N U = U (N + 1) − U (N )
                                                               m
                                                           1 X
                                                         ≈         E pw(i) (y | x) − pw(i) (y | x) .
                                                           m     (x,y)    N            N +1
                                                                               i=1
                                                                         (i)
In principle, we should run two Markov chains, one that draws samples wN     and another, completely
                                          (i)
independent one, that draws samples wN +1 . Since we need to estimate C(N ) for many different
values of the sample size N , this would again require us to implement many different Markov chains.
In practice, we implement a coarse approximation of this procedure, where we think of the number of
samples N as a parameter that varies with time and set
                                                                     m
                                                                   1 X
                                               −N −2 C ≈                 E pw(i) (y | x) − pw(i) (y | x)                                                                   (17)
                                                                   m   (x,y)   t             t+∆t
                                                                     i=1
where t denotes the number of MCMC updates and ∆t is the interval after which we increase the
sample size by one (in practice, this involves simply adding a new sample, or a few samples, to the


                                                                                       14
data-loader and waiting until the draws from the Markov chain become uncorrelated, e.g., for a few
epochs). In practice, we do not sweep all values of N but instead sweep through a set of sample sizes
(but still use these finite difference estimates of the thermodynamic quantities). This construction
is inspired from the work of Crooks (2007) which estimates the thermodynamic length, a quantity
that characterizes the distance between two equilibrium states by endowing the state-space with a
Riemannian metric and calculating the length of a path that joins the end points using quasi-static
transformations.
      The MCMC approach allows us to estimate the average energy U and learning capacity C using
a single Markov chain, but one where the number of samples N increases with time t. As Fig. S.1
shows, the estimates of the thermodynamic quantities using this procedure exhibit the same trends
that we have discussed in the main paper in Fig. 2. The effective dimension is much smaller than the
number of weights in these models. The MCMC-based estimate of the learning capacity is much
larger. This can be explained by the large derivative of the estimate of U in Fig. S.1 (a,c). It is
interesting to note that the MCMC-based estimate of U is also larger than the corresponding one using
SGD in Fig. 2. We suspect that this is because of the sharper posterior of SGD than stochastic gradient
Langevin dynamics; this is consistent with the fact that in practice, SGLD often obtains poorer test
errors than SGD. There is another way to interpret the results of this experiment: the MCMC-based
learning capacity estimates are higher than those using SGD discussed in the main paper. While
we have focused on the utility of the learning capacity for model selection across architectures and
datasets, we see some evidence here that the learning capacity can also distinguish between different
training algorithms (which affect the kinds of solutions found at the end of training). Again, it is
reassuring that smaller the learning capacity, better the test loss.

C    Interpreting the learning capacity using singular learning theory
One can obtain a more general version of PAC-Bayes bounds above by directly calculating
− log Z(N )/N . Watanabe (2009) has calculated asymptotic expressions of this quantity, which
is also called stochastic complexity to show that
                             − E [log Z(N )] = K log N + O(log log N ),                  (18)
                              D∼P
where K is the so-called real-log canonical threshold (RLCT) in algebraic geometry that characterizes,
roughly speaking, the co-dimension of the model after accounting for symmetries (e.g., permutation
symmetries in a neural network) of the weight space. The Fisher Information Metric (FIM) g(w) ∈
Rp×p is the metric of the manifold of probability distributions {pw (y | x) : w ∈ Rp } parameterized by
the weights w:
                                N     m
                             1 XX
                (g(w))kl =        pw (y | xi )∂wk log pw (y | xi )∂wl log pw (y | xi ).            (19)
                             N
                               i=1 y=1
The FIM becomes singular (det g(w) = 0) at these symmetries because there are directions in which
the weights can be perturbed without changing the probabilities pw (y | x). Statistical inference of
such models, which includes deep networks, Gaussian mixture models, Bayesian networks with
hidden units etc., is the subject of singular learning theory. For models without singularities (also
called regular models) such as linear regression, the log-canonical threshold is equal to the number of
parameters, i.e., K = p/2 and, in this form (18), is well-known as the Bayes Information Criterion
(BIC). In general, the log-canonical threshold is smaller than half the number of parameters for
non-regular models. From (6) and (18), we have that, up to a constant is the entropy of the true labels,
                                                                           K
                                −    E      [log p(y | x, D)] = U (N ) =                           (20)
                                    x,y∼P                                  N
asymptotically as N → ∞. In other words, smaller the log-canonical threshold K , smaller the average
test negative log-likelihood. In summary, the concept of model complexity, as captured by the real-log
canonical threshold (K ), plays a crucial role in understanding and evaluating the performance of
machine learning models. Models with lower values of K , indicating lower complexity, exhibit
superior predictive capabilities. From (20), we now have
                                      C(N ) = −N −2 ∂N U = K.                                      (21)
In other words, the learning capacity is equal to the log-canonical threshold which characterizes the
number of degrees of freedom that are constrained in the trained model and thereby controls the
negative test log-likelihood in (20). The techniques developed in this paper to calculate the learning
capacity can therefore be understood as effective ways to calculate the real-log canonical threshold in
algebraic geometry.


                                                     15
Remark 1. We can get more intuition on the real-log canonical threshold using an alternate definition.
Watanabe (2009, Theorem 7.1) showed that
                                              log Vw (aϵ) − log Vw (ϵ)
                                 K(w) = lim                                                          (22)
                                             ϵ→0       log a
for any a > 0 where Vw (ϵ) is the volume under the prior φ of the sub-ϵ level set of the loss, i.e.,
                                       Z ϵ    Z
                              Vw (ϵ) =     dϵ′ dw′ δϵ′ (Ĥ(w′ ))φw (w′ ).
                                         0
The RLCT K(w) can therefore be understood as the rate at which the logarithm of the number of
hypotheses (entropy) under consideration increases as we allow an incrementally larger value of the
training loss Ĥ(w) (from ϵ to aϵ). One way to understand this is to set Ĥ(w) = 1 and a = e, i.e,
calculate the number of hypotheses without considering their training loss, and see that the limit
in (22) is the logarithm of the volume of the shell of thickness (e − 1)ϵ in p dimensions as the radius
of the sphere ϵ goes to zero; this suggests that the real-log canonical threshold is the number of
parameters: K(w) = p up to an additive constant.

Discussion on symmetries in the weight space Even if deep networks were to be trained with
plentiful data, there would still be anomalies in the number of parameters and the complexity of
the learned function purely because of the hierarchical architecture. This is because, for singular
models such as deep networks, there are many symmetries in the weight space and multiple weight
configurations map to the same predictions (Watanabe, 2007). Geodesics of the manifold of
probability distributions accumulate near such singularities and therefore the training dynamics can
slow down enormously (Amari et al., 2018; Transtrum et al., 2011). Building upon classical results in
statistics (Dacunha-Castelle & Gassiat, 1997), Watanabe has developed a sophisticated theoretical
framework based on algebraic geometry to characterize the statistical properties of such singular
models. In a different context, it has been noticed that regression models fitted to data from systems
biology are “sloppy”, i.e., they have few number of tightly constrained stiff parameters and a large
number of poorly constrained parameters that do not affect predictions much (Brown et al., 2004;
Gutenkunst, 2007). These ideas have also been used to study deep networks and have provided novel
insights into the geometry of the hypothesis space of deep networks (Yang et al., 2022b; Mao et al.,
2022; Ramesh et al., 2023). Singular learning theory and sloppy models rely on calculating the
log-canonical threshold and the Fisher Information Metric to characterize the underlying model—and
for modern deep networks trained on large datasets these quantities are rather daunting to compute.
The learning capacity discussed here can be used to capture the same concepts and apply them in
practice, but it is much easier to compute.

D    Details of the experimental setup
Datasets We use MNIST (LeCun et al., 1990) and CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky, 2009) datasets for our
experiments on image classification, use WikiText-2 for experiments on text generation, and use
binary-class (miniboone, higgs, numerai) and multi-class datasets (covertype, jannis, connect) for
experiments using tabular data; see (Fakoor et al., 2020) for a description of how the tabular datasets
were curated. For MNIST, we set up a binary classification problem (even digits vs. odd digits). The
synthetic data was created by sampling d = 200 dimensional inputs for at most N = 50, 000 from a
Gaussian distribution whose covariance has eigenvalues that decay as λi = e−κi (i.e., larger the slope
κ, more low-dimensional the inputs) and labeled these inputs using a random teacher network with
one hidden layer (1000 neurons, 2 classes). We also use CIFAR10 with noise rate 0.2 to reproduce
the double descent phenomenon on ResNet18, see (Nakkiran et al., 2019) for a description of how we
add noise to CIFAR10. (Notice: for ??, the learning capacity is also estimated on the noisy CIFAR10,
in order to match the results.)
Architectures We use the original LeNet-5 network (convolutional layers and linear layers with
tanh as the activation function) and MLPs (one layer, different numbers of hidden neurons and
ReLU non-linearity) to train on the MNIST dataset and the synthetic dataset. We use a Wide-
ResNet (Zagoruyko & Komodakis, 2016) with a depth of 10 layers and a widening factor of 8 and
the ALLCNN network (Springenberg et al., 2015) to train on CIFAR-10. We also train multi-layer
RNNs and LSTMs on WikiText-2. For the tabular datasets, we use random forest-based (RFs) and
k-NN (k-nearest neighbor) classifiers. We set the total estimators in RF to be 1000, and use the gini
criterion for splitting. We do not restrict the maximal depth of each tree, this entails that each node
will expand until the leaves are pure (i.e., all samples in the leaf are from the same class). For the
k-nearest neighbor classifiers, we set the number of neighbors to be 10.


                                                   16
Training Procedure We use all samples from the training set and record the average energy for 14
different values of N in the set [200, 400, 600, 800, 1000, 2000, 4000, 6000, 8000, 10000, 20000,
30000, 40000, 50000]. The MCMC-based estimates are much more inexpensive computationally and
we therefore sampled 63 different values of N uniformly on a log-scale between 100 and 50,000. No
data augmentation is used. We only normalize the images of each dataset with mean and standard
deviation. As discussed in §2.2, we used k = 5 cross-validation folds to estimate the average values of
U, C . We train all models with SGD and Nesterov’s momentum (with coefficient 0.9), and a learning
rate schedule that begins with a value of 0.5 and decays using a cosine curve for one cycle (Smith &
Topin, 2018). We train for 200 epochs for all datasets and models. The batch size is set to be 64 for
all experiments.
       Our implementation for WikiText-2 is adapted from pytorch/examples/word language model.
The only difference is the size of the training dataset. We separate the first N rows of the complete
data set as the sub-dataset. The different values of N are [200, 400, 600, 800, 1000, 2000, 4000,
6000, 8000, 10000, 20000, 30000, 40000]. The initial learning rate for multi-layer RNN is 5, and the
initial learning rate for multi-layer LSTM is 20. Whenever there is no improvement on the validation
dataset, we divide the learning rate by 4.
       We will now describe how we add samples incrementally while running SGLD. Suppose we
start from some initial sample size N1 and would like to change it to N2 . We first split the N1 samples
into k = 10 equal-sized folds and run k = 10 Markov chains in parallel on these folds; these Markov
chains are run completely independent of each other. After 20 epochs, we add (N2 − N1 )/k samples
into each of the k Markov chains’ dataset; we assume that the Markov chain reaches an equilibrium
after 20 epochs of training on this expanded dataset with ((k − 1)N2 )/k samples and draw 10 samples
w(i) from the last 10 epochs to calculate the expressions in (16) and (17).


E    Further experimental results for random forests
We saw in the main text (see Fig. 5a) that the random
                                                                 Miniboone
forest models do not exhibit freezing of the learning   10
                                                           4
                                                                 Higgs
capacity at large samples. This is an indicator of the           NumerAI
powerful function approximation capabilities of these      3
                                                           Effective dimensions (C)


                                                        10
models. Roughly speaking, this is an attempt to think
of the number of leaves in a random forest as being
                                                           2
equivalent to the number of weights in a neural net-    10
work. Both quantities describe the number of degrees
of freedom available to their respective models and     10
                                                           1

training corresponds to allocating these degrees of
freedom to fit the data. Since we saw that the learning    0
                                                        10
capacity of neural networks exhibits freezing at large
sample sizes, we should also expect this behavior for                         5             6        7
random forests. We set the total number of trees in                        10            10       10
                                                                                # leaves
the forest as 1,000 (same as the original experiment) Figure S.2: The learning capacity is much smaller
but restricted the maximal amount of leaf nodes to (about 0.1%) than the number of leaves in a ran-
100 (in the original experiment, each node is split dom forest for all three tabular learning datasets
until the leaves are pure). As shown in Fig. S.3a considered here. The capacity also increases mono-
and Fig. S.3b, the learning capacity of random forest tonically as the number of leaves grows.
models exhibits freezing at large sample sizes when
the number of leaf nodes in each tree is restricted. We therefore believe that freezing is a general
phenomenon for machine learning models with a fixed number of degrees of freedom.

F    A guide to the calculations in the main paper
Basic formulation for the partition function            We provide detailed calculations for the basic
formulation (6)
                                                  N
                                               1 X
                                   Ĥ(w) = −       log pw (yi | xi )
                                               N
                                                  i=1
                                                                                                   (23)
                                                  N
                                                  X
                                    N Ĥ(w) = −         log pw (yi | xi )
                                                  i=1


                                                  17
                        0.8
                                                                                                                                                       Miniboone-100-leaves
                        0.7                                                                                             150                            Higgs-100-leaves
                                                                                                                                                       NumerAI-100-leaves


                                                                                                Learning capacity (C)
                        0.6                                                                                             125


        Test Loss (U)
                              Miniboone-no-leaves-restriction
                        0.5   Higgs-no-leaves-restriction                                                               100
                              NumerAI-no-leaves-restriction
                        0.4
                              Miniboone-100-leaves
                              Higgs-100-leaves
                                                                                                                         75
                              NumerAI-100-leaves
                        0.3                                                                                              50
                                                                                                                         25
                        0.2
                                                                                                                          0
                        0.1
                                            3                        4                    5                                                3                    4             5
                                       10                       10                   10                                               10                   10            10
                                                # samples (N)                                                                                  # samples (N)
                                                    (a)                                                                                          (b)
Figure S.3: (a) shows the average energy for random forest models on different datasets (different colors) with
(diamonds) and without (circles) a restriction on the number of leaves in each tree. Although the average energy
is quite similar for both methods at small sample sizes, as expected models without any restrictions continue to
decrease the average energy at large sample sizes. This corresponds to the saturation of the learning capacity in
(b); contrast this with Fig. 5a where the learning capacity is growing quickly even at large sample sizes.
                                                Z
                                      Z(N ) = dw φ(w)e−N Ĥ(w)
                                                Z             PN
                                             = dw φ(w)e i=1 log pw (yi |xi )                                (24)
                                                Z             PN +1
                                 Z(N + 1) = dw φ(w)e i=1 log pw (yi |xi )

                                                    dw pw (y | x)φ(w)e−N Ĥ(w)
                                                R
     log p(y | x, D) = log
                                                        dw φ(w)e−N Ĥ(w)
                                                      R
                                                Z                                                                                 Z
                                  = log              dw pw (y | x)φ(w)e−N Ĥ(w) − log
                                                                             dw φ(w)e−N Ĥ(w)
                                       Z                                     Z
                                  = log dw φ(w)e−N Ĥ(w)+log pw (y|x) − log dw φ(w)e−N Ĥ(w)                                                                                      (25)
                                       Z        PN +1                      Z         PN
                                  = log dw φ(w)e i=1 log pw (yi |xi ) − log dw φ(w)e i=1 log pw (yi |xi )

                                  = log Z(N + 1) − log Z(N )
                                  ≈ −U,


Exact calculation of learning capacity for the example of convex energy Ĥ(w) =
1/2 ⟨w − w∗ , A(w − w∗ )⟩ with full rank symmetry Hessian A ≻ 0        . For this paragraph, we
provide direct calculations for the example provided in the method section. Here we make some
assumptions to simplify the calculations. We assume uniform prior (φ(w) = 1) and w∗ = 0.
                                                                                 Z
                                                                 Z(N ) =                 dw φ(w)e−N Ĥ(w)
                                                                                 Z
                                                                                                              N           T
                                                                                                                                                                                  (26)
                                              dw e− 2 w Aw                   =

Since A is symmetric, we can write A as pi=1 λi vi viT where vi and λi is the eigenvector and
                                             P
eigenvalue of matrix
               P A. We can also write w as linear combination of eigenvectors of A since A is
full rank. (w = ai vi ), and we have the following:
                                                       Z
                                                                         N   T
                                    Z(N ) =                 dw e− 2 w Aw
                                                       Z                                  Pp
                                                                                     N                2
                                                 =          da1 ... dap e− 2                  i=1 λi ai
                                                                                                                                                                                  (27)
                                                       Z                                  Z                                                    p
                                                                         N       2                                            N   2                    2π 12
                                                            da1 e− 2 λ1 a1 ...                dap e− 2 λp ap
                                                                                                                                               Y
                                                 =                                                                                    =            (        )
                                                                                                                                                       N λi
                                                                                                                                           i=1


                                                                                              18
C(N ) = N 2 ∂N
             2
               log Z(N )
             ∂ 2 Z(N )   ∂ Z(N ) 2
      = N 2( N         −( N        ) )
               Z(N )       Z(N )
                                 N   T                         N   T
                              e− 2 w Aw                      e− 2 w Aw 2
             Z                              Z
                    1                               1
      = N 2 ( dw ( wT Aw)2               − ( dw wT Aw                   ) )
                    2            z(N )              2          z(N )
                             p          −N
                                           P  p       2                     p         −N ( p
                                                                                          P         2
                                              i=1 λi ai                                     i=1 λi ai )
             Z                                             Z
          2               1X        2 2e 2                                1X      2 e 2
      = N ( da1 ... dap (       λi ai )                 − ( da1 ... dap (     λi ai )                   )2 )
                          2                z(N )                          2               z(N )
                                           i=1                                                                  i=1
                            p                                                                 N
                                                                                                  Pp        2
                                                                                    e− 2            i=1 λi ai
             Z
                         1 X 2 4
      = N 2 ( da1 ... dap (                                         λi λj a2i a2j )
                                                             X
                              λi ai +
                         4                                                                        z(N )
                                          i=1          i,j=1,i̸=j
                                      p             −N
                                                        Pp        2
                                                     2 (  i=1 λi ai )
           Z
                                1X          e
      −(       da1 ... dap (       λi a2i )                              )2 )
                                2                          z(N )
                                     i=1
                          p       N
                                    Pp       2
                        1 X 2 4 e− 2 i=1 λi ai
           Z
         2
      = N ( da1 ... dap     λi ai              )
                        4           z(N )
                                          i=1
                                                                    N
                                                                         Pp           2
                                                                  e− 2        i=1 λi ai
             Z
                          1
      + N 2 ( da1 ... dap                           λi λj a2i a2j
                                            X
                                                                                          )
                          4                                              z(N )
                                i,j=1,i̸=j
                                  p          N
                                                 Pp       2
                                           e− 2 ( i=1 λi ai ) 2
            Z
                              1
      − N 2(                        λi a2i
                                X
                  da1 ... dap                                )
                              2                  z(N )
                                i=1
        3    1          1
      =   p + p(p − 1) − p2
        4    4          4
        p
      =
        2
                                                                                                 (28)
     The above provides direct calculation of the learning capacity for regular (non-singular) models.


Exact calculation of learning capacity for the example of convex energy Ĥ(w) =
1/2 ⟨w − w∗ , A(w − w∗ )⟩ with gaussian prior
                                         .
                                                     Z
                                                            ϵ p2 − 12 wT ϵIw − N2 wT Aw
                                          Z(N ) =        dw ( ) e           e
                                                           2π
                                                   Z
                                                            ϵ p 1 T
                                                 = dw ( ) 2 e− 2 w (N A+ϵI)w                                              (29)
                                                           2π
                                                    p
                                                   Y        ϵ     1
                                                 =    (          )2
                                                        N λi + ϵ
                                                     i=1
                         p
                     1   X                  ϵ
    log Z(N ) =                log
                     2                   N λi + ϵ
                         i=1
       C(N ) = N 2 ∂N
                    2
                      log Z(N )
                          p
                     1 X N λi 2                                                                                           (30)
                 =      (          )
                     2    N λi + ϵ
                         i=1
                                 p                                        p                                           p
                  p  1 X 2N ϵλi + ϵ2                           p   ϵ X     λi       1 ϵ X      1
                 = −                                       =     −                 − ( )2
                  2  2   (N λi + ϵ)2                           2   N   (λi + Nϵ )2  2 N   (λi + Nϵ )2
                               i=1                                       i=1                                      i=1
     If we have λ >> Nϵ and p ≈ N , we can approximate the results.
                                                               p
                                                 C(N ) =         − ϵHM−1 (λi (A))                                         (31)
                                                               2


Exact calculation         The following provides exact calculation of the generalization error upper bound.


                                                                   19
                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                   ϵ∥w∗ − w0 ∥
                                                             P
                           log Z(N )   p log N                i log λi                       ϵ
                                                                                   X
                      −              ≈         +                               +                 +
                               N          2N                      2N                       2N λi        N
                                                                                   i
                                                                                                      2
                                            p + ϵ HM−1 (λi )                              ϵ∥w∗ − w0 ∥
                                                                           P
                                                                               i log λi                                 (32)
                                          =                  +                          +
                                                   2N                           2N             N
                                                     ∗       2
                                            C     ϵ∥w − w0 ∥
                                          =    +               ,               from (5),
                                            N          N
                      Z
                            ϵ p2 − 2ϵ (w−w0 )T I(w−w0 ) − N2 (w−w∗ )H(w∗ )(w−w∗ )
               Z=             ) e
                           dw (                        e
                           2π
               Let Q = w − w∗ ,
                  Z
                            ϵ p     ϵ      ∗      T      ∗         N       ∗
                = dQ ( ) 2 e− 2 (Q+w −w0 ) I(Q+w −w0 ) e− 2 QH(w )Q
                           2π                                                                                           (33)
                                         Z
                     ϵ   ∗      2  ϵ p              ϵ    ∗      T      ∗          N ∗
                = e− 2 (w −w0 ) ( ) 2       dQ e− 2 (Q+w −w0 ) I(Q+w −w0 ) e− 2 QH(w )Q
                                  2π
                                         Z
                     ϵ   ∗      2  ϵ p              1  T                    ∗     T
                = e− 2 (w −w0 ) ( ) 2       dQ e− 2 (Q (N H(w)+ϵI)Q+2ϵ(w −w0 ) Q)
                                  2π
Projection to eigenvector coordinate and let bi be the components of w∗ − w0
                                                         Z
                                  ϵ   ∗      2    ϵ p2                                 1
                                                                                           Pp             2
                          = e− 2 (w −w0 ) (         )        da1 ... dap e− 2               i=1 (N λi +ϵ)ai +2ϵbi ai    (34)
                                                 2π
let ci = N λϵbii+ϵ
                                                    2
                                 ϵ p2 ϵ22 Ppi=1 N λbi+ϵ
                                                        Z                    Pp
                      ϵ       ∗       2                                    1                2
               = e− 2 (w −w0 ) (   ) e              i       da1 ... dap e− 2 i=1 (N λi +ϵ)(ai +ci )
                                2π
                                          b2     p                                                                      (35)
                              2 ϵ2                        ϵ
                    ϵ   ∗
                                   Pp      i                     1
               = e− 2 (w −w0 ) e 2 i=1 N λi +ϵ
                                                Y
                                                    (          )2
                                                      N λi + ϵ
                                                             i=1
And we have the following
                                                                           p                                p
                     log Z(N )    ϵ                1 X     N λi + ϵ    ϵ2 X    b2i
                 −             =    (w∗ − w0 )2 +      log          +                                                   (36)
                         N       2N               2N          ϵ       2N    N λi + ϵ
                                                                       i=1                                i=1
Consider the case where λ >> ϵ and we can have
                                                              p                                  p
                               ϵ                1 X     N λi    ϵ2 X b2i
                          =      (w∗ − w0 )2 +      log      −
                              2N               2N        ϵ     2N 2  λi
                                                             i=1                                i=1
                                                                                       p                        p
                                                                                                                        (37)
                             ϵ                p     N    1 X           ϵ2 X b2i
                          =    (w∗ − w0 )2 +    log   +      log λi −
                            2N               2N     ϵ   2N            2N 2  λi
                                                                                   i=1                      i=1
      If we choose ϵ small enough, we can have
                                                                       2
                                             C   ϵ∥w∗ − w0 ∥    log Z(N )                                               (38)
                                               +             ≈−
                                             N       2N             N
     Upper bound of the generalization is the upper bound of the complexity term. Minimizing the
objective is equivalent to minimizing the complexity of the Bayesian models.

G     Q&A
Q: What are the practical implications of this work? The primary focus of this paper is theoretical
but it indeed also has some very broad practical implications. Perhaps the most important one (in our
mind) is as follows. The learning capacity can be estimated using a cross-validation-like procedure
to calculate the derivative of the test loss with respect to the number of samples. One can estimate
the saturation of the learning capacity using its second derivative to obtain crisp guidelines as to
whether one should invest in procuring more data or whether the test loss would improve if the model
architecture/class were different. This is important because it is increasingly being noticed that large
models are significantly under-trained Hoffmann et al. (2022). The learning capacity is a very good


                                                                   20
way to check how much of the capacity of the model is being utilized. In this sense, the utility of
learning capacity is akin to that of scaling laws in language models. Scaling laws tell us how much
more data to procure or how long to train for, and we can use the learning capacity to ask similar
questions. One could also use learning capacity as an architecture search procedure; this is similar
to Yang et al. (2022a) who used small networks to search for the training hyper-parameters of bigger
networks.
      By eliminating the double descent phenomenon, we believe we have brought deep networks back
into the classical realm of analysis in machine learning. We can think of them as another model in the
bag of models that a practitioner has. In fact, we have also brought other models such as random
forests and k-nearest neighbor classifiers on the same playing field. The learning capacity allows us
to think about all these models using the same set of ideas, and in a theoretically rigorous fashion.
This has broad implications for model selection, both in practice and in theory.
Q: What are the theoretical implications of this work? The fact that deep networks predict
extremely well on new data in spite of often having many more parameters than the number of training
data is one of the biggest open questions today. There is a large body of work that tackles this question
but a definitive explanation is yet to be found. Our paper adds a different perspective to the literature.
      We use a very different set of tools, from thermodynamics and statistical physics, to motivate
a quantity called learning capacity (which is analogous to the heat capacity of a material) that can
be thought of as the effective number of degrees of freedom that are constrained by the data in a
trained deep network. The smaller the number of these constrained degrees of freedom, the fewer the
number of parameters that the network is actually using to make its predictions and therefore even
if the architecture itself has a large number of other parameters, we should calculate the effective
dimensionality using only the parameters that play a role in making the predictions. We elaborated
upon rigorous connections of this idea to existing results in learning theory (e.g., PAC-Bayes theory,
singular learning theory). There are also some other ones that we can glean, e.g., sharpness-based
measures of generalization (Foret et al., 2020) can be seen to be related to learning capacity using the
calculation in (5), or techniques to find and study wide regions in the energy landscape (Chaudhari et al.,
2017; Baldassi et al., 2016) are already closely related to the log-partition function (they calculated
log Z using MCMC locally in the neighborhood of a solution) and PAC-Bayes bounds (Dziugaite &
Roy, 2017).
      We found strong evidence that the learning capacity captures generalization in deep learning
correctly (e.g., it is much smaller than the number of weights, correlates well with the test loss,
matches numerically tight PAC-Bayes generalization bounds). There are also surprising findings, e.g.,
if we plot the test loss against the learning capacity, then the double descent phenomenon vanishes.
This suggests that it may be fruitfully used to understand the complexity of functions learned by deep
networks.
Q: Can you calculate learning capacity other models, datasets and input modalities? This is a
very interesting point. While existing concepts for studying generalization are rather abstract and
require complicated implementations (and fall short of unraveling the mystery), the learning capacity
is a simple quantity that is also easy to estimate. Any model (even a Python function!) can be used to
calculate the learning capacity.
       In terms of correlation of the learning capacity with the test loss, our results are comparable (often
better) than those from exhaustive comparisons such as Jiang et al. (2019) and directly comparable to
rigorous ones such as Yang et al. (2022b). This is strong evidence that the learning capacity is useful
to understand generalization.
Q: How is the learning capacity in this paper different from the original work of LaMont
& Wiggins (2019)? Our paper is strongly inspired by theirs. Lamont and Wiggins coined the
term “learning capacity” and showed that for some systems (a free particle in vacuum and Gaussian
distributions), the learning capacity is proportional to the number of degrees of freedom. They
suggested that one could calculate U using finite differences of the log-partition function (note,
estimating its derivative which is the learning capacity C robustly is the difficult step in this approach).
      We used the learning capacity to investigate the generalization of machine learning models. All
our findings from Section 2.2, especially all the insights discussed in the ”Results” section are new.
To glean these insights, we made the analogy of Lamont and Wiggins more rigorous, by drawing
out a clean connection PAC-Bayes theory (this is critical because it shows that what is essentially a
pattern matching exercise is meaningful) and to singular learning theory (in their paper, it was more
of a speculation). We have developed an effective procedure to numerically calculate the learning
capacity (which is absent in the original paper).


                                                     21
      We should emphasize that heat capacity is a very basic thermodynamic quantity. Learning
capacity is completely analogous, except that we interpret the statistical ensemble in physics as all
possible models. The ideas from thermodynamics used in this paper are in standard undergraduate
textbooks on the subject. In particular there is nothing new that we say up to Section 2.1. The
correspondence between the number of samples and the inverse temperature is simply because the
factor of 1/N in (1) shows up in the exponent in (2).
Q: How can you justify the definition of the learning capacity? The definition of the learning
capacity is simply C = −N 2 ∂N log Z(N ). As such, it is well-defined as soon as we set up the
statistical inference problem. The utility of a definition, and the merit of developing it, lies in how
well the definition can be used to explain observations (e.g., test loss), glean new conclusions (e.g.,
freezing phenomena) and whether it can be interpreted in the light of existing ideas in the field (e.g.,
PAC-Bayes theory and singular learning theory).
Q: This paper is difficult to understand This paper touches a lot of non-standard topics; there
are also a lot of technicalities involved (e.g., we are using data-distribution dependent PAC-Bayes
bounds and computing a notion of effective dimensionality from those bounds); we have also resorted
to approximations (e.g., calculating the log-partition function using a quadratic approximation of the
training loss interpret the learning capacity). We have attempted to make the narrative as clear as
possible, but it is difficult to explain some of these ideas from scratch in limited space (e.g., Appendix C
summarizes an entire chapter from the book on algebraic geometry by Watanabe (2009)).
Q: Does the learning capacity depend upon the training method? Does changing the training
method yield different results? The learning capacity defined on (4) does not depend upon the
method used to train the model (it is an average over the entire weight space). This is just like the VC
dimension, which does not depend upon how we train the model.
                7   Wide-Resnet-widenfactor8-SGD                              15000   Wide-Resnet-widenfactor8-SGD
                    Wide-Resnet-widenfactor4-ADAM                                     Wide-Resnet-widenfactor4-ADAM
                6                                                             12500
                                                      Learning Capacity (C)


                5                                                             10000
Test Loss (U)


                4                                                              7500
                3
                                                                               5000
                2
                                                                               2500
                1
                                                                                  0
                           3                4                                                3                4
                      10               10                                               10               10
                           # samples (N)                                                     # samples (N)
Figure S.4: Average energy and learning capacity for two wide residual networks with different widening factors
training with SGD and Adam respectively on CIFAR-10. It is remarkable that the learning capacity in the two is
quite similar across different sample sizes, and as is the test loss.
      The procedure to numerically estimate the learning capacity does depend upon the training
method. And different experiments in the paper use different training methods, e.g., SGD for
training each deep network in Monte Carlo, fitting the random forest using bootstrapping, or the
MCMC method for estimating learning capacity in Appendix B. In all cases, we have shown that the
conclusions drawn using the learning capacity are both consistent with existing results in the literature
on generalization (e.g., correlation to test loss) and also lead to some surprising phenomena which
have not been noticed yet. We additionally show one more experiment in Fig. S.4 where we trained
two different wide residual networks on CIFAR-10 using two training methods (SGD vs. Adam);
the learning capacity in both cases is very similar across a wide range of sample sizes N , and as is
the test loss. This suggests that our estimate of learning capacity is insensitive to the details of the
training procedure.
      We have also used a broad diversity of architectures, datasets and input modalities and obtained
conclusions that are consistent across the spectrum. This suggests that we can not only instantiate the
learning capacity in different settings but also implement it robustly.


                                                      22
