Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


MMT O M-QA: M ULTIMODAL T HEORY                                                    OF       M IND
Q UESTION A NSWERING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Theory of Mind (ToM), the ability to understand people’s minds, is an essential
         ingredient for developing machines with human-level social intelligence. Recent
         machine learning models, particularly large language models, seem to show some
         aspects of ToM understanding. However, existing ToM benchmarks use unimodal
         datasets – either video or text. Human ToM, on the other hand, is more than video
         or text understanding. People can flexibly reason about another person’s mind
         based on conceptual representations (e.g., goals, beliefs, plans) extracted from
         any available data, which can include visual cues, linguistic narratives, or both.
         To address this, we introduce a multimodal Theory of Mind question answering
         (MMToM-QA) benchmark. MMToM-QA comprehensively evaluates machine
         ToM both on multimodal data and on different kinds of unimodal data about a
         person’s activity in a household environment. To engineer multimodal ToM ca-
         pacity, we propose a novel method, BIP-ALM (Bayesian Inverse Planning Ac-
         celerated by Language Models). BIP-ALM extracts unified representations from
         multimodal data and utilizes language models for scalable Bayesian inverse plan-
         ning. We conducted a systematic comparison of human performance, BIP-ALM,
         and state-of-the-art models, including GPT-4. The experiments demonstrate that
         large language models and large multimodal models still lack robust ToM capac-
         ity. BIP-ALM, on the other hand, shows promising results, by leveraging the
         power of both model-based mental inference and language models.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Theory of Mind (ToM) is the cognitive ability to ascribe hidden mental states (e.g. goals, beliefs,
and desires) to other individuals based on their observed behavior. A hallmark of human social
intelligence, ToM serves as the foundation for a wide range of social interactions and a pillar of
commonsense reasoning (Lake et al., 2017). Systems designed to safely and productively interact
with humans in an open-ended manner, such as assistive robots (e.g., Dautenhahn, 2007; Hadfield-
Menell et al., 2016; Puig et al., 2023), AI teachers (e.g., Wang et al., 2021), autonomous vehicles
(e.g., Chandra et al., 2020), and cooperative embodied agents (e.g., Bara et al., 2021; Sclar et al.,
2022a), would greatly benefit from incorporating ToM reasoning capabilities, either through learn-
ing or based on built-in features. The recent advancements in machine learning, especially in the
realm of Large Language Models (LLMs), have spurred increased interest in assessing these models’
aptitude for ToM reasoning (e.g., Rabinowitz et al., 2018; Kosinski, 2023; Sap et al., 2019; 2022;
Ullman, 2023; Shapira et al., 2023; Shu et al., 2021; Moghaddam & Honey, 2023; Nematzadeh
et al., 2018; Gandhi et al., 2021). Many of these assessments use either text-based or video-based
benchmarks inspired by classic ToM experiments in the cognitive science literature (Wimmer &
Perner, 1983).
While the recent benchmarks for testing ToM reasoning in ML models provide well-designed, cog-
nitively informed tools, they share several notable limitations. One such limitation is the dependence
on massive training data, which raises the concern that these models work by finding data patterns
in a way that deviates from human-like ToM reasoning. This concern is under active discussion
(e.g., Ullman, 2023; Sap et al., 2022; Shapira et al., 2023). In this paper, we focus on a different but
related limitation: These benchmarks rely on unimodal data, either in the form of videos and anima-
tions (e.g., Gandhi et al., 2021), or textual descriptions of actions and environments (e.g., Kosinski,


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        VIDEO INPUT


                                                                                                       Microwave
                                                                                   6th cabinet
                                    Wine glass
                                                   …                                              …


        TEXT INPUT
         What’s inside the apartment: … The kitchen is equipped with a microwave, eight cabinets, … Inside the microwave, there is a
         cupcake. There is a wine glass and an apple on one of the kitchen tables. There are water glasses, a bottle wine, a condiment bottle,
         and a bag of chips in inside the cabinets. …
         Actions taken by Emily: Emily is initially in the bathroom. She then walks to the kitchen, goes to the sixth cabinet, opens it,
         subsequently closes it, and then goes towards the fourth cabinet.

        QUESTION
         Which one of the following statements is more likely to be true?
         (a) Emily has been trying to get a cupcake.         (b) Emily has been trying to get a wine glass.


Figure 1: Sketch of the MMToM-QA benchmark. Each question is associated with a video stream
(representative frames highlighting key moments are shown above for illustration) and text input
(illustrative text above is shortened for brevity). In the example video, Emily can see the wine glass
on one of the kitchen tables (1st frame) and passes by it without picking it up (2nd frame). At the end
of the clip (3rd frame), it appears that she could be walking towards the cabinets on the left side of
the room; or she might want to check if a goal object is inside the microwave. The text indicates that
there are no cupcakes in the cabinets, but there is a cupcake inside the microwave. To confidently
choose the correct answer, a model must fuse relevant information from both the video and the text.

2023; Sap et al., 2022). But Theory of Mind reasoning goes beyond merely text comprehension or
video understanding. It is about forming a causal model of another person’s mind, which connects
mental variables to possible actions (Baker et al., 2009; Saxe, 2012; Jara-Ettinger et al., 2016; Jara-
Ettinger, 2019). Such a model can infer mental states from either words or vision separately, or fuse
the separate information to form a single coherent mental scene. By examining multimodal ToM
reasoning, we can both gain insight into the computational models that underlie human ToM and
offer a stronger test for current ML models, particularly LLMs.
To systematically evaluate the ability of ML models to infer mental states from multimodal data, we
developed a novel Multimodal Theory of Mind Question Answering benchmark (MMToM-QA). As
shown in Figure 1, the benchmark includes as input both videos and text describing the activity of a
person in a household environment. The benchmark also includes questions associated with different
points in each of the videos. The questions refer to the mental states (goals and beliefs) of the person
described by the video or text. Each question has two possible options, neither surely true nor surely
false, but with one option always significantly more likely to be true given the observations so far.
Some questions can be adequately answered based on a single modality (text or video), but some
questions require fusing information from both modalities (e.g. understanding the woman’s goal in
Figure 1). We validated our benchmark through human experiments, showing that people are adept
at answering the questions in the benchmark. A human-like machine ToM model should adequately
adjust its inferences and associated uncertainties over a person’s mental states given the information
from both modalities up to the point at which the question is asked, in line with human judgments.
To build a human-like machine ToM model, we propose a novel multimodal ToM model, Bayesian
Inverse Planning Accelerated by Language Models (BIP-ALM), which combines multimodal data to
produce a coherent inference. As illustrated in Figure 3, BIP-ALM first extracts symbolic represen-
tations about the physical scene and the actions of the person from both video and text inputs. Using
these symbolic representations, BIP-ALM then extends Bayesian inverse planning (BIP) (Baker
et al., 2017), a ToM reasoning method that reverse-engineers human ToM but was originally de-
signed for visual data, to reason about the multimodal data. To further accelerate the inference for
ToM in real-world scenarios such as household activities in our benchmark, BIP-ALM finetunes a
language model using synthetic human activity data and uses it to evaluate the likelihood of hypothe-
ses about the person’s belief and goal. By doing so, BIP-ALM takes advantage of the robustness of
Bayesian inverse planning, as well as the scalability and open-endedness of language models.
We compared the performance of BIP-ALM and several state-of-the-art models for text QA or multi-
modal QA, including GPT-4 and Video-LLaMA. We found that existing models, however impressive


                                                                            2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


in other QA benchmarks, make large and systematic errors in our benchmark, and fail to match hu-
man performance. In contrast, BIP-ALM significantly outperforms these models, even when using
a very small language model. These findings reveal the limits of current state-of-the-art models and
suggest an alternative approach to engineering human-level ToM reasoning.
In summary, our main contributions include (1) the first benchmark for multimodal ToM, (2) a
novel ToM reasoning method, BIP-ALM, that combines Bayesian inverse planning and language
models to conduct robust yet efficient ToM inference based on multimodal data, and (3) a systematic
comparison of different ML models and human ToM.

2     R ELATED W ORK
Theory of Mind Benchmarks. Existing ToM benchmarks are based on either videos or text. Visual-
based benchmarks such as BIB (Gandhi et al., 2021), AGENT (Shu et al., 2021), or PHASE (Ne-
tanyahu et al., 2021) typically use animations of goal-directed agents to evaluate different concepts
in ToM. ToMi (Le et al., 2019) and its variants, Adv0-CSFB (Shapira et al., 2023), adapt a classic
false belief test, the Sally-Anne test (Wimmer & Perner, 1983), to build text QA benchmarks. Sim-
ilarly, the episode reasoning benchmark introduced by (Hewitt & Cohen, 2021) has text-based QA
tests that ask to select the true hypothesis about a person’s knowledge and belief based on a given
premise, which extends the Sally-Anne test. Triangle COPA (Gordon, 2016) asks questions about
the mental states of agents based on text descriptions of abstract shapes acting like social agents.
Moreover, there are QA benchmarks such as Social-IQ (Zadeh et al., 2019) and SocialIQa (Sap
et al., 2019) that do not specifically test ToM, but evaluate social intelligence in general. Lastly,
there have also been multi-agent challenges (e.g., Sclar et al., 2022b; Puig et al., 2020; 2023) eval-
uating ToM as part of the tasks. Unlike existing benchmarks, our MMToM-QA evaluates machine
ToM on multimodal data to test both goal and belief inference. We also go beyond simple visual
and textual stimuli and evaluate ToM using long everyday activities in complex environments. Crit-
ically, ToM QAs ask questions about people’s mental states (goals and beliefs) based on observable
behaviors. This is fundamentally different from VQAs (e.g., Antol et al., 2015; Zellers et al., 2019)
which do not require mental state inference. Table 2 in Appendix A provides a detailed comparison.
Multimodal Question Answering. There have been several multimodal QA benchmarks developed
in recent years (e.g., Talmor et al., 2021; Singh et al., 2021; Sanders et al., 2023; Fu et al., 2023;
Li et al., 2023). These benchmarks focus on the ability of models to detect and retrieve relevant
information from multimodal inputs (e.g., images, videos, text, tables) to answer factual questions.
However, there have not been multimodal QA benchmarks focusing on ToM, an ability fundamen-
tally different from the kind of multimodal information retrieval tested in the existing benchmarks.
Machine Theory of Mind. There have been two main approaches to engineering machine ToM:
end-to-end methods such as Theory of Mind neural networks (e.g., Rabinowitz et al., 2018), and
model-based methods such as Bayesian inverse planning (e.g., Baker et al., 2017; Shu et al., 2021).
Both types of approaches focus mostly on unimodal data and simple domains. Recent studies have
suggested that machine ToM may also emerge in LLMs such as GPT-4 (Kosinski, 2023; Bubeck
et al., 2023). However, more systematic evaluations have shown that apparent ToM capacities in
LLMs are not yet as robust as humans (Sap et al., 2022; Shapira et al., 2023; Sclar et al., 2023), and
often fail to pass trivial variants of common tests (Ullman, 2023). Our BIP-ALM model builds on
the strengths of these different methods. It extends Bayesian inverse planning to fuse multimodal
data and conduct inference in complex scenarios with the use of finetuned language models.

3     MMT O M-QA B ENCHMARK
3.1   OVERVIEW

Our benchmark consists of 134 videos of a person looking for daily objects in household environ-
ments, in line with cognitive studies examining mental attributions to agents navigating an envi-
ronment (e.g. Baker et al., 2017). On average, each video has 1,462 frames, depicting 36 human
actions. Based on these videos, we constructed 600 questions about a person’s goals and beliefs.
Each question is paired with a clip of the full activity in a video (as RGB-D frames), as well as a
text description of the scene and the actions taken by the person in that clip. All questions have two


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        Type 1.1: True belief, short-term                            Type 1.2: False belief, short-term                                    Type 1.3: Belief tracking, long-term


   Belief Inference     Scene: … Inside the bridge, you’ll find a bottle             Scene: … The living room features a cabinet… The cabinet is           Scene: … The kitchen is equipped with a fridge, sofa, dishwasher, eight
                        of wine…                                                     filled with a bag of chips, a remote controller, a bottle of wine,    cabinets, a stove, a microwave, and a kitchen table…
                        Actions: … Finally, she moves towards the                    and a water glass.                                                    Actions: … He walks to the seventh kitchen cabinet, opens and closes
                        fridge, preparing to open it.                                Actions: Jennifer is situated in the living room. She heads           it. He repeats the same action with the sixth kitchen cabinet.
                                                                                     towards the cabinet and is about to open it.                          Subsequently, he moves towards the dishwasher.
                        Question: If Elizabeth has been trying to get a
                        bottle of wine, which one of the following                   Question: If Jennifer has been trying to get a cupcake, which         Questions: If Charles has been trying to get a salmon, which one of the
                        statements is more likely to be true?                        one of the following statements is more likely to be true?            following statements is more likely to be true?
                        (a) Elizabeth thinks that there is a bottle of               (a) Jennifer thinks that there isn’t a cupcake inside the cabinet.    (a) Charles thinks that there is a salmon inside the fridge.
                            wine inside the fridge.                                  (b)Jennifer thinks that there is a cupcake inside the                 (b)Charles thinks that there isn’t any salmon inside the fridge.
                        (b) Elizabeth thinks that there isn’t any bottle of              cabinet.
                            wine inside the fridge.
                      Type 2.1: Goal given true belief                        Type 2.2: Goal given false belief                   Type 2.3: Goal given updated belief Type 2.4: Goal given future actions
  Goal Inference


                      Scene: … The living room is furnished with a            Scene: … There is a water glass inside the          Scene: … The first cabinet, from left to right,   Scene: … The dishwasher holds a dish bowl…
                      cabinet, … The cabinet is filled with two               seventh cabinet… The fridge stores two              contains a bag of chips.                          The first cabinet from the left holds a bag of chips
                      apples, …, and a bottle of wine. … Inside the           cupcakes…                                           Actions: Mary… walks towards the first kitchen    and a wine glass… The fifth cabinet has an
                      fridge, there are two apples.                           Actions: Mark… advances towards the                 cabinet, opens it, and then closes it.            apple…
                      Actions: James… then opens the fridge,                  seventh kitchen cabinet.                                                                              Actions: Williams… advances towards the first
                                                                                                                                  Question: Which one of the following
                      closes it… Finally, he walks towards the living                                                                                                               kitchen cabinet, opens it, and then shuts it. He
                                                                              Question: If Mark doesn’t think there is a          statements is more likely to be true?
                      room and approaches the cabinet.                                                                                                                              then moves towards the fifth kitchen cabinet.
                                                                              water glass inside the seventh kitchen              (a) Mary has been trying to get a bag of chips.
                      Question: Which one of the following                    cabinet, which one of the following statements      (b)Mark has been trying to get a condiment        Question: Which one of the following statements
                      statements is more likely to be true?                   is more likely to be true?                              bottle.                                       is more likely to be true?
                      (a) James has been trying to get a bottle of            (a) Mark has been trying to get a water glass.                                                        (a) William has been trying to get a wine glass.
                          wine.                                               (b)Mark has been trying to get a cupcake.                                                             (b)William has been trying to get a dish bowl.
                      (b) James has been trying to get an apple.



Figure 2: Question types in MMToM-QA, with examples. Questions fall into two broad cate-
gories, Belief and Goal, with several different question types in each category that span a range of
mental reasoning. Each example shows only a few frames and snippets. The options in the green,
italic font are correct answers. Note that we simplify the text in the examples for brevity. We provide
the full text and the link to the video clip of each example in Appendix E.
choices. The questions are categorized into seven types (see Figure 2), evaluating belief inference
and goal inference in rich and diverse situations. Each belief inference type has 100 questions, total-
ing 300 belief questions; each goal inference type has 75 questions, totaling 300 goal questions. We
provide another set of synthetic human behavior data in household environments for model training.
This training set includes 1000 procedurally synthesized videos with ground-truth annotations of the
scene, objects, goals, and beliefs.

3.2                    Q UESTION T YPES

Questions fall into two categories – belief inference and goal inference. There are several types
within each category (Figure 2), evaluating different aspects of multimodal ToM reasoning. Unlike
existing ToM evaluation that isolates goal and belief inference, questions in our benchmark require
a joint inference of goal and belief, asking about one conditioned on another.
Type 1.1: True belief, short-term. In the scenarios this type refers to, a person is about to open a
container. The question focuses on an object the person has not seen so far and treats it as a hypothet-
ical goal object. The question is then whether the person believes the object is in the container. This
type examines true belief ; that is, the inference that the person believes the goal is in the container
is more consistent with the current action, and it is also the same as the actual world state.
Type 1.2: False belief, short-term. This type is similar to Type 1.1, but differs in a significant way:
the hypothetical goal object is not inside the container that the person is about to open, so the person
has a false belief. In this case, the correct answer should still be that it is more likely that the person
thinks there is such a goal object inside the container, given the current action, even though they
would not find what they want there in reality.
Type 1.3: Belief tracking, long-term. In the scenarios this type refers to, the person passes by a
container but does not check it. After a while, they have still not found a goal object, but are also not
going back to check the container they passed by. This suggests that they do not think the goal object
is inside that container. This question tests whether a model can use the long-term observation of
past actions to make judgments consistent with history, not just the most recent action.
Type 2.1: Goal inference given true belief. This question targets a person’s unknown goal. In the
scenarios that this type refers to, the person walks towards a container, where there is a hypothetical
goal object that the person has not observed so far. The person, on the other hand, has observed the
other hypothetical goal object but has not picked it up in the past. The correct inference is that it is


                                                                                                                              4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


more likely that the person wants the goal object that they have not seen so far and thinks it is inside
the container (true belief). This type tests whether a model can infer the goal given a true belief.
Type 2.2: Goal inference given false belief. This type is similar to type 2.1, but the person has a
hypothetical false belief. In these scenarios, a specific object is inside a container that the person
is walking towards. However, the question states that this person thinks that there is no such object
inside the container (false belief). So, the most likely explanation is that the person’s goal is a
different object, which they think might be inside the container.
Type 2.3: Goal inference given updated belief. Unlike Type 2.1 and 2.2, in a Type 2.3 question,
the video does not end with the person walking towards a container. Instead, the person opens
the container and then closes it without taking an object from it. The correct inference is that the
person’s goal is an item not yet seen rather than anything inside the container. To correctly answer
this type of question, a model has to infer how a person may update their belief and change their
plan (e.g., closing the container without picking anything from it) to pursue the goal accordingly.
Type 2.4: Goal inference given future actions. Questions in Type 2.1, 2.2, and 2.3 ask about
goals that are consistent with the belief and the latest action. In contrast, in Type 2.4, a model needs
to consider possible future actions as well. Specifically, one of the hypothetical goal objects is an
unobserved object at a location that is still far away from the person and is not directly related to
the latest action (which is walking to a nearby container). But, in these scenarios, the person is on a
path to potentially reach the location of that object. For instance, in the Type 2.4 example illustrated
in Figure 2, a person is walking towards the right side of the room, and so they might want to search
through all possible locations on the right side, including the dishwasher. This gives rise to the
correct answer, dish bowl, which is located inside the dishwasher. As such, Type 2.4 requires a
model to reason about the spatial relationships (the locations of objects and the person as well as the
person’s heading direction) in a visual scene and predict possible future actions for a goal.

3.3   P ROCEDURAL G ENERATION

To generate video and text data, as well as questions of all types at scale for the test set, we designed
a procedural generation method. First, we procedurally synthesized a large set of videos in a realistic
household embodied simulator, VirtualHome-Social (Puig et al., 2020). As Puig et al. (2020) have
demonstrated, such procedural video generation can conveniently create synthetic human activities
that are human-like, diverse, and well-annotated (including objects, actions, and ground-truth goals
and beliefs). It also alleviates the concerns of cost and privacy that come with collecting real-world
human activity videos suitable for ToM reasoning. At each step in a video, we sampled a question
type and two opposing hypotheses based on the definition of the type. Finally, we generated the text
description and the question based on the ground-truth state, actions, and the sampled hypotheses
using GPT-4 to create the text input for the question. Using the same procedural generation, we can
synthesize the videos in the training set. We provide more details in Appendix B.5.

3.4   E VALUATION P ROTOCOL

We can evaluate a model in three conditions: (1) Multimodal QA in which both the video and text
inputs are present, (2) Text QA with only the text input, and (3) Video QA with only the video in-
put. We evaluated all models in a zero-shot manner, following prior works on ToM QA evaluation
Shapira et al. (2023). Crucially, we do not provide any example QAs during training. We expect
a model to learn how a person updates their mental state and acts accordingly in a physical envi-
ronment from the human behavior data in the training set, and generalize the learned knowledge to
answer the questions at test time.


4     T HE BIP-ALM M ODEL

To infer the mental state of a person based on video and text inputs, we propose a novel machine
Theory of Mind method, Bayesian Inverse Planning Accelerated by Language Models (BIP-ALM),
which builds on Bayesian inverse planning (BIP) (Baker et al., 2017). Prior works have shown that
BIP can reverse engineer human ToM reasoning in simple domains. BIP-ALM extends BIP by (1)
building unified representations about a scene, a person’s actions, and the mental state hypotheses


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        RGB-D Video                                      Scene Graphs apple
                                                                                 in kitchen cabinet

                                       …
                                                                    apple
                                                                       personin kitchen(closed)
                                                                                          cabinet     …
                                                                   person close (closed)
                                                                                       kitchen
                                                                                        table
                                                                                   kitchen
                                           Visual Perception                        table                 Fused Symbolic Representations
                               …                                        Fridge cupcake
                                                                                                                 0
                                                Module                 (closed)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               <latexit sha1_base64="/OwHDR4vD2jfpgrx6zuoIHhPmGU=">AAAB6nicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0lE1GPRi8eK9gPaWDbbSbt0swm7G6GE/gQvHhTx6i/y5r9x2+agrQ8GHu/NMDMvSATXxnW/ncLK6tr6RnGztLW9s7tX3j9o6jhVDBssFrFqB1Sj4BIbhhuB7UQhjQKBrWB0M/VbT6g0j+WDGSfoR3QgecgZNVa6149ur1xxq+4MZJl4OalAjnqv/NXtxyyNUBomqNYdz02Mn1FlOBM4KXVTjQllIzrAjqWSRqj9bHbqhJxYpU/CWNmShszU3xMZjbQeR4HtjKgZ6kVvKv7ndVITXvkZl0lqULL5ojAVxMRk+jfpc4XMiLEllClubyVsSBVlxqZTsiF4iy8vk+ZZ1buounfnldp1HkcRjuAYTsGDS6jBLdShAQwG8Ayv8OYI58V5dz7mrQUnnzmEP3A+fwACr42e</latexit>


                                                                    Fridge    cupcake
                                                                   (closed)                                       s
                                                                                                          In(apple, kitchen cabinet)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           States
                                                                                                          In(cupcake, fridge)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                …
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           s0:t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           <latexit sha1_base64="dt5mHHHIizVtwwhb0uWQDgCAevA=">AAAB7nicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0lEVDwVvXisYD+gjWWz3bRLN5uwOxFK6I/w4kERr/4eb/4bt20O2vpg4PHeDDPzgkQKg6777RRWVtfWN4qbpa3tnd298v5B08SpZrzBYhnrdkANl0LxBgqUvJ1oTqNA8lYwup36rSeujYjVA44T7kd0oEQoGEUrtcxj5l7jpFeuuFV3BrJMvJxUIEe9V/7q9mOWRlwhk9SYjucm6GdUo2CST0rd1PCEshEd8I6likbc+Nns3Ak5sUqfhLG2pZDM1N8TGY2MGUeB7YwoDs2iNxX/8zophld+JlSSIldsvihMJcGYTH8nfaE5Qzm2hDIt7K2EDammDG1CJRuCt/jyMmmeVb2Lqnt/Xqnd5HEU4QiO4RQ8uIQa3EEdGsBgBM/wCm9O4rw4787HvLXg5DOH8AfO5w8cyI9s</latexit>


                                                                 Actions                                  Closed(fridge)
                                                                    walk towards fridge   …               Closed(kitchen cabinet)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               H1
                                                                                                          …                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Inverse Symbolic
        Text                           GPT-4 for Text Parsing                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Planner       H2
                                                                             In(apple, kitchen cabinet)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0         Actions
                                                                                                                  <latexit sha1_base64="tK82omn/jLU2g70XIjM4u4MKF/A=">AAAB6nicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0lE1GPRi8eK9gPaWDbbSbt0swm7G6GE/gQvHhTx6i/y5r9x2+agrQ8GHu/NMDMvSATXxnW/ncLK6tr6RnGztLW9s7tX3j9o6jhVDBssFrFqB1Sj4BIbhhuB7UQhjQKBrWB0M/VbT6g0j+WDGSfoR3QgecgZNVa6p49ur1xxq+4MZJl4OalAjnqv/NXtxyyNUBomqNYdz02Mn1FlOBM4KXVTjQllIzrAjqWSRqj9bHbqhJxYpU/CWNmShszU3xMZjbQeR4HtjKgZ6kVvKv7ndVITXvkZl0lqULL5ojAVxMRk+jfpc4XMiLEllClubyVsSBVlxqZTsiF4iy8vk+ZZ1buounfnldp1HkcRjuAYTsGDS6jBLdShAQwG8Ayv8OYI58V5dz7mrQUnnzmEP3A+fwDnNI2M</latexit>


                                                             Initial State   In(cupcake, fridge)                  a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             …                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           a0:t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <latexit sha1_base64="+cs/wrftN7W7eZpvNB4NEcq3KMY=">AAAB7nicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0lEVDwVvXisYD+gjWWz3bRLN5uwOxFK6I/w4kERr/4eb/4bt20O2vpg4PHeDDPzgkQKg6777RRWVtfWN4qbpa3tnd298v5B08SpZrzBYhnrdkANl0LxBgqUvJ1oTqNA8lYwup36rSeujYjVA44T7kd0oEQoGEUrtehj5l7jpFeuuFV3BrJMvJxUIEe9V/7q9mOWRlwhk9SYjucm6GdUo2CST0rd1PCEshEd8I6likbc+Nns3Ak5sUqfhLG2pZDM1N8TGY2MGUeB7YwoDs2iNxX/8zophld+JlSSIldsvihMJcGYTH8nfaE5Qzm2hDIt7K2EDammDG1CJRuCt/jyMmmeVb2Lqnt/Xqnd5HEU4QiO4RQ8uIQa3EEdGsBgBM/wCm9O4rw4787HvLXg5DOH8AfO5w8BFI9a</latexit>


        What’s inside the apartment:                                         Closed(fridge)               walk towards fridge
        ...                                                                  Closed(kitchen cabinet)
                                                                             …
        …                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Hypothesis 1
                                                                                                           Goal: apple
        Actions taken by John:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      g1 , bt1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      <latexit sha1_base64="QkHYsedbEaZf06bXABOJj/jvucY=">AAAB8XicbVBNS8NAEJ34WetX1aOXxSJ4kJKIqMeiF48V7Ae2MWy223bpZhN2J0IJ/RdePCji1X/jzX/jts1BWx8MPN6bYWZemEhh0HW/naXlldW19cJGcXNre2e3tLffMHGqGa+zWMa6FVLDpVC8jgIlbyWa0yiUvBkObyZ+84lrI2J1j6OE+xHtK9ETjKKVHvqBd0rCwHvEoFR2K+4UZJF4OSlDjlpQ+up0Y5ZGXCGT1Ji25yboZ1SjYJKPi53U8ISyIe3ztqWKRtz42fTiMTm2Spf0Ym1LIZmqvycyGhkzikLbGVEcmHlvIv7ntVPsXfmZUEmKXLHZol4qCcZk8j7pCs0ZypEllGlhbyVsQDVlaEMq2hC8+ZcXSeOs4l1U3LvzcvU6j6MAh3AEJ+DBJVThFmpQBwYKnuEV3hzjvDjvzsesdcnJZw7gD5zPHyI8j+o=</latexit>


                                                                             walk towards fridge
        …                                                      Actions                                     Belief: In(apple, fridge)
                                                       √                     open fridge
        …                                                                    close fridge
                                                                             …
        Question:                                                                                          Goal: apple
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Hypothesis 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      g2 , bt2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      <latexit sha1_base64="xJxt2kElWCglakWOE41+1eq+9Iw=">AAAB8XicbVDLSgNBEOyNrxhfUY9eBoPgQcJuEPUY9OIxgnlgsobZySQZMju7zPQKYclfePGgiFf/xpt/4yTZgyYWNBRV3XR3BbEUBl3328mtrK6tb+Q3C1vbO7t7xf2DhokSzXidRTLSrYAaLoXidRQoeSvWnIaB5M1gdDP1m09cGxGpexzH3A/pQIm+YBSt9DDoVs5I0K08YrdYcsvuDGSZeBkpQYZat/jV6UUsCblCJqkxbc+N0U+pRsEknxQ6ieExZSM64G1LFQ258dPZxRNyYpUe6UfalkIyU39PpDQ0ZhwGtjOkODSL3lT8z2sn2L/yU6HiBLli80X9RBKMyPR90hOaM5RjSyjTwt5K2JBqytCGVLAheIsvL5NGpexdlN2781L1OosjD0dwDKfgwSVU4RZqUAcGCp7hFd4c47w4787HvDXnZDOH8AfO5w8lTY/s</latexit>


        ….                                                                   H1:
                                                                                                           Belief: ¬In(apple, fridge)
                                                                             Hypothetical goal
        (a) …                                                Hypotheses      Hypothetical belief
        (b) ….                                                               H2:
                                                                             Hypothetical goal
                                                                             Hypothetical belief


Figure 3: Overview of our model, BIP-ALM. For visual, linguistic, and fused information, we
show examples of the symbolic representations of states (s1:t ), actions (a1:t ), and the two hypotheses
about the person’s goal (g1 and g2 ) and belief (bt1 and bt2 ) for a question asked at time step t.

from multimodal inputs, and (2) finetuning a language model to efficiently conduct inverse symbolic
planning, based on unified symbolic representations.
Figure 3 provides an overview of the method. We first extract symbolic representations of the states
and actions from both the video and the text. We then align and fuse representations extracted from
different modalities, to form a unified representation of the event and the physical scene. This unified
representation allows us to use a principled method to infer a person’s mental state based on inputs
from any given modality. We then use an inverse symbolic planner to compare the two hypotheses
extracted from the question and produce the answer. We introduce each module below, and also
provide more implementation details in the Appendix C.

4.1   U NIFIED S YMBOLIC R EPRESENTATIONS

Visual Perception. Our visual perception module processes visual data and transforms it into sym-
bolic representations. For each frame, we adopt the method in Blukis et al. (2022) to create a voxel
map. We then construct a scene graph based on this voxel map.
Text Parsing. We use GPT-4 to parse text, to extract symbolic representations of the initial state as
well as subsequent actions. GPT-4 first parses the text into three components – the description of the
environment state, the human actions, and the question. Each component is further translated into
symbolic representation by different, specifically prompted instances of GPT-4. For state, we gener-
ate predicates such as In(apple, fridge). For action, we generate action commands such as
walk towards kitchen. Finally, we translate the question into two hypotheses about the goal
and the belief. For each hypothesis, the goal is represented by the goal object (e.g., apple), and the
belief is represented by a predicate (e.g., In(apple, fridge)), or its negation (¬In(apple,
fridge)), indicating the location of the goal object in the hypothetical belief.
Representation Fusion. The fusion module aligns and integrates information from different input
streams. Specifically, we transform the scene graphs from the video input to a set of predicates
(similar to those extracted from the text), which describe the spatial relationships between entities
and the status of objects. We first form the symbolic representation of the initial state by combin-
ing predicates from the video and the text. We then align the actions parsed from the text with the
actions detected from the video, and truncate the video frames into several intervals, each corre-
sponding to an action. We term each interval, a time step t. Starting from the initial state, we update
the state predicates from the previous step with the new predicates obtained from the video frame
corresponding to the current step. By doing so, we can construct a symbolic state sequence and a
symbolic action sequence, as illustrated in Figure 3. In addition, we form two hypotheses based on
the hypothetical goals and beliefs parsed from the question.

4.2   I NVERSE S YMBOLIC P LANNER

Similar to BIP, we first formulate an agent’s behavior as a forward generative model using a Par-
tially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP) (Kaelbling et al., 1998), defined by the tuple
⟨S, A, T, G, R, Ω, O, γ⟩. st ∈ S and at ∈ A are the state and the action at time t. T (s′ |s, a)
are the state transition probabilities. g ∈ G is a goal, which defines the reward of the agent


                                                                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


rt = R(st , at , g). ot ∈ Ω is the agent’s observation at t derived following the observation function,
ot = O(st ). Finally, γ ∈ (0, 1] is a discount factor. The belief of an agent is modeled as a probabil-
ity distribution over the state b(s). In this work, we factorize the belief of the full state into beliefs
about individual objects. For each object, the belief indicates the probability of finding that object
at a possible location. Conditioned on both the goal and the belief,
                                                                  P∞ a rational agent will take actions
based on the optimal policy π(at |g, bt ) to maximize its return t=0 γ t rt .
Given this forward generative model, we can then conduct inverse inference about the agent’s goal
and belief. By assuming a deterministic state transition, we can jointly infer the goal and belief of
an agent given observed states and actions as follows:
                                                      Qt−1
        P (g, bt |s1:t , a1:t−1 ) ∝ P (bt |bt−1 , st ) τ =0 π(aτ |g, bτ )P (bτ |bτ −1 , sτ )P (b0 )P (g). (1)
Given two hypotheses about goal and belief, H1 = ⟨g1 , bt1 ⟩ and H2 = ⟨g2 , bt2 ⟩, we can evaluate
which one is more likely to be true as
                                                                               Qt−1
              P (g1 , bt1 |s1:t , a1:t )   π(at |g1 , bt1 )P (bt1 |b̂t−1 , st ) τ =0 π(aτ |g1 , b̂τ )
                                         =                                                            , (2)
              P (g2 , bt2 |s1:t , a1:t )
                                                                               Qt−1
                                           π(at |g2 , bt2 )P (bt2 |b̂t−1 , st ) τ =0 π(aτ |g2 , b̂τ )
where b̂τ is the estimated belief at a past step τ < t. Since the hypothetical belief in the question
is about the belief at the current step, we estimate the belief in the past steps to form a full belief
hypothesis. In this work, we assume a uniform distribution for the initial belief. We represent the
agent’s observation as the subset of the state predicates that the agent can observe, and update the
agent’s belief accordingly. This gives us an estimated agent belief b̂τ = b̂τ (sτ ) at each past step.
Based on Eqn. (2), we need to evaluate (1) the likelihood of the last action at given the hypo-
thetical belief and goal (π(at |g, bt )), (2) the probability of a hypothetical belief at the last step
(P (bt |b̂t−1 , st )), and (3) the likelihood of all past actions given the hypothetical goal and the esti-
                                            Qt−1
mated belief prior to the current step ( τ =0 π(aτ |g, b̂τ )). The computational bottleneck here is the
policy. Conventional methods rely on planning or reinforcement learning to acquire such a policy.
Inspired by the recent use of LLMs for decision-making (Huang et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022), we
adopt a language model to amortize the policy. In particular, we symbolically represent the belief at
each step as a list of possible locations of the corresponding goal object. We then prompt a language
model with the symbolic representations of the state st , goal g, and estimated belief b̂t , and generate
the likelihood of the observed action at based on the output logits. We can finetune the language
model on the ground-truth state, belief, goal, and action sequences in the training dataset.

5     E XPERIMENTS
5.1   BASELINES

Human baseline. We conducted a behavioral experiment to validate our questions, and to evaluate
human performance. Participants (N=180) were recruited online via Prolific. We randomly sampled
120 questions (20% of all questions) from all types and tested the participants in three conditions:
multimodal, text-only, and video-only. Each question in each condition was answered by 5 partici-
pants. The experiment was approved by an institutional review board.
Large language models (LLMs). We evaluate LLMs on the text-only version of MMToM-QA, in-
cluding GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023), GPT-3.5, GPT-J (6B) (Wang & Komatsuzaki, 2021), and LLaMA
2 (7B) (Touvron et al., 2023). For all LLMs, we prompt them with the text input.
Large multimodal models (LMMs). We evaluate state-of-the-art LLMs – InstructBLIP (Dai
et al., 2023) and Video-LLaMA 2 (Zhang et al., 2023) – on both multimodal and video-only versions
of MMToM-QA. For all LMMs, we uniformly sample a few frames from each video following
prior works (Dai et al., 2023). In particular, we sample 16 frames and 30 frames from each video
for InstructBLIP and Video-LLaMA 2 respectively. We use the largest versions of both models,
Vicuña-13B for InstructBLIP and LLaMA-2-13B-Chat for Video-LLaMA 2. To test GPT-4in both
multimodal and video-only conditions, we create a baseline, GTP-4 with captions, by appending
video captions generated by Video-LLaMA 2 to the prompt for GPT-4.
In the experiments, we finetuned GPT-J (6B) and LLaMA 2 (7B) and created two BIP-ALM models:
BIP-ALM w/ GPT-J and BIP-ALM w/ LLaMA 2.


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          Table 1: Human and model performance in each question type.
               Method                        Belief Inference                Goal Inference            All
                                      1.1      1.2      1.3   All    2.1    2.2    2.3    2.4   All
               Human                  95.8     96.7 100 97.5        90.0   91.7 83.3 88.9       88.5   93.0
  Multimodal

               InstructBLIP           62.0     52.0 32.0 48.7       46.7   29.3 42.7 60.0       44.7   46.7
               Video-LLaMA 2          36.0     38.0 52.0 42.0       36.0   41.3 30.7 45.3       38.3   40.2
               GPT-4 with captions    98.0     37.0 84.0 73.0       49.3   58.7    1.3   48.0   39.3   56.2
               BIP-ALM w/ GPT-J       90.0     69.0 86.0 81.7       68.0   78.7 56.0 73.3       69.0   75.3
               BIP-ALM w/ LLaMA 2     88.0     68.0 85.0 80.3       62.7   77.3 72.0 80.0       73.3   76.7
               Human                  96.0     95.8 81.3 91.0       85.8   76.7 65.0 68.3       74.0   82.5
               GPT-4                  97.0     12.0 77.0 62.0       48.0   42.7    2.7   42.7   34.0   48.0
  Text only


               GPT-3.5                81.0     11.0 39.0 43.7       46.7   16.0 21.3 48.0       33.0   38.3
               GPT-J                  56.0     53.0 38.0 49.0       52.0   50.7 50.7 56.0       52.3   59.7
               LLaMA 2                64.0     55.0 50.0 56.3       49.3   48.0 41.3 38.7       44.3   50.3
               BIP-ALM w/ GPT-J       88.0     69.0 88.0 81.7       77.3   68.0 30.7 70.7       61.7   71.7
               BIP-ALM w/ LLaMA 2     89.0     68.0 90.0 82.3       54.7   66.7 50.7 62.7       58.7   70.5
               Human                  69.1     64.3 86.4 73.3       58.5   60.0 76.7 63.3       64.6   68.9
  Video only


               InstructBLIP           56.0     50.0 42.0 49.3       56.0   45.3 54.7 53.3       52.3   50.8
               Video-LLaMA 2          24.0     32.0 67.0 41.0       50.7   45.3 56.0 52.0       51.0   46.0
               GPT-4 with captions    58.0     21.0 41.0 40.0       45.3   38.3 42.6 37.3       40.9   40.5
               BIP-ALM w/ GPT-J       63.0     57.0 72.0 64.0       45.3   62.7 50.7 62.7       55.3   59.7
               BIP-ALM w/ LLaMA 2     69.0     63.0 60.0 64.0       62.7   54.7 53.3 62.7       58.3   61.2

5.2            R ESULTS

We summarize the results in Table 1. On the multimodal version, humans achieve 93% accuracy
averaging across question types. For each tested question, the majority of the participants chose the
correct answer, validating our question designs. When only given unimodal data, human perfor-
mance overall drops in accuracy, with video-only questions being harder to answer than text-only.
While most questions suffer, the performance of text-based reasoning on the false-belief/true-belief
remains the same. This is of note as these questions have been the main target of text ToM QAs.
The baselines show performance that is close to random guessing across all types, except GPT-
4. GPT-4 reaches human-level accuracy on Type 1.1 and shows competitive performance on Type
1.3, in both text QAs and multimodal QAs (combined with the captions from Video-LLaMA 2).
However, it also makes systematic mistakes in harder questions that involve false beliefs (Type
1.2). This suggests that GPT-4 can understand the true world state from the text but confuses belief
with the true world state. Hence it fails to recognize false beliefs. GPT-4 also struggles with goal
inference. Its accuracy on Type 2.3 is particularly low. We hypothesize that this is because GPT-4
mistakenly thinks that the goal has to be one of the objects inside the container the person opens and
fails to recognize that the person updates the belief after checking inside the container.
Our BIP-ALM models significantly outperform all baselines in all three conditions by a large mar-
gin. Even without fine-tuning, as the ablated study in Appendix B.1 shows, our model with the pre-
trained GPT-J and LLaMA 2 can already achieve better results than using pretrained LLMs alone,
even outperforming a much larger model (GPT-4). In addition, our models have no exposure to
modality-specific training – they are only trained on symbolic representations of the training data.
This allows them to flexibly conduct ToM reasoning with any unimodal or multimodal data.


5.3            A DDITIONAL E VALUATION

Effect of model sizes. We report the performance of open-sourced models (LLaMA 2, InstructBLIP,
and Video-LLaMA 2) with different model sizes in Table 5 in Appendix B.1. We found that all
baselines performed no better than chance, regardless of the model sizes.
Effect of few-shot prompting or chain-of-thought. As shown in Table 4 in Appendix B.1, we
found no meaningful improvement for almost all baselines after using different few-shot or chain-
of-thought Kojima et al. (2022) prompting. They still perform no better than chance. The only
exception is GPT-4 in the text-only condition, which has an improvement in simple types (e.g., Type
1.3) with few-shot prompting but still performs poorly on harder types, e.g., false belief (Type 1.2).


                                                          8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Finetuning baselines. We finetuned Video-LLaMA 2 (13B) on our training set for video instruction
tasks following Zhang et al. (2023). As Table 6 shows, the finetuned Video-LLaMA 2 performs
moderately better in a few simpler question types, most notably true belief (Type 1.1), but its overall
performance is still not better than chance, unlike our method.
Generalization. We created an additional test set, the human test set, for generalization evaluation.
It has 40 videos and 120 questions. To generate the videos in this set, we used 2 new apartments
unseen in the training set and the main test set. We recruited 3 participants who had no prior exposure
to the system to control the avatar to reach assigned goals via the human interface so that we could
collect real human belief updates and human actions. We then used the same method to generate
the questions. We report the model performance on this human test set in Table 7. The results show
that our method can generalize to both real human behavior and unseen physical environments.


6   D ISCUSSION & C ONCLUSION

We presented Multimodal Theory of Mind Question Answering (MMToM-QA), the first multimodal
benchmark for machine ToM. The results of our human experiment verified the design of the ques-
tions and provided a human baseline. Comparison of human performance across different modalities
reveals the kinds of modalities necessary for answering each type of question. We conducted a sys-
tematic evaluation of state-of-the-art LLMs and LMMs and compared them with our method. We
summarize several key findings and discuss the limitations and future work as follows.
What information necessary for ToM can we get from each modality? From a video, a model
gets the dynamic state change at each step as well as what objects the agent is walking towards and is
passing by at a given step. A model needs this information to determine the agent’s expected action
plans given a hypothesis about the belief and the goal. From the text, a model gets ground truth
information about the initial state. Because of the partial observations caused by the limited camera
view and occlusion, the text provides additional state information that is sometimes unavailable in
the video. A model requires information about the true world state to determine whether an agent
has a true belief or false belief as well as what objects the agent has observed so far.
What do current LLMs and LMMs understand about ToM? We found strong performance from
GPT-4 on questions that only require retrieving information about the true world state. However, the
results overall show GPT-4 cannot still reason about the mental state of a person and track the change
in the mental state over time. We found more specifically that GPT-4 has poor judgment on goals,
which was not discussed in prior literature due to the lack of goal inference tests in existing text-
based ToM benchmarks. Finally, we found that current LMMs can produce useful captions about
people’s activities, which can be seen by the marginal performance improvement of GPT-4 with
captions compared to only prompting GPT-4 with text input (i.e., GPT-4 in the text-only condition).
However, on their own, current LMMs’ ToM reasoning capabilities appear to be inferior to GPT-4.
What are the successes and failures of BIP-ALM? Instead of directly mapping the multimodal
inputs to beliefs and goals, BIP-ALM conducts model-based inference by imaging possible actions
given a hypothetical mental state and state context via language models. This not only results in a
much better performance in the main test set but also enables the method to generalize to real human
behavior in unseen environments. These successes suggest that machine ToM can benefit from (1)
the modality-invariance of symbolic representations, (2) the robustness of inverse planning, and
(3) the scalability of language models. We also observed several failures. First, BIP-ALM cannot
imagine missing state information from videos. Second, it does not have motion planning, which is
crucial for Type 2.4, as the model has to imagine possible future paths. Finally, the action likelihood
estimated by the LMs sometimes could be inaccurate due to LMs’ occasional failures in planning.
Limitations and future work. First, MMToM-QA only includes videos of people looking for ob-
jects in household environments. In the future, we would like to extend this to more diverse scenar-
ios. Second, in addition to goals and beliefs, ToM also includes reasoning about desires, emotions,
and constraints, which we intend to incorporate in a future version of the benchmark. Finally, we
intend to enrich the representations in BIP-ALM with broader relations and predicates, extending its
reach even further to more complex scenes and human behaviors. This could potentially achieved
by finetuning larger language models in broader datasets. Such datasets can be collected in diverse
simulators; they can also be crowdsourced (text descriptions of real-world human behaviors).


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Stanislaw Antol, Aishwarya Agrawal, Jiasen Lu, Margaret Mitchell, Dhruv Batra, C Lawrence Zit-
  nick, and Devi Parikh. Vqa: Visual question answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE international
  conference on computer vision, pp. 2425–2433, 2015.

Chris L Baker, Rebecca Saxe, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Action understanding as inverse planning.
  Cognition, 113(3):329–349, 2009.

Chris L Baker, Julian Jara-Ettinger, Rebecca Saxe, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Rational quantitative
  attribution of beliefs, desires and percepts in human mentalizing. Nature Human Behaviour, 1(4):
  1–10, 2017.

Cristian-Paul Bara, Sky CH-Wang, and Joyce Chai. Mindcraft: Theory of mind modeling for situ-
  ated dialogue in collaborative tasks. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing, 2021.

Valts Blukis, Chris Paxton, Dieter Fox, Animesh Garg, and Yoav Artzi. A persistent spatial semantic
  representation for high-level natural language instruction execution. In Conference on Robot
  Learning, pp. 706–717. PMLR, 2022.

Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Ka-
   mar, Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, et al. Sparks of artificial general
   intelligence: Early experiments with gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712, 2023.

Rohan Chandra, Aniket Bera, and Dinesh Manocha. Stylepredict: Machine theory of mind for
  human driver behavior from trajectories. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.04816, 2020.

Wenliang Dai, Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Anthony Meng Huat Tiong, Junqi Zhao, Weisheng Wang,
 Boyang Li, Pascale Fung, and Steven Hoi. Instructblip: Towards general-purpose vision-language
 models with instruction tuning, 2023.

Kerstin Dautenhahn. Socially intelligent robots: dimensions of human–robot interaction. Philo-
  sophical transactions of the royal society B: Biological sciences, 362(1480):679–704, 2007.

Chaoyou Fu, Peixian Chen, Yunhang Shen, Yulei Qin, Mengdan Zhang, Xu Lin, Zhenyu Qiu, Wei
  Lin, Jinrui Yang, Xiawu Zheng, et al. Mme: A comprehensive evaluation benchmark for multi-
  modal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.13394, 2023.

Kanishk Gandhi, Gala Stojnic, Brenden M Lake, and Moira R Dillon. Baby intuitions benchmark
  (bib): Discerning the goals, preferences, and actions of others. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:9963–9976, 2021.

Andrew S. Gordon. Commonsense interpretation of triangle behavior. In AAAI Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence, 2016.

Dylan Hadfield-Menell, Stuart J Russell, Pieter Abbeel, and Anca Dragan. Cooperative inverse
  reinforcement learning. In Advances in neural information processing systems, 2016.

John Hewitt and Michael Cohen. Exploring roberta’s theory of mind through textual entailment.
  2021.

Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.

Wenlong Huang, Pieter Abbeel, Deepak Pathak, and Igor Mordatch. Language models as zero-shot
 planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied agents. In International Conference on
 Machine Learning, pp. 9118–9147. PMLR, 2022.

Julian Jara-Ettinger. Theory of mind as inverse reinforcement learning. Current Opinion in Behav-
  ioral Sciences, 29:105–110, 2019.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Julian Jara-Ettinger, Hyowon Gweon, Laura E Schulz, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. The naı̈ve utility
  calculus: Computational principles underlying commonsense psychology. Trends in cognitive
  sciences, 20(8):589–604, 2016.
Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Michael L Littman, and Anthony R Cassandra. Planning and acting in
  partially observable stochastic domains. Artificial intelligence, 101(1-2):99–134, 1998.
Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large
  language models are zero-shot reasoners. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  35:22199–22213, 2022.
Michal Kosinski. Theory of mind may have spontaneously emerged in large language models. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2302.02083, 2023.
Brenden M Lake, Tomer D Ullman, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Samuel J Gershman. Building
  machines that learn and think like people. Behavioral and brain sciences, 40:e253, 2017.
Matt Le, Y-Lan Boureau, and Maximilian Nickel. Revisiting the evaluation of theory of mind
 through question answering. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
 ing, 2019.
Lei Li, Yuwei Yin, Shicheng Li, Liang Chen, Peiyi Wang, Shuhuai Ren, Mukai Li, Yazheng Yang,
  Jingjing Xu, Xu Sun, et al. M3 it: A large-scale dataset towards multi-modal multilingual instruc-
  tion tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.04387, 2023.
Shuang Li, Xavier Puig, Chris Paxton, Yilun Du, Clinton Wang, Linxi Fan, Tao Chen, De-An Huang,
  Ekin Akyürek, Anima Anandkumar, et al. Pre-trained language models for interactive decision-
  making. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:31199–31212, 2022.
Shima Rahimi Moghaddam and Christopher J Honey. Boosting theory-of-mind performance in large
  language models via prompting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.11490, 2023.
Aida Nematzadeh, Kaylee Burns, Erin Grant, Alison Gopnik, and Thomas L Griffiths. Evaluating
  theory of mind in question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.09352, 2018.
Aviv Netanyahu, Tianmin Shu, Boris Katz, Andrei Barbu, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Phase:
  Physically-grounded abstract social events for machine social perception. In Proceedings of the
  aaai conference on artificial intelligence, volume 35, pp. 845–853, 2021.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. ArXiv, abs/2303.08774, 2023.
Xavier Puig, Tianmin Shu, Shuang Li, Zilin Wang, Yuan-Hong Liao, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Sanja
  Fidler, and Antonio Torralba. Watch-and-help: A challenge for social perception and human-ai
  collaboration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.09890, 2020.
Xavier Puig, Tianmin Shu, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Antonio Torralba. Nopa: Neurally-guided
  online probabilistic assistance for building socially intelligent home assistants. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2301.05223, 2023.
Neil Rabinowitz, Frank Perbet, Francis Song, Chiyuan Zhang, SM Ali Eslami, and Matthew
  Botvinick. Machine theory of mind. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 4218–
  4227. PMLR, 2018.
Kate Sanders, David Etter, Reno Kriz, and Benjamin Van Durme. Multivent: Multilingual videos of
  events with aligned natural text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.03153, 2023.
Maarten Sap, Hannah Rashkin, Derek Chen, Ronan LeBras, and Yejin Choi. Socialiqa: Common-
 sense reasoning about social interactions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09728, 2019.
Maarten Sap, Ronan LeBras, Daniel Fried, and Yejin Choi. Neural theory-of-mind? on the limits of
 social intelligence in large lms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.13312, 2022.
Rebecca Saxe. The happiness of the fish: Evidence for a common theory of one’s own and others’
  actions. In Handbook of Imagination and Mental Simulation, pp. 257–309. Psychology Press,
  2012.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Melanie Sclar, Graham Neubig, and Yonatan Bisk. Symmetric machine theory of mind. In Ka-
 malika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato
 (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162 of
 Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 19450–19466. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022a.
Melanie Sclar, Graham Neubig, and Yonatan Bisk. Symmetric machine theory of mind. In Interna-
 tional Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 19450–19466. PMLR, 2022b.
Melanie Sclar, Sachin Kumar, Peter West, Alane Suhr, Yejin Choi, and Yulia Tsvetkov. Minding
 language models’ (lack of) theory of mind: A plug-and-play multi-character belief tracker, 2023.
Natalie Shapira, Mosh Levy, Seyed Hossein Alavi, Xuhui Zhou, Yejin Choi, Yoav Goldberg,
  Maarten Sap, and Vered Shwartz. Clever hans or neural theory of mind? stress testing social
  reasoning in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14763, 2023.
Tianmin Shu, Abhishek Bhandwaldar, Chuang Gan, Kevin Smith, Shari Liu, Dan Gutfreund, Eliza-
  beth Spelke, Joshua Tenenbaum, and Tomer Ullman. Agent: A benchmark for core psychological
  reasoning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9614–9625. PMLR, 2021.
Hrituraj Singh, Anshul Nasery, Denil Mehta, Aishwarya Agarwal, Jatin Lamba, and Balaji Vasan
  Srinivasan. Mimoqa: Multimodal input multimodal output question answering. In Proceedings
  of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 5317–5332, 2021.
Alon Talmor, Ori Yoran, Amnon Catav, Dan Lahav, Yizhong Wang, Akari Asai, Gabriel Ilharco,
  Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Jonathan Berant. Multimodalqa: Complex question answering over
  text, tables and images. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.06039, 2021.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
  tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
Tomer Ullman. Large language models fail on trivial alterations to theory-of-mind tasks. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2302.08399, 2023.
Ben Wang and Aran Komatsuzaki. GPT-J-6B: A 6 Billion Parameter Autoregressive Language
  Model. https://github.com/kingoflolz/mesh-transformer-jax, May 2021.
Qiaosi Wang, Koustuv Saha, Eric Gregori, David Joyner, and Ashok Goel. Towards mutual theory
  of mind in human-ai interaction: How language reflects what students perceive about a virtual
  teaching assistant. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI conference on human factors in computing
  systems, pp. 1–14, 2021.
Heinz Wimmer and Josef Perner. Beliefs about beliefs: Representation and constraining function of
  wrong beliefs in young children’s understanding of deception. Cognition, 13(1):103–128, 1983.
Amir Zadeh, Michael Chan, Paul Pu Liang, Edmund Tong, and Louis-Philippe Morency. Social-
 iq: A question answering benchmark for artificial social intelligence. In Proceedings of the
 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8807–8817, 2019.
Rowan Zellers, Yonatan Bisk, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. From recognition to cognition: Visual
  commonsense reasoning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition, pp. 6720–6731, 2019.
Hang Zhang, Xin Li, and Lidong Bing. Video-llama: An instruction-tuned audio-visual language
  model for video understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.02858, 2023.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     C OMPARISON OF T HEORY OF M IND B ENCHMARKS


                       Table 2: A comparison of Theory of Mind benchmarks.
  Dataset               Tested Concepts         Test Modality      Generation Evaluation
                                                Size
  ToMi (Le et al.,      False belief            400 Text           Templates     Multiple choice
  2019)                                                                          Q&A
  epistemic rea-        Knowledge, beliefs      2000 Text          Templates     True or false
  soning (Hewitt &                                                               judgement
  Cohen, 2021)
  Adv-CSFB              False belief            183    Text        Hand-         Multiple choice
  (Kosinski, 2023)                                                 designed      filling in the
                                                                                 blanks
  Triangle COPA         Social interaction      100    Text        Hand-         Multiple choice
  (Gordon, 2016)                                                   designed      Q&A
  BIB        (Gandhi    Goal preferences,       5,000 Video        Procedural    Surprise rating
  et al., 2021)         efficient    actions,                      generation
                        constraints, instru-
                        mental actions
  AGENT         (Shu    Goal          prefer-   960    Video       Procedural    Surprise rating
  et al., 2021)         ences,      efficient                      generation
                        actions, unobserved
                        constraints, cost-
                        reward trade-off
  PHASE      (Ne-       Goals, relationships    100    Video       Procedural    Multiple choice
  tanyahu et al.,                                                  generation    recognition
  2021)
  MMToM-QA              Beliefs, goals          600    Text and    Procedural    Multiple    choice
  (Our benchmark)                                      video       generation    Q&A

We provide a comparison of Theory of Mind benchmarks in Table 2, summarizing the evaluated
ToM concepts, the size of the test set, available modalities of the inputs, the generation method, and
the evaluation for each benchmark. From the table, we can see that our benchmark is the only one
that provides multimodal inputs. Additionally, commonly used text-based ToM QA benchmarks do
not evaluate goal inference, whereas questions in our benchmark ask about both goals and beliefs.

B     B ENCHMARK D ETAILS

B.1   M ORE Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS

We conducted an ablated study to show the effect of finetuning language models for BIP-ALM. As
Table 3 shows, finetuning GPT-J and LLaMA 2 significantly boosts the performance of BIP-ALM. It
is also interesting to see that even before finetuning, BIP-ALM with pretrained GPT-J or LLaMA can
already outperform much larger models including GPT-4. This further demonstrates the advantage
of conducting inverse symbolic planning for multimodal ToM reasoning.
We have also evaluated the effect of few-shot or chain-of-thought prompting (Table 4), the effect of
model sizes (Table 5), the effect of finetuning baseline models on our training set (Table 6), and the
generalization of models on the human test set with real human behaviors in unseen environments
(Table 7).

B.2   Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS

Figure 4 demonstrates how the inverse symbolic planner enabled by the language model in our
BIP-ALM model can estimate the likelihood of a given hypothesis. In Figure 4A, given the goal
of getting a water glass, our model reasons that Elizabeth is more likely to open the microwave if


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: Results of the ablated study. “w/o FT” indicates ablated models in which our model uses
pretrained language models without finetuning. “MM” represents the multimodal condition.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Method                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Belief Inference                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Goal Inference                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    All
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1.1      1.2     1.3   All                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2.1         2.2    2.3   2.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            All
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ours GPT-J (w/o FT)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   84.0     63.0 92.0 79.7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       58.7        64.0 16.0 65.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               51.0   65.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ours GPT-J                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            90.0     69.0 86.0 81.7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       68.0        78.7 56.0 73.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               69.0   75.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MM


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ours LLaMA 2 (w/o FT)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 56.0     46.0 96.0 66.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       66.7        48.0 29.3 69.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               53.3   59.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ours LLaMA 2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          88.0     68.0 85.0 80.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       62.7        77.3 72.0 80.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               73.3   76.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ours GPT-J (w/o FT)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   76.0     61.0 90.0 75.7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       44.0        58.7 26.7 56.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               46.3   61.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ours GPT-J                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            88.0     69.0 88.0 81.7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       77.3        68.0 30.7 70.7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               61.7   71.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Text


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ours LLaMA 2 (w/o FT)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 66.0     53.0 98.0 72.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       57.3        41.3 30.7 65.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               48.7   60.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ours LLaMA 2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          89.0     68.0 90.0 82.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       54.7        66.7 50.7 62.7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               58.7   70.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ours GPT-J (w/o FT)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   57.0     36.0 77.0 56.7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       56.0        60.0 36.0 54.7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               51.7   54.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Video


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ours GPT-J                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            63.0     57.0 72.0 64.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       45.3        62.7 50.7 62.7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               55.3   59.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ours LLaMA 2 (w/o FT)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 51.0     33.0 75.0 53.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       45.3        72.0 41.3 50.7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               52.3   52.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ours LLaMA 2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          69.0     63.0 60.0 64.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       62.7        54.7 53.3 62.7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               58.3   61.2



 A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Action likelihood given different beliefs                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Likelihood of given hypothesis changes over time


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       …                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    …

 Scene: … The microwave contains two cupcakes and a plate…
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Scene: … The oven contains a cupcake and a plate...
 Actions: … She is on the verge of opening the microwave.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Actions: … She opens the oven and closes it.
 Question: If Elizabeth has been trying to get a water glass, which one of the
 following statements is more likely to be true?                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Question: Which one of the following statements is more likely to be true?
 (a) Elizabeth thinks that there is a water glass inside the microwave.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (a) Karen has been trying to get a salmon.
 (b) Elizabeth thinks that there isn’t any water glass inside the microwave.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (b) Karen has been trying to get a plate.

 Action likelihood ratio by BIP-ALM at t :                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Action likelihood ratio by BIP-ALM at t        1:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   <latexit sha1_base64="NA529J++qMz/VAAfLaKTBX9yYAw=">AAAB6nicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBiyURUY9FLx4r2g9oQ9lsN+3SzSbsToQS+hO8eFDEq7/Im//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IJHCoOt+O4WV1bX1jeJmaWt7Z3evvH/QNHGqGW+wWMa6HVDDpVC8gQIlbyea0yiQvBWMbqd+64lrI2L1iOOE+xEdKBEKRtFKD3jm9coVt+rOQJaJl5MK5Kj3yl/dfszSiCtkkhrT8dwE/YxqFEzySambGp5QNqID3rFU0YgbP5udOiEnVumTMNa2FJKZ+nsio5Ex4yiwnRHFoVn0puJ/XifF8NrPhEpS5IrNF4WpJBiT6d+kLzRnKMeWUKaFvZWwIdWUoU2nZEPwFl9eJs3zqndZde8vKrWbPI4iHMExnIIHV1CDO6hDAxgM4Ble4c2Rzovz7nzMWwtOPnMIf+B8/gC7NY1v</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         <latexit sha1_base64="Pr5aPgXpcw4NaU2PSo9hhymmHUg=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEN3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0lE1GPRi8cW7Ae0oWy2k3btZhN2J0IJ/QVePCji1Z/kzX/jts1BWx8MPN6bYWZekEhh0HW/ncLa+sbmVnG7tLO7t39QPjxqmTjVHJo8lrHuBMyAFAqaKFBCJ9HAokBCOxjfzfz2E2gjYvWAkwT8iA2VCAVnaKUG9ssVt+rOQVeJl5MKyVHvl796g5inESjkkhnT9dwE/YxpFFzCtNRLDSSMj9kQupYqFoHxs/mhU3pmlQENY21LIZ2rvycyFhkziQLbGTEcmWVvJv7ndVMMb/xMqCRFUHyxKEwlxZjOvqYDoYGjnFjCuBb2VspHTDOONpuSDcFbfnmVtC6q3lXVbVxWard5HEVyQk7JOfHINamRe1InTcIJkGfySt6cR+fFeXc+Fq0FJ585Jn/gfP4A4c+M/Q==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ⇡(at 1 = open oven|g = salmon, bt 1 , st 1 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              <latexit sha1_base64="UbWQzbhVVx8IfwH9BXqqsiOyurY=">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</latexit>


  ⇡(at = open microwave|g = water glass, bt = In(water glass, micowave), st )
 <latexit sha1_base64="Wv/qqQZXbvll3Gt6JnVxagaV0kE=">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</latexit>


                                                                               = 1.82                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              t 1                         t 1  t 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           = 0.73
 ⇡(at = open microwave|g = water glass, bt = ¬In(water glass, microwave), st )                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ⇡(a     = open oven|g = plate, b , s )

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Action likelihood ratio by BIP-ALM at t :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                <latexit sha1_base64="Pr5aPgXpcw4NaU2PSo9hhymmHUg=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEN3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0lE1GPRi8cW7Ae0oWy2k3btZhN2J0IJ/QVePCji1Z/kzX/jts1BWx8MPN6bYWZekEhh0HW/ncLa+sbmVnG7tLO7t39QPjxqmTjVHJo8lrHuBMyAFAqaKFBCJ9HAokBCOxjfzfz2E2gjYvWAkwT8iA2VCAVnaKUG9ssVt+rOQVeJl5MKyVHvl796g5inESjkkhnT9dwE/YxpFFzCtNRLDSSMj9kQupYqFoHxs/mhU3pmlQENY21LIZ2rvycyFhkziQLbGTEcmWVvJv7ndVMMb/xMqCRFUHyxKEwlxZjOvqYDoYGjnFjCuBb2VspHTDOONpuSDcFbfnmVtC6q3lXVbVxWard5HEVyQk7JOfHINamRe1InTcIJkGfySt6cR+fFeXc+Fq0FJ585Jn/gfP4A4c+M/Q==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ⇡(at = close oven|g = salmon, bt , st )⇡(at 1 |g = salmon, bt 1 , st 1 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              <latexit sha1_base64="HnMFPADT4Typ4egIEmpPR/4keUs=">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</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       = 1.32
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ⇡(at = close oven|g = plate, bt , st )⇡(at 1 |g = plate, bt 1 , st 1 )



Figure 4: Examples of how BIP-ALM evaluates the likelihood of different hypotheses via the action
likelihood estimation from the language model. The results here are based on BIP-ALM with fine-
tuned LLaMA 2. The green option in each example is the correct answer and BIP-ALM selects the
correct answers in both cases. The blue panels show the likelihood ratio estimated by the language
model at a certain step for each example, explaining how BIP-ALM can come to the correct con-
clusions by conducting inverse planning via a language model. (A) It is more likely for Elizabeth
to open the microwave if she believes that there is a water glass inside the microwave and that she
wants to get a water glass, even though there is not any water glass inside the microwave (i.e., she
has a false belief)). (B) The likelihood of hypothesis will change after the model observes more
actions.



she believes that there is a water glass inside the microwave, even though there is not any water
glass inside the microwave according to the true world state. By imagining reasonable actions
conditioned on hypothesized mental states, our model can successfully infer that Elizabeth has a
false belief. In contrast, GPT-4 selects (b) as the more likely option, failing to recognize the false
belief. Figure 4B depicts how the likelihood of a hypothesis changes after the model observes
different actions. Specifically, in this case, the model first thinks that it is more likely that Karen is
going to open the oven if the goal is to get a plate because there is a plate inside the oven. However,
if the goal is truly to get a plate, at the next step, Karen should not close the oven but pick up the plate
instead. If the goal is not to get a plate but a salmon, on the other hand, then Karen should close the
oven and continue to look for salmon in other places. Therefore, the fact that Karen closes the oven
without picking up the plate suggests that it is unlikely that her goal is to get a plate and that it is
still quite possible that she wants to get a salmon instead. The action likelihood ratios estimated by


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                Table 4: Results of baselines using few-shot prompting or chain-of-thought (CoT).

              Method                                     Belief Inference                Goal Inference            All
                                                   1.1      1.2     1.3   All   2.1    2.2     2.3   2.4    All
              InstructBLIP                        62.0     52.0 32.0 48.7       46.7   29.3 42.7 60.0       44.7   46.7
              InstructBLIP (w/ 1-shot)            42.0     49.0 53.0 48.0       50.7   33.3 44.0 46.7       43.7   45.8
              InstructBLIP (w/ 2-shot)            31.0     26.0 55.0 37.3       50.7   30.7 41.3 38.7       40.3   38.8
              InstructBLIP (w/ CoT)               68.0     66.0 39.0 57.7       45.3   26.7 45.3 42.7       40.0   48.8
 Multimodal


              GPT-4 with captions                 98.0     37.0 84.0 73.0       49.3   58.7    1.3   48.0   39.3   56.2
              GPT-4 with captions (w/ 1-shot)     94.0     22.0 55.0 57.0       49.3   85.3    5.3   50.7   47.7   52.3
              GPT-4 with captions (w/ 2-shot)     95.0     14.0 89.0 66.0       41.3   93.3    2.7   46.7   46.0   56.0
              GPT-4 with captions (w/ CoT)        59.0     49.0 78.0 62.0       56.1   56.5    2.6   40.0   38.8   50.4
              Video-LLaMA 2                       36.0     38.0 52.0 42.0       36.0   41.3 30.7 45.3       38.3   40.2
              Video-LLaMA 2 (w/ 1-shot)           45.0     45.0 37.0 42.3       46.7   48.0 42.7 48.0       46.3   44.3
              Video-LLaMA 2 (w/ 2-shot)           57.0     42.0 36.0 45.0       45.3   36.0 41.3 53.3       44.0   44.5
              Video-LLaMA 2 (w/ CoT)              30.0     13.0 43.5 28.8       25.0   24.8 15.3 12.8       19.5   24.5
              GPT-4                               97.0     12.0 77.0 62.0       48.0   42.7    2.7   42.7   34.0   48.0
              GPT-4 (w/ 1-shot)                   99.0     40.0 86.0 75.0       61.3   49.3    2.7   54.7   42.0   58.5
              GPT-4 (w/ 2-shot)                   99.0     39.0 96.0 78.0       72.0   100      0    45.3   54.3   66.2
              GPT-4 (w/ CoT)                      97.0     13.0 82.0 64.0       49.3    5.3    2.7   44.0   25.3   44.7
              GPT-3.5                             81.0     11.0 39.0 43.7       46.7   16.0 21.3 48.0       33.0   38.3
              GPT-3.5 (w/ 1-shot)                 100      25.0 13.0 46.0       49.3    2.7   32.0 37.3     30.3   38.1
              GPT-3.5 (w/ 2-shot)                 100      16.0 16.0 44.0       61.3   36.0 13.3 40.0       37.7   40.8
 Text only


              GPT-3.5 (w/ CoT)                    82.0     11.0 40.0 44.3       45.3   10.7 21.3 46.7       31.0   37.7
              GPT-J                               56.0     53.0 38.0 49.0       52.0   50.7 50.7 56.0       52.3   59.7
              GPT-J (w/ 1-shot)                   44.0     47.0 54.0 48.3       53.3   52.0 53.3 58.7       54.3   51.3
              GPT-J (w/ 2-shot)                   44.0     47.0 54.0 48.3       53.3   52.0 53.3 58.7       54.3   51.3
              GPT-J (w/ CoT)                      59.0     58.0 41.0 52.7       53.3   48.0 36.0 42.7       45.0   48.8
              LLaMA 2                             64.0     55.0 50.0 56.3       49.3   48.0 41.3 38.7       44.3   50.3
              LLaMA 2 (w/ 1-shot)                 66.0     65.0 31.0 54.0       48.0   34.7 45.3 44.0       43.0   48.5
              LLaMA 2 (w/ 2-shot)                 48.0     51.0 50.0 49.7       46.7   48.0 46.7 50.7       48.0   48.8
              LLaMA 2 (w/ CoT)                    56.0     53.0 46.0 51.7       46.7   48.0 46.7 41.3       45.7   48.7
              InstructBLIP                        56.0     50.0 42.0 49.3       56.0   45.3 54.7 53.3       52.3   50.8
              InstructBLIP (w/ 1-shot)            63.0     60.0 32.0 51.7       56.0   41.3 52.0 62.7       53.0   52.3
              InstructBLIP (w/ 2-shot)            67.0     52.0 21.0 46.7       54.7   56.0 58.7 58.7       57.0   51.8
              InstructBLIP (w/ CoT)               51.0     54.0 62.0 55.7       46.7   48.0 46.7 42.7       46.0   50.8
 Video only


              GPT-4 + captions                    58.0     21.0 41.0 40.0       45.3   38.3 42.6 37.3       40.9   40.5
              GPT-4 + captions (w/ 1-shot)        66.0     65.0 36.0 55.7       30.7   28.0 32.0 25.3       29.0   42.3
              GPT-4 + captions (w/ 2-shot)        79.0     38.0 24.0 47.0       38.7   74.7 60.0 33.3       51.7   49.3
              GPT-4 + captions (w/ CoT)           52.0     27.0 47.0 42.0       50.0   53.5 38.5 41.6       45.9   44.0
              Video-LLaMA 2                       24.0     32.0 67.0 41.0       50.7   45.3 56.0 52.0       51.0   46.0
              Video-LLaMA 2 (w/ 1-shot)           54.0     49.0 45.0 49.3       46.7   45.0 46.0 41.3       44.8   47.0
              Video-LLaMA 2 (w/ 2-shot)           47.0     49.0 53.0 49.7       48.0   49.3 49.3 50.7       49.3   49.5
              Video-LLaMA 2 (w/ CoT)              28.6     24.4 26.7 25.6       11.1   45.6 11.7 26.8       23.8   24.7


                              Table 5: Results of baselines with different model sizes.
              Method                            Belief Inference                  Goal Inference            All
                                         1.1       1.2     1.3   All     2.1     2.2    2.3   2.4   All
              InstructBLIP (7B)         49.0      53.0 62.0 54.7        52.0    48.0 50.7 37.7      47.0    50.8
              InstructBLIP (13B)        62.0      52.0 32.0 48.7        46.7    29.3 42.7 60.0      44.7    46.7
  MM


              Video-LLaMA 2 (7B)        21.9      12.5 25.0 19.8        21.4    10.5 17.7 16.7      15.6    18.2
              Video-LLaMA 2 (13B)       36.0      38.0 52.0 42.0        36.0    41.3 30.7 45.3      38.3    40.2
              LLaMA 2 (7B)              64.0      55.0 50.0 56.3        49.3    48.0 41.3 38.7      44.3    50.3
  Text


              LLaMA 2 (13B)             44.0      47.0 54.0 48.3        48.0    37.3 49.3 60.0      48.7    48.5
              InstructBLIP (7B)         47.0      41.0 59.0 49.0        45.3    38.7 46.7 41.3      43.0    46.0
  Video


              InstructBLIP (13B)        56.0      50.0 42.0 49.3        56.0    45.3 54.7 53.3      52.3    50.8
              Video-LLaMA 2 (7B)        19.0      13.0 18.0 16.7        18.7    15.7 10.7 20.0      21.7    19.2
              Video-LLaMA 2 (13B)       24.0      32.0 67.0 41.0        50.7    45.3 56.0 52.0      51.0    46.0


                                                              15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 6: Effect of finetuning baseline models on our training set. We compare the the finetuned
Video-LLaMA 2, i.e., Video-LLaMA 2 (FT), and the pretrained Video-LLaMA 2. Note that the
baselines here are multimodal models. So they are evaluated in the multimodal (MM) condition and
the video-only condition but not in the text-only condition.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Method                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Belief Inference                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Goal Inference                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                All
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1.1      1.2      1.3   All                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2.1     2.2     2.3   2.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  All
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Video-LLaMA 2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            36.0     38.0 52.0 42.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 41.3    36.0 30.7 45.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     38.3         40.2
   Video MM


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Video-LLaMA 2 (FT)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       61.0     51.0 42.0 51.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 41.3    44.0 45.3 44.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     43.7         47.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Video-LLaMA 2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            24.0     32.0 67.0 41.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 45.3    50.7 56.0 52.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     51.0         46.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Video-LLaMA 2 (FT)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       44.0     58.0 44.0 48.7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 60.0    41.3 56.0 49.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     51.7         50.2



Table 7: Generalization results on the human test set. All models are the same as the ones evaluated
in Table 1.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Method                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Belief Inference                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Goal Inference                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                All
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.1      1.2     1.3   All                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2.1     2.2    2.3   2.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   All
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         InstructBLIP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              43.8     57.9 48.0 49.9                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 53.3    46.7 40.0 53.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      48.3        49.1
 Multimodal


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Video-LLaMA 2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             50.0     47.4 24.0 40.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 33.3    33.3 20.0 46.7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      33.3        36.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         GPT-4 with captions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       100      66.7 52.0 72.9                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 40.0    46.7 20.0 66.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      43.2        58.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BIP-ALM w/ GPT-J                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          93.8     52.6 88.0 78.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 73.3    86.7 73.3 66.7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      75.0        76.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BIP-ALM w/ LLaMA 2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        87.5     73.7 96.0 85.7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 60.0    86.7 60.0 66.7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      68.3        77.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         GPT-4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     100      31.5 64.0 65.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 40.0    40.0 13.3 53.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      36.7        50.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         GPT-3.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   93.8     52.6 28.0 58.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 53.3     0.0   33.3 46.7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    33.3        45.7
 Text only


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         GPT-J                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     62.5     42.1 44.0 49.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 33.3    53.3 26.7 53.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      41.7        45.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LLaMA 2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   75.0     52.6 44.0 57.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 46.7    40.0 60.0 53.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      50.0        53.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BIP-ALM w/ GPT-J                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          75.0     52.6 88.0 71.9                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 40.0    73.3 33.3 66.7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      53.3        62.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BIP-ALM w/ LLaMA 2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        75.0     52.6 100 75.9                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  66.7    80.0 53.3 40.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      60.0        67.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         InstructBLIP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              43.8     52.6 48.0 48.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 46.7    46.7 46.7 60.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      50.0        49.1
 Video only


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Video-LLaMA 2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             31.3     26.8 68.0 42.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 53.3    60.0 40.0 40.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      48.3        45.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         GPT-4 with captions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       64.3     46.2 26.3 45.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 46.7    50.0 57.1 50.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      50.9        48.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BIP-ALM w/ GPT-J                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          62.5     57.9 60.0 60.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 46.7    53.3 73.3 60.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      58.3        59.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BIP-ALM w/ LLaMA 2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        75.0     57.9 76.0 69.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 60.0    53.3 60.0 53.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      56.7        63.1


VIDEO INPUT
   t 1
        <latexit sha1_base64="QkoKqtO/zLmSqm+aZOiPJqQ/ew8=">AAAB7XicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBiyURUY9FLx4r2A9oQ9lsN+3aTTbsToQS+h+8eFDEq//Hm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IJHCoOt+O4WV1bX1jeJmaWt7Z3evvH/QNCrVjDeYkkq3A2q4FDFvoEDJ24nmNAokbwWj26nfeuLaCBU/4DjhfkQHsQgFo2ilJpIz4pFeueJW3RnIMvFyUoEc9V75q9tXLI14jExSYzqem6CfUY2CST4pdVPDE8pGdMA7lsY04sbPZtdOyIlV+iRU2laMZKb+nshoZMw4CmxnRHFoFr2p+J/XSTG89jMRJynymM0XhakkqMj0ddIXmjOUY0so08LeStiQasrQBlSyIXiLLy+T5nnVu6y69xeV2k0eRxGO4BhOwYMrqMEd1KEBDB7hGV7hzVHOi/PufMxbC04+cwh/4Hz+AL4pje0=</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     <latexit sha1_base64="Pr5aPgXpcw4NaU2PSo9hhymmHUg=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEN3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0lE1GPRi8cW7Ae0oWy2k3btZhN2J0IJ/QVePCji1Z/kzX/jts1BWx8MPN6bYWZekEhh0HW/ncLa+sbmVnG7tLO7t39QPjxqmTjVHJo8lrHuBMyAFAqaKFBCJ9HAokBCOxjfzfz2E2gjYvWAkwT8iA2VCAVnaKUG9ssVt+rOQVeJl5MKyVHvl796g5inESjkkhnT9dwE/YxpFFzCtNRLDSSMj9kQupYqFoHxs/mhU3pmlQENY21LIZ2rvycyFhkziQLbGTEcmWVvJv7ndVMMb/xMqCRFUHyxKEwlxZjOvqYDoYGjnFjCuBb2VspHTDOONpuSDcFbfnmVtC6q3lXVbVxWard5HEVyQk7JOfHINamRe1InTcIJkGfySt6cR+fFeXc+Fq0FJ585Jn/gfP4A4c+M/Q==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        svideo-only
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        <latexit sha1_base64="41M0Di46oyy/xj+rqjdNPngPjZ4=">AAAB/HicbVDLSgNBEJz1GeMrmqOXxSB4MeyKqMegF48RzAOSEGYnnWTI7Mwy0xtclvgrXjwo4tUP8ebfOEn2oIkFDUVVN91dQSS4Qc/7dlZW19Y3NnNb+e2d3b39wsFh3ahYM6gxJZRuBtSA4BJqyFFAM9JAw0BAIxjdTv3GGLThSj5gEkEnpAPJ+5xRtFK3UDTdNsIjpmPeA3WmpEgm3ULJK3szuMvEz0iJZKh2C1/tnmJxCBKZoMa0fC/CTko1ciZgkm/HBiLKRnQALUslDcF00tnxE/fEKj23r7Qtie5M/T2R0tCYJAxsZ0hxaBa9qfif14qxf91JuYxiBMnmi/qxcFG50yTcHtfAUCSWUKa5vdVlQ6opQ5tX3obgL768TOrnZf+y7N1flCo3WRw5ckSOySnxyRWpkDtSJTXCSEKeySt5c56cF+fd+Zi3rjjZTJH8gfP5A5TZlV8=</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Close(agent, microwave)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         …                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Fused Symbolic Representations
     …
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   smultimodal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   <latexit sha1_base64="8q8dT16jtD5bSylsOE4zRkmDpNk=">AAAB/nicbVBNS8NAEN3Ur1q/ouLJy2IRPJVERD0WvXisYGuhDWGz2bRLd5OwOxFLCPhXvHhQxKu/w5v/xm2bg7Y+GHi8N8PMvCAVXIPjfFuVpeWV1bXqem1jc2t7x97d6+gkU5S1aSIS1Q2IZoLHrA0cBOumihEZCHYfjK4n/v0DU5on8R2MU+ZJMoh5xCkBI/n2gfbzPrBHyGUmgMskJKIofLvuNJwp8CJxS1JHJVq+/dUPE5pJFgMVROue66Tg5UQBp4IVtX6mWUroiAxYz9CYSKa9fHp+gY+NEuIoUaZiwFP190ROpNZjGZhOSWCo572J+J/XyyC69HIepxmwmM4WRZnAkOBJFjjkilEQY0MIVdzciumQKELBJFYzIbjzLy+SzmnDPW84t2f15lUZRxUdoiN0glx0gZroBrVQG1GUo2f0it6sJ+vFerc+Zq0Vq5zZR39gff4AtiCWnQ==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Close(agent, microwave)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        In(cupcake, microwave)
TEXT INPUT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               stext-only
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         <latexit sha1_base64="KVRUfYktX/7Qam7t8W033yaoBWE=">AAAB/XicbVDLSsNAFJ34rPUVHzs3wSK4sSQi6rLoxmUF+4A2hMl00g6dTMLMjRhD8FfcuFDErf/hzr9x0mahrQfu5XDOvcyd48ecKbDtb2NhcWl5ZbWyVl3f2NzaNnd22ypKJKEtEvFIdn2sKGeCtoABp91YUhz6nHb88XXhd+6pVCwSd5DG1A3xULCAEQxa8sx95WV9oA+QFe0kEjzNc8+s2XV7AmueOCWpoRJNz/zqDyKShFQA4VipnmPH4GZYAiOc5tV+omiMyRgPaU9TgUOq3GxyfW4daWVgBZHUJcCaqL83MhwqlYa+ngwxjNSsV4j/eb0Egks3YyJOgAoyfShIuAWRVURhDZikBHiqCSaS6VstMsISE9CBVXUIzuyX50n7tO6c1+3bs1rjqoyjgg7QITpGDrpADXSDmqiFCHpEz+gVvRlPxovxbnxMRxeMcmcP/YHx+QO/R5YP</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        …
 What’s inside the apartment: … The kitchen is equipped with a microwave, eight                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          In(cupcake, microwave)
 cabinets, … Inside the microwave, there is a cupcake…                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   …


 Policy estimated by BIP-ALM given state info extracted from different modalities                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Most possible next action
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ⇡(at |g = cupcake, bt , svideo-only = {Close(agent, microwave), · · · })
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           <latexit sha1_base64="X3KLXRgMV44dztV5s4L5CzVuWsQ=">AAACSXicbVBNbxMxFPSmQEv4CnDkYhEhpVKJdhGiXCpV9MKxSKStlE3D27cvqRWvvbLfBqJl/x4Xbtz4D1w4gBAnnI8DtIxkaTQzz8+erNTKcxx/jVpb167f2N652b51+87de537D068rRzSAK227iwDT1oZGrBiTWelIygyTafZ7Gjpn87JeWXNW16UNCpgatREIXCQxp13aal6cM7yo5wepEwfuMaqRJhRsyezc96TfryW5yon+9QavWgO0nqtHWnrqQdTMiFYKHT2PcxpN4ymmFv2abM77nTjfryCvEqSDemKDY7HnS9pbrEqwp2owfthEpc8qsGxQk1NO608lYCzsHUYqIGC/KheNdHIJ0HJ5cS6cAzLlfr3RA2F94siC8kC+MJf9pbi/7xhxZOXo1qZsmIyuF40qbRkK5e1ylw5QtaLQACdCm+VeAEOkEP57VBCcvnLV8nJs37yoh+/ed49fLWpY0c8Eo9FTyRiXxyK1+JYDASKT+Kb+CF+Rp+j79Gv6Pc62oo2Mw/FP2ht/QHNYrN2</latexit>


 Video-only                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       walk towards cabinet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         <latexit sha1_base64="lhMe9Otb33N+BpE8I9asfeyueIA=">AAACBHicbVC7SgNBFJ2Nrxhfq5ZpBoNgFXZF1DJoYxnBPCAJ4e7sJBky+2DmrjEsKWz8FRsLRWz9CDv/xkmyhSYeGDicc+/MnOPFUmh0nG8rt7K6tr6R3yxsbe/s7tn7B3UdJYrxGotkpJoeaC5FyGsoUPJmrDgEnuQNb3g99Rv3XGkRhXc4jnkngH4oeoIBGqlrF9vIHzAdgRxSjEagfE0ZeOY2nHTtklN2ZqDLxM1IiWSodu2vth+xJOAhMglat1wnxk4KCgWTfFJoJ5rHwIbQ5y1DQwi47qSzEBN6bBSf9iJlToh0pv7eSCHQehx4ZjIAHOhFbyr+57US7F12UhHGCfKQzR/qJdLEpdNGqC8UZyjHhgBTwvyVsgEoYGh6K5gS3MXIy6R+WnbPy87tWalyldWRJ0VyRE6ISy5IhdyQKqkRRh7JM3klb9aT9WK9Wx/z0ZyV7RySP7A+fwB7KZig</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             t   t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           <latexit sha1_base64="Zbbmk+gmKR/kVrKV8qyL0ciVF+o=">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</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ⇡(a |g = cupcake, b , stext-only = {In(cupcake, microwave), · · · })                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   walk towards microwave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         <latexit sha1_base64="PM43/04P12TVc2n82Kgua7T7M2k=">AAACBnicbVC7SgNBFJ31GeNr1VKEwSBYhV0RtQzaWEYwD0iWMDt7kwyZfTBzNzEsqWz8FRsLRWz9Bjv/xsmj0MQDA4dz7uXOOX4ihUbH+baWlldW19ZzG/nNre2dXXtvv6rjVHGo8FjGqu4zDVJEUEGBEuqJAhb6Emp+72bs1/qgtIijexwm4IWsE4m24AyN1LKPmggPmA2Y7FGMB0wFmoaCK0P7MGrZBafoTEAXiTsjBTJDuWV/NYOYpyFEyCXTuuE6CXoZUyi4hFG+mWpIGO+xDjQMjVgI2ssmMUb0xCgBbcfKvAjpRP29kbFQ62Hom8mQYVfPe2PxP6+RYvvKy0SUpAgRnx5qp9IEpuNOaCAUcJRDQxhXwvyV8i5TjKNpLm9KcOcjL5LqWdG9KDp354XS9ayOHDkkx+SUuOSSlMgtKZMK4eSRPJNX8mY9WS/Wu/UxHV2yZjsH5A+szx9TGZmr</latexit>


  Text-only

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ⇡(at |g = cupcake, bt , smultimodal = {Close(agent, microwave), In(cupcake, microwave), · · · })                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          open microwave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        <latexit sha1_base64="FZvWOXkth4b5/IWPVf+G2U5OJao=">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</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  <latexit sha1_base64="S6K5WD8k9Vh2vXC+I3p4lk8qL6k=">AAAB/nicbVDLSgNBEJz1GeMrKp68DAbBU9gVUY9BLx4jmAckIcxOOsmQ2ZllpjcaloC/4sWDIl79Dm/+jZPHQRMLGoqqbrq7wlgKi77/7S0tr6yurWc2sptb2zu7ub39itWJ4VDmWmpTC5kFKRSUUaCEWmyARaGEati/GfvVARgrtLrHYQzNiHWV6AjO0Emt3GED4RFTHYOikeBGP7ABjFq5vF/wJ6CLJJiRPJmh1Mp9NdqaJxEo5JJZWw/8GJspMyi4hFG2kViIGe+zLtQdVSwC20wn54/oiVPatKONK4V0ov6eSFlk7TAKXWfEsGfnvbH4n1dPsHPVTIWKEwTFp4s6iaSo6TgL2hYGOMqhI4wb4W6lvMcM4+gSy7oQgvmXF0nlrBBcFPy783zxehZHhhyRY3JKAnJJiuSWlEiZcJKSZ/JK3rwn78V79z6mrUvebOaA/IH3+QMcXZY6</latexit>


 Multimodal


Figure 5: Example of how different modalities contribute to the mental state reasoning by BIP-
ALM. In this example, we can get different state information from different modalities. From the
video frame at step t, we can see that the person is close to the microwave, but we do not know
what is inside the microwave or where we can find a cupcake. From the text, we know that there
is a cupcake inside the microwave, but we do not know if the person is close to the microwave. By
combining the two modalities, we can form a full picture of the world state. In the blue panel at the
bottom, we show how state information from different modalities may shape the policy estimated
by the model.


our model at these two steps reflect this reasoning. Consequently, our model answers the question
correctly.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  RGB                             Depth                      Instance Segmentation


      3D Human Pose            Scene Graph                          Action                Camera Data
                          apple
                                   in kitchen cabinet
                          person           (open)            open kitchen cabinet
                              close     kitchen
                                         table
                          Fridge cupcake
                         (closed)


                         Figure 6: Types of data provided in our benchmark.


                              Figure 7: Context length of MMToM-QA.


Figure 5 illustrates how BIP-ALM may form different state information from different modalities
and how different state information may shape the policy estimated by our model. In particular,
from the video, we know that the person is close to the microwave but we do not know where the
cupcake is. So the policy conditioned on the state extracted from the video (Svideo-only ) tries to guess
where the person is going to look for the cupcake (e.g., cabinet). From the text, we know that
there is a cupcake inside the microwave, but we do not know that the agent is already close to the
microwave. Thus the policy conditioned on the state extracted from the text (Stext-only ) predicts that
the person is going to walk towards the microwave. After fusing information from both the video
and the text, we then know the full state information. Conditioned on this fused state Smultimodal , the
policy then predicts that the person is going to open the microwave, which is the ground-truth action
of the person at the next step. This demonstrates that BIP-ALM can more accurately estimate the
person’s policy when having access to both modalities, which explains why it performs the best in
the multimodal condition.

B.3   AVAILABLE DATA

As shown in Figure 6, our benchmark provides RGB-D images, instance segmentation maps, human
3D poses, ground-truth scene graphs, ground-truth actions, and camera data.

B.4   B ENCHMARK S TATISTICS

The environment in each question features an apartment that includes a bedroom, kitchen, living
room, and bathroom. On average, each apartment contains 10.1 distinct types of containers (e.g.,
fridge, cabinets) and surfaces (e.g., desks, kitchen tables, coffee tables) types, and 16.4 instances


                                                        17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Step 1: Video Synthesis                            Video frames                                                            Step 3: Text Generation
                                                               t=1                          t=2

                                                                                                                                               ( for a question at t = 2)
                            VirtualHome-Social
                                 Simulator                                                                                                       State context
                                                                                                                …

  Apartment &
                                                     Ground-truth state and action                                                               Action context
   initial state
                                                     State:                    State:
                                                     In(agent, bedroom)        In(agent, kitchen)
                           Observation   Action
                                                     In(plate, cabinet)
                                                     Closed(cabinet)
                                                                               In(plate, cabinet)
                                                                               Closed(cabinet)
                                                                                                                                  GPT-4          Question and
                                                     …                         …                                …                                two options
    Goal:
 get a plate                       Planner           Action:                   Action:
                                                     Walk towards kitchen      Walk towards kitchen cabinet



 Step 2: Question Sampling
                                                    Ideal Observer                                                  H1: Goal: plate, Belief: IN(Plate, Cabinet)
                                                                                                                    H2: Goal: plate, Belief: NOT IN(Plate, Cabinet)

  Hypotheses after t = 1                                       Hypotheses after t = 2
  Goal: water glass, Belief: [kitchen table, cabinet, …]       Goal: water glass, Belief: [kitchen table, cabinet, …]
  Goal: cupcake, Belief: [fridge, microwave, …]                Goal: cupcake, Belief: [fridge, microwave, …]                    Hypotheses
  Goal: apple, Belief: [fridge, kitchen table…]
  Goal: plate, Belief: [kitchen table, kitchen cabinet, …]
                                                               Goal: apple, Belief: [fridge, kitchen table…]
                                                               Goal: plate, Belief: [kitchen table, kitchen cabinet, …]          Sampler
  …                                                            …


                   Figure 8: Overview of the procedural generation for creating our benchmark.


of containers and surfaces. There are on average 12 different object types, summing up to approxi-
mately 26.3 object instances in an apartment.
Figure 7 provides an overview of the distribution of text and video lengths across all questions in our
benchmark. In comparison to existing ToM benchmarks, MMToM-QA features a more extensive
text and video context, with an average of 1595 tokens and 1902 frames, respectively. Such lengths
demand advanced information retrieval and fusion capabilities. The longer visual and textural con-
text also increases the difficulty of paying attention to the relevant information to reconstruct the
mental state of a person.


B.5      D ETAILS OF THE P ROCEDURAL G ENERATION


Figure 8 provides an overview of the procedural generation of questions in our benchmark. To
procedurally generate videos, we first sample different apartments, the goal, and the initial state
of an agent, then generate a sequence of actions using a planner. In particular, we formulate the
agent in POMDP. The belief of the agent is represented as the probability of finding each object
at a location. The agent can observe any objects within the same room that are not inside closed
containers. We adopt the same planner in Puig et al. (2020), which has been verified to be able to
synthesize human-like plans in household environments. Given the action sequence, we then render
the RGB-D video frames and record ground-truth data including the instance segmentation maps,
3D human poses, scene graphs, actions, ground-truth agent beliefs, and the true goal.
To generate questions, we first use an “ideal observer” model to keep track of all possible goal and
belief hypotheses at any given step. This model has access to the ground-truth observation of the
agent at each step and eliminates the belief hypotheses that are inconsistent with the observations.
It also has access to the planner of the agent and will evaluate each remaining goal and belief
hypothesis pair by simulating actions conditioned on the hypothesis. If the simulated actions are
consistent with the actual actions taken by the agent, we then further eliminate that hypothesis.
Finally, to generate a question of a certain type at a given step, we sample two hypotheses that fit
the design of the question type, with one from the set of possible hypotheses produced by the ideal
observer model and the other being a hypothesis ruled out by the model.
At any given moment in a video, we ensure that our benchmark poses at most one question. To
achieve this, we randomly select one question from the pool of possible questions at every step. We
further sample a subset of the remaining questions to achieve a balanced distribution of question
types.


                                                                                   18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.6   U TILIZING GPT-4 FOR E NHANCED T EXT G ENERATION

We first translate the symbolic representations of state and action descriptions into natural language
using simple templates. We then use GPT-4 to enhance the phrasing and diversify the expression.
The prompts are provided as follows.
 Improving state descriptions: We are describing where things are in an apartment. Please
 improve the grammer of the description without changing the meaning. Please use only one
 line break to separate descriptions about each room.
 Original: There is a kitchen and a livingroom. 4 kitchencabinets are inside the kitchen.
 There is nothing inside the 1st kitchencabinet from left to right. There is nothing inside
 the 3rd kitchencabinet from left to right. There is nothing inside the 2nd kitchencabinet
 from left to right. A waterglass and a wineglass and 2 dishbowls are inside the 4th
 kitchencabinet from left to right.
 Improved: There is a kitchen and a living room. The kitchen has four cabinets. The
 first, second, and third cabinets, from left to right, are empty. The fourth cabinet, from
 the left, contains a water glass, a wine glass and two dish bowls.
 Original: {state description in the question}
 Improved:


 Improving action descriptions: Please improve the following descriptions about a person’s
 actions without changing the meaning.
 Original: [name] is in the kitchen, walktowards stove.
 Improved: [name] is in the kitchen. [name] walks towards the stove.
 Original: [name] is in the livingroom, walktowards kitchen, walktowards 1st
 kitchencabinet, open 1st kitchencabinet, close 1st kitchencabinet.
 Improved: [name] is in the living room. [name] walks to the kitchen, approaches the first
 cabinet, opens it, and then closes it.
 Original: {action description in the question}
 Improved:


C     BIP-ALM I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
C.1   V ISUAL P ERCEPTION

We adopt Blukis et al. (2022) to obtain a voxel map for each frame. Specifically, we first get the
instance segmentation map from the RGB image. Combined with the depth map and the camera
data, we create a 3D point cloud, with each point representing the pixel on the instance segmentation
map. We group the 3D point cloud into a voxel map and then estimate the 3D bounding boxes of the
objects. We can also estimate the 3D human pose in each frame. In the current experiments, we use
ground-truth instance segmentation maps and ground-truth 3D human poses. In future work, we plan
to also evaluate our model on segmentation and pose estimation results acquired from off-the-shelf
computer vision models.
Using the 3D bounding boxes and the 3D human pose, we construct a scene graph. Each node in
the graph is either an object or a person. For nodes representing containers, we indicate whether
they are open or closed (which in our scenarios can be detected from the change in the sizes of their
bounding boxes). There are two types of edges in a graph – (1) inside edges indicating containment
and (2) close edges indicating proximity. Note that our BIP-ALM model is not restricted to these
relationships and can be applied to broader scenarios with more types of spatial relationships.

C.2   T EXT PARSING

Utilizing GPT-4, we parse the provided question to extract representations about the state context,
action context, question, and the two options. In this subsection, we detail all the prompts used.
To extract representations regarding the state context, we use the following prompt:
 State Extraction: Please extract the description of the rooms and where things are
 in an apartment, found after the phrase ‘‘What’s inside the apartment’’ and before the
 description of a person’s actions. Keep the line breaks.
 Input: {question}
 Extracted:

 State Parsing: Please parse the following description about where things are in an
 apartment. Each sentence should follow the pattern ‘[something] is/are in/on the


                                                 19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 [somewhere].’   Use a ‘.’   to separate the sentences, and keep the original line breaks.

 Original: The living room contains a sofa, a desk, a cabinet, and a coffee table, and
 the cabinet holds chips, a wine glass, and an apple.
 Parsed: A sofa, a desk, a cabinet and a coffeetable are in the livingroom. Chips, a
 wineglass and an apple are in the cabinet.

 Original: The kitchen has an oven, a microwave, and four cabinets. The oven contains
 a salmon, the microwave holds a cupcake, the third cabinet from the left has a wine glass,
 the fourth cabinet is empty. The first and second kitchen cabinets each holds a plate.
 Parsed: an oven and a microwave and 4 kitchencabinets are in the kitchen. A salmon is
 in the oven. A cupcake is in the microwave. A wineglass is in the 3rd kitchencabinet.
 Nothing is in the 4th kitchencabinet. A plate is in the 1st kitchencabinet. A plate is in
 the 2nd kitchencabinet.

 Original:   {extracted states}
 Parsed:


To parse the human actions, we employ the following prompt:
 Action Extraction: Please extract the exact description of a person’s actions (starting
 from the initial location), found after the phrase ‘‘[someone]’s action’’ and before the
 question. Please do not include the question, choices, or the answer.
 Input: {question}
 Extracted:

 Action Parsing: Please parse the description of a person’s actions. Use a ‘.’ to
 separate each action, and remove all occurrences of the word ‘and’ in the description.

 Original: Jennifer is in the bedroom. She proceeds to the kitchen and strides towards
 the oven, preparing to open it.
 Parsed: In the bedroom. walktowards kitchen. walktowards oven. about to open oven.

 Original: Mark is in the bathroom. He then walks to the kitchen. He sequentially
 approaches the oven, the second, and third kitchen cabinets, opening and closing each
 one in turn.
 Parsed: In the bedroom. walktowards kitchen. walktowards oven. open oven. close oven.
 walktowards 2nd kitchencabinet. open 2nd kitchencabinet. close 2nd kitchencabinet. open
 3rd kitchencabinet. close 3rd kitchencabinet.

 Original:   {extracted actions}
 Parsed:


To parse and analyze the question, we prompt GPT-4 to determine if a question falls under the “Belief
Inference” or “Goal Inference” category, and extract all the hypothetical beliefs, hypothetical goals,
and conditions in the question:
 Question Parsing:    Please determine the type of inference for the input question: either
 ‘‘Belief Inference’’, which inquires about a person’s belief regarding an object, or ‘‘Goal
 Inference’’, which seeks to understand a person’s objective.
 If a question falls under the ‘‘Belief Inference’’, please identify the [object] and the
 [container] that the object may or may not be inside in choices (a) and (b).
 If a question falls under the ‘‘Goal Inference’’, please identify the two possible objects
 that the person is looking for in choices (a) and (b). If the input contains a statement
 indicating that someone believes there isn’t an [object] inside a [container], please also
 identify both the [object] and the [container] mentioned. Otherwise, return ‘NaN.’

 Input: ... (detailed descriptions about states and actions) ... If Elizabeth has been
 trying to get a plate, which one of the following statements is more likely to be true?
 (a) Elizabeth thinks that there is a plate inside the fridge. (b) Elizabeth thinks that
 there isn’t any plate inside the fridge.
 Output: Belief Inference. plate, fridge.

 Input: ... (detailed descriptions about states and actions) ... If Jennifer has been
 trying to get a plate, which one of the following statements is more likely to be true?
 (a) Jennifer thinks that there is a salmon inside the oven. (b) Jennifer thinks that there
 isn’t any salmon inside the oven.
 Output: Belief Inference. plate, fridge. salmon, oven.

 Input: ... (detailed descriptions about states and actions) ... Which one of the
 following statements is more likely to be true? (a) Mark has been trying to get a plate.
 (b) Mark has been trying to get a cupcake.
 Output: Goal Inference. plate, cupcake. NaN.

 Input: ... (detailed descriptions about states and actions) ... If Mary think there
 isn’t an apple inside the microwave, which one of the following statements is more likely
 to be true? (a) Mary has been trying to get an apple. (b) Mary has been trying to get a


                                                 20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 bottle of wine.
 Output: Goal Inference.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   apple, wine.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 apple, microwave.

 Input: {question}
 Output:



C.3   R EPRESENTATION F USION

                            t=0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              t=1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             <latexit sha1_base64="9EEXdVU95Sdv4KXsxJLO1Tumu8E=">AAAB6nicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0lE1ItQ9OKxov2ANpTNdtMu3WzC7kQooT/BiwdFvPqLvPlv3LY5aOuDgcd7M8zMCxIpDLrut1NYWV1b3yhulra2d3b3yvsHTROnmvEGi2Ws2wE1XArFGyhQ8naiOY0CyVvB6Hbqt564NiJWjzhOuB/RgRKhYBSt9IDXXq9ccavuDGSZeDmpQI56r/zV7ccsjbhCJqkxHc9N0M+oRsEkn5S6qeEJZSM64B1LFY248bPZqRNyYpU+CWNtSyGZqb8nMhoZM44C2xlRHJpFbyr+53VSDK/8TKgkRa7YfFGYSoIxmf5N+kJzhnJsCWVa2FsJG1JNGdp0SjYEb/HlZdI8q3oXVff+vFK7yeMowhEcwyl4cAk1uIM6NIDBAJ7hFd4c6bw4787HvLXg5DOH8AfO5w/ThY1/</latexit>


                            <latexit sha1_base64="Bk6wdgkrblaaO9I2TFOckxqvZeA=">AAAB6nicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0lE1ItQ9OKxov2ANpTNdtMu3WzC7kQooT/BiwdFvPqLvPlv3LY5aOuDgcd7M8zMCxIpDLrut1NYWV1b3yhulra2d3b3yvsHTROnmvEGi2Ws2wE1XArFGyhQ8naiOY0CyVvB6Hbqt564NiJWjzhOuB/RgRKhYBSt9IDXbq9ccavuDGSZeDmpQI56r/zV7ccsjbhCJqkxHc9N0M+oRsEkn5S6qeEJZSM64B1LFY248bPZqRNyYpU+CWNtSyGZqb8nMhoZM44C2xlRHJpFbyr+53VSDK/8TKgkRa7YfFGYSoIxmf5N+kJzhnJsCWVa2FsJG1JNGdp0SjYEb/HlZdI8q3oXVff+vFK7yeMowhEcwyl4cAk1uIM6NIDBAJ7hFd4c6bw4787HvLXg5DOH8AfO5w/SAY1+</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         kitchen cabinet                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    kitchen cabinet
               person                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (closed)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (closed)
                    close                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  kitchen                close                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       kitchen
 From Video                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 table                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              table
                 Fridge                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Fridge                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     cupcake
                (closed)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (open)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Fused Symbolic Representations
              Close(agent, fridge)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Close(agent, fridge)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             IN(cupcake, fridge)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         s0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         <latexit sha1_base64="/OwHDR4vD2jfpgrx6zuoIHhPmGU=">AAAB6nicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0lE1GPRi8eK9gPaWDbbSbt0swm7G6GE/gQvHhTx6i/y5r9x2+agrQ8GHu/NMDMvSATXxnW/ncLK6tr6RnGztLW9s7tX3j9o6jhVDBssFrFqB1Sj4BIbhhuB7UQhjQKBrWB0M/VbT6g0j+WDGSfoR3QgecgZNVa6149ur1xxq+4MZJl4OalAjnqv/NXtxyyNUBomqNYdz02Mn1FlOBM4KXVTjQllIzrAjqWSRqj9bHbqhJxYpU/CWNmShszU3xMZjbQeR4HtjKgZ6kVvKv7ndVITXvkZl0lqULL5ojAVxMRk+jfpc4XMiLEllClubyVsSBVlxqZTsiF4iy8vk+ZZ1buounfnldp1HkcRjuAYTsGDS6jBLdShAQwG8Ayv8OYI58V5dz7mrQUnnzmEP3A+fwACr42e</latexit>


              Closed(fridge)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     s1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     <latexit sha1_base64="/9CVcMA9ClGrsI7s0UHMzwP0hBk=">AAAB6nicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0lE1GPRi8eK9gPaWDbbTbt0swm7E6GE/gQvHhTx6i/y5r9x2+agrQ8GHu/NMDMvSKQw6LrfTmFldW19o7hZ2tre2d0r7x80TZxqxhsslrFuB9RwKRRvoEDJ24nmNAokbwWjm6nfeuLaiFg94DjhfkQHSoSCUbTSvXn0euWKW3VnIMvEy0kFctR75a9uP2ZpxBUySY3peG6CfkY1Cib5pNRNDU8oG9EB71iqaMSNn81OnZATq/RJGGtbCslM/T2R0ciYcRTYzoji0Cx6U/E/r5NieOVnQiUpcsXmi8JUEozJ9G/SF5ozlGNLKNPC3krYkGrK0KZTsiF4iy8vk+ZZ1buounfnldp1HkcRjuAYTsGDS6jBLdShAQwG8Ayv8OZI58V5dz7mrQUnnzmEP3A+fwAEM42f</latexit>


              Closed(kitchen cabinet)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Open(fridge)
              …                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Closed(kitchen cabinet)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Close(Agent, Fridge)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Close(Agent, Fridge)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             …                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  IN(apple, kitchen cabinet)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           IN(apple, kitchen cabinet)
 From Text          Initial state
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                IN(cupcake, fridge)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  IN(cupcake, fridge)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Closed(fridge)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Open(fridge)
              IN(apple, kitchen cabinet)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Closed(kitchen cabinet)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Closed(kitchen cabinet)
              IN(cupcake, fridge)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               …                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    …
              Closed(fridge)
              Closed(kitchen cabinet)
              …


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Figure 9: Illustration of fusing multimodal representations.

Figure 9 illustrates how BIP-ALM fuse complementary information extracted from the video and
the text to form unified symbolic representations. In particular, the orange predicates can only be
extracted from the video and the blue predicates can only be extracted from the text. After merging
predicates extracted from both modalities, we can then construct a full state sequence.
When fusing information from different inputs, we may encounter conflicting predicates. In the
case of conflict, we only keep the predicates from the text and remove the contradictory predicates
from the video. This is because the predicates from the video are more likely to be erroneous due to
noisy visual perception. However, more broadly speaking, such conflict-resolving mechanisms can
be calibrated by the reliability of different modalities in a given domain.

C.4   B ELIEF R EPRESENTATION AND U PDATE

                      Belief about plate at t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Belief about plate at t + 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                <latexit sha1_base64="Pr5aPgXpcw4NaU2PSo9hhymmHUg=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEN3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0lE1GPRi8cW7Ae0oWy2k3btZhN2J0IJ/QVePCji1Z/kzX/jts1BWx8MPN6bYWZekEhh0HW/ncLa+sbmVnG7tLO7t39QPjxqmTjVHJo8lrHuBMyAFAqaKFBCJ9HAokBCOxjfzfz2E2gjYvWAkwT8iA2VCAVnaKUG9ssVt+rOQVeJl5MKyVHvl796g5inESjkkhnT9dwE/YxpFFzCtNRLDSSMj9kQupYqFoHxs/mhU3pmlQENY21LIZ2rvycyFhkziQLbGTEcmWVvJv7ndVMMb/xMqCRFUHyxKEwlxZjOvqYDoYGjnFjCuBb2VspHTDOONpuSDcFbfnmVtC6q3lXVbVxWard5HEVyQk7JOfHINamRe1InTcIJkGfySt6cR+fFeXc+Fq0FJ585Jn/gfP4A4c+M/Q==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           <latexit sha1_base64="InvlnqSIbh+4SiPWtvoDVgk5yTY=">AAAB6nicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBZBEEoioh6LXjxWtB/QhrLZbtqlm03YnQgl9Cd48aCIV3+RN/+N2zYHbX0w8Hhvhpl5QSKFQdf9dgorq2vrG8XN0tb2zu5eef+gaeJUM95gsYx1O6CGS6F4AwVK3k40p1EgeSsY3U791hPXRsTqEccJ9yM6UCIUjKKVHvDM65UrbtWdgSwTLycVyFHvlb+6/ZilEVfIJDWm47kJ+hnVKJjkk1I3NTyhbEQHvGOpohE3fjY7dUJOrNInYaxtKSQz9fdERiNjxlFgOyOKQ7PoTcX/vE6K4bWfCZWkyBWbLwpTSTAm079JX2jOUI4toUwLeythQ6opQ5tOyYbgLb68TJrnVe+y6t5fVGo3eRxFOIJjOAUPrqAGd1CHBjAYwDO8wpsjnRfn3fmYtxacfOYQ/sD5/AG4K41t</latexit>


                            e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           …                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         …
                               er net           t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Observation at t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   <latexit sha1_base64="Pr5aPgXpcw4NaU2PSo9hhymmHUg=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEN3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0lE1GPRi8cW7Ae0oWy2k3btZhN2J0IJ/QVePCji1Z/kzX/jts1BWx8MPN6bYWZekEhh0HW/ncLa+sbmVnG7tLO7t39QPjxqmTjVHJo8lrHuBMyAFAqaKFBCJ9HAokBCOxjfzfz2E2gjYvWAkwT8iA2VCAVnaKUG9ssVt+rOQVeJl5MKyVHvl796g5inESjkkhnT9dwE/YxpFFzCtNRLDSSMj9kQupYqFoHxs/mhU3pmlQENY21LIZ2rvycyFhkziQLbGTEcmWVvJv7ndVMMb/xMqCRFUHyxKEwlxZjOvqYDoYGjnFjCuBb2VspHTDOONpuSDcFbfnmVtC6q3lXVbVxWard5HEVyQk7JOfHINamRe1InTcIJkGfySt6cR+fFeXc+Fq0FJ585Jn/gfP4A4c+M/Q==</latexit>


                          bl                  ne                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  bl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      er net            t
                        ta ash abi          bi                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ta ash abi            ne
                     en shw n c           ca                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  In(plate, dishwasher)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                w c              bi
                    h
                       Di he
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           he ish en              ca
                  tc                   om                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     On(apple, kitchen table)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    c                     m
                ki      tc           ro                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  t     D h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               o
                      ki           th                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ki       tc
                                 Ba                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ki            th
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ba

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Belief about apple at t + 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        <latexit sha1_base64="InvlnqSIbh+4SiPWtvoDVgk5yTY=">AAAB6nicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBZBEEoioh6LXjxWtB/QhrLZbtqlm03YnQgl9Cd48aCIV3+RN/+N2zYHbX0w8Hhvhpl5QSKFQdf9dgorq2vrG8XN0tb2zu5eef+gaeJUM95gsYx1O6CGS6F4AwVK3k40p1EgeSsY3U791hPXRsTqEccJ9yM6UCIUjKKVHvDM65UrbtWdgSwTLycVyFHvlb+6/ZilEVfIJDWm47kJ+hnVKJjkk1I3NTyhbEQHvGOpohE3fjY7dUJOrNInYaxtKSQz9fdERiNjxlFgOyOKQ7PoTcX/vE6K4bWfCZWkyBWbLwpTSTAm079JX2jOUI4toUwLeythQ6opQ5tOyYbgLb68TJrnVe+y6t5fVGo3eRxFOIJjOAUPrqAGd1CHBjAYwDO8wpsjnRfn3fmYtxacfOYQ/sD5/AG4K41t</latexit>


                      Belief about apple at t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   <latexit sha1_base64="Pr5aPgXpcw4NaU2PSo9hhymmHUg=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEN3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0lE1GPRi8cW7Ae0oWy2k3btZhN2J0IJ/QVePCji1Z/kzX/jts1BWx8MPN6bYWZekEhh0HW/ncLa+sbmVnG7tLO7t39QPjxqmTjVHJo8lrHuBMyAFAqaKFBCJ9HAokBCOxjfzfz2E2gjYvWAkwT8iA2VCAVnaKUG9ssVt+rOQVeJl5MKyVHvl796g5inESjkkhnT9dwE/YxpFFzCtNRLDSSMj9kQupYqFoHxs/mhU3pmlQENY21LIZ2rvycyFhkziQLbGTEcmWVvJv7ndVMMb/xMqCRFUHyxKEwlxZjOvqYDoYGjnFjCuBb2VspHTDOONpuSDcFbfnmVtC6q3lXVbVxWard5HEVyQk7JOfHINamRe1InTcIJkGfySt6cR+fFeXc+Fq0FJ585Jn/gfP4A4c+M/Q==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           …                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         e e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      …
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              e           t
                            e
                         bl ge      le           t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                bl dg abl             ne
                       ta frid tab             ne                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ta fri    t           bi
                                             bi                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               n         e           ca
                   he
                     n        ee           ca                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             e        fe          m
                  c          f           m                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                t         f            o
                 t       Co
                           f
                                      ro
                                        o                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ki        Co           ro
               Ki                  th                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        th
                                 Ba                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ba


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Figure 10: Illustration of estimated belief update.

A person’s belief consists of beliefs about the locations of individual objects as illustrated in Fig-
ure 10. At each step, we estimate the person’s observation and update the estimated belief accord-
ingly b̂t . Then for each step, we construct a symbolic representation of the belief about each object
as a list of possible locations of the object that have non-zero probabilities in the belief.
Note that for representing the negation of a predicate, we can simply remove the location from the
list of possible locations in the symbolic belief representation.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.5   P ROMPT FOR L ANGUAGE M ODELS IN I NVERSE S YMBOLIC P LANNER

As introduced in the main paper, we employ a language model (either GPT-J or LLaMA 2) to
amortize the policy and estimate the likelihood of the person’s last action at given the hypothetical
belief bt and goal g. We present the language model with the specified prompt below and then record
its likelihood of predicting the accurate action.
 goal: {hypothetical goal}
 state: {state}
 belief (possible locations the person suspects the {hypothetical goal} could be):
 {hypothetical or predicted belief}
 action:



C.6   T RAINING D ETAILS

In the experiments, we finetuned GPT-J (6B) and LLaMA 2 (7B) for our BIP-ALM method. Ad-
hering to our evaluation protocol, we employed the ground-truth state, belief, goal, and action from
1,000 training videos, excluding the use of any example QAs. The models were trained using the
state, belief, and goal as inputs at specific timestamps, with the aim of predicting the corresponding
action. This approach enhanced the Inverse Symbolic Planner’s ability to estimate the likelihood
of human actions at a specific moment conditioned on the hypothesis about the goal and belief.
The training data comprised 20,000 samples, consistent with the input and output of the Inverse
Symbolic Planner defined in Appendix C.5.
For finetuning, we incorporated the Low-Rank Adapters (LoRA) method (Hu et al., 2021). The
training process leveraged the AdamW optimizer, with a set learning of 5 × 10−5 and a batch size
of 4. We trained both models for 5 epochs, which took about 20 GPU hours on a single A100 GPU.

D     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS OF BASELINES
In all baselines, we use gpt-4-0613 for GPT-4 and text-davinci-003 for GPT-3.5.
In our GPT-4 with captions baseline, we use the following prompts to guide Video-LLaMA 2 to
generate captions that summarize video content. These captions are subsequently integrated with
our questions and provided to GPT-4 for question answering.
 Descibing the Scenes in Videos: Please describe what’s inside the apartment based on the
 video. Please avoid using bullet points or numbers in your description.

 Descibing Human Activity in Videos: Please describe the actions of the human in the video.
 Please avoid using bullet points or numbers in your description.



In particular, for the multimodal condition, we use the following prompt for GPT-4 with captions
to generate the answer to a given question:
 Captions:
 What’s inside the apartment: {environment captions generated by Video-LLaMA}
 The person’s action: {action captions generated by Video-LLaMA 2}
 Text Descriptions:
 {text description in the original question}
 Question: ...Please respond with either a or b, even when you are extremely uncertain
 about the answer (Enforce GPT-4 to return a valid letter answer.)



In the video-only condition, we use the following prompt for GPT-4 with captions to generate the
answer:
 Captions:
 What’s inside the apartment: {environment captions generated by Video-LLaMA}
 The person’s action: {action captions generated by Video-LLaMA 2}
 Question: ...Please respond with either a or b, even when you are extremely uncertain
 about the answer (Enforce GPT-4 to return a valid letter answer)



Finetuning Video-LLaMA 2. We followed Zhang et al. (2023) to create a video instruction dataset
using our training data to finetune Video-LLaMA 2. In particular, based on our training videos


                                                 22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and the ground-truth annotations, we generated 7088 training examples for describing either the
environment or the actions of the person in a given video clip. For each video clip, we sampled 8
frames and used the ground-truth scene graph at the last frame or the action sequence during the
whole clip to generate the ground-truth descriptions for the training data. We then finetuned the
Video-LLaMA 2 (13B) model on our training data on 2 A100 GPUs.

E     F ULL V ERSION OF THE E XAMPLE Q UESTIONS IN F IGURE 2
E.1   T YPE 1.1 E XAMPLE

The video input: https://youtu.be/4zoDwQk91ak.
The text input:
 What’s inside the apartment:
 The apartment consists of a bedroom, kitchen, living room, and bathroom.
 In the bedroom, there is a coffee table and a desk, with a remote control resting on the
 coffee table.
 The kitchen is equipped with four cabinets, a fridge, a kitchen table, a microwave, and
 an oven. The first and third cabinets, from left to right, are empty, while the second
 cabinet houses a condiment bottle. The fourth cabinet contains a water glass. Inside the
 fridge, you’ll find a bottle of wine, a dish bowl, and two plates. The microwave holds a
 cupcake, and the oven contains a salmon, two cupcakes, and a plate.
 The living room features a cabinet, a sofa, a coffee table, and a desk. The cabinet is
 filled with two plates, a bottle of wine, two wine glasses, a condiment bottle, a water
 glass, a bag of chips, and an apple. A remote control, a wine glass, and a book are placed
 on the coffee table.
 Lastly, the bathroom has a cabinet, which is currently empty.
 Actions taken by Elizabeth:
 Elizabeth is initially in the bathroom. She then proceeds to the kitchen and heads towards
 the oven. After opening and closing the oven, she moves to the second kitchen cabinet,
 opens it, and then shuts it. She repeats this action with the third and first kitchen
 cabinets. Subsequently, she walks towards the fourth kitchen cabinet, opens it, and then
 closes it. Finally, she moves towards the fridge, preparing to open it.


 Question:
 If Elizabeth has been trying to get a bottle of wine, which one of the following statements
 is more likely to be true?
 (a) Elizabeth thinks that there is a bottle of wine inside the fridge.
 (b) Elizabeth thinks that there isn’t any bottle of wine inside the fridge.



Correct answer: a.

E.2   T YPE 1.2 E XAMPLE

The video input: https://youtu.be/mgvh1lY_Z38.
The text input:
 What’s inside the apartment:
 The apartment consists of a bedroom, kitchen, living room, and bathroom.
 In the bedroom, there is a coffee table and a desk, with three wine glasses and a dish bowl
 placed on the coffee table.
 The kitchen is equipped with four cabinets, a fridge, a kitchen table, a microwave, and
 an oven. The first, second, and fourth cabinets, from left to right, contain a dish bowl
 each, while the third cabinet houses a plate. The fridge contains two apples, a dish bowl,
 and a salmon. The microwave holds two cupcakes, and there is a salmon in the oven.
 The living room features a cabinet, a sofa, a coffee table, and a desk. The cabinet is
 filled with a plate, a bag of chips, a water glass, a remote control, a bottle of wine, and
 a condiment bottle.
 Lastly, the bathroom has a cabinet, which is currently empty.
 Actions taken by Jennifer:
 Jennifer is situated in the living room. She heads towards the cabinet and is about to
 open it.


 Question:
 If Jennifer has been trying to get a cupcake, which one of the following statements is more
 likely to be true?
 (a) Jennifer thinks that there isn’t any cupcake inside the cabinet.


                                               23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 (b) Jennifer thinks that there is a cupcake inside the cabinet.



Correct answer: b.

E.3   T YPE 1.3 E XAMPLE

The video input: https://youtu.be/lN810N3KdjM.
The text input:
 What’s inside the apartment:
 The apartment consists of a bedroom, kitchen, living room, and bathroom.
 In the bedroom, there is a sofa with a book on it and a cabinet containing a remote
 control, a wine glass, two dish bowls, a bottle of wine, and a condiment bottle.
 The kitchen is equipped with a fridge, sofa, dishwasher, eight cabinets, an oven, a
 microwave, and a kitchen table. The fridge contains an apple, three plates, and a bottle
 of wine, while a bag of chips rests on the sofa. Inside the dishwasher, there is a plate,
 a water glass, and a wine glass. The first to the seventh cabinets, from left to right,
 are all empty. However, the eighth cabinet houses a wine glass. The oven contains a
 salmon, the microwave is empty, and the kitchen table is adorned with a plate, a wine
 glass, two apples, two books, and a cupcake.
 The living room features a sofa with a water glass and a book on it, and a desk.
 Lastly, the bathroom has a cabinet, which is currently empty.
 Actions taken by Charles:
 Charles is in the kitchen. He walks to the seventh kitchen cabinet, opens and closes it.
 He repeats the same action with the sixth kitchen cabinet. Subsequently, he moves towards
 the dishwasher.


 Question:
 If Charles has been trying to get a salmon, which one of the following statements is more
 likely to be true?
 (a) Charles thinks that there is a salmon inside the fridge.
 (b) Charles thinks that there isn’t any salmon inside the fridge.



Correct answer: b.

E.4   T YPE 2.1 E XAMPLE

The video input: https://youtu.be/NsOPbJWPn1c.
The text input:
 What’s inside the apartment:
 The apartment consists of a bedroom, a bathroom, a living room, and a kitchen.
 In the bedroom, there is a coffee table with a plate on it.
 The bathroom houses a cabinet, which is currently empty.
 The living room is furnished with a cabinet, a coffee table, a sofa, and a desk. The
 cabinet is filled with two apples, a condiment bottle, three wine glasses, two water
 glasses, a cupcake, two bags of chips, a remote control, and a bottle of wine. Both a
 water glass and a wine glass are placed on the coffee table.
 The kitchen is equipped with a fridge, an oven, a kitchen table, and a microwave. Inside
 the fridge, there are two apples. The oven contains a salmon. Meanwhile, the microwave
 houses a salmon and two cupcakes.
 Actions taken by James:
 James is in the kitchen. He strides towards the stove, opens it, and then shuts it. He
 then opens the fridge, closes it, opens the microwave, and closes it as well. Finally, he
 walks towards the living room and approaches the cabinet.


 Question:
 Which one of the following statements is more likely to be true?
 (a) James has been trying to get a bottle of wine.
 (b) James has been trying to get an apple.



Correct answer: a.

E.5   T YPE 2.2 E XAMPLE

The video input: https://youtu.be/Fn6s47ZtxMQ.


                                             24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The text input:
 What’s inside the apartment:
 The apartment consists of a bedroom, bathroom, living room, and kitchen.
 In the bedroom, there is a sofa, a cabinet, a desk, and a coffee table. A book rests on
 the sofa. The cabinet contains a remote control, three cupcakes, a wine glass, an apple,
 and a bag of chips. The coffee table holds two books and a dish bowl.
 The bathroom houses a single cabinet, which is currently empty.
 The living room is furnished with a sofa, a desk, and a coffee table. A dish bowl and a
 book are placed on the sofa, while a plate sits on the coffee table.
 The kitchen is equipped with a dishwasher, an oven, a kitchen table, eight cabinets, a
 microwave, and a fridge. Inside the dishwasher, there is a dish bowl. The oven contains
 a salmon and a plate. The second kitchen cabinet from the left holds an apple, while the
 fourth and fifth cabinets contain two dish bowls and another apple respectively. There is
 a water glass inside the seventh cabinet. The first, third, sixth, and eighth cabinets are
 empty. The microwave contains a condiment bottle. The fridge stores two cupcakes, a dish
 bowl, a plate, and a bottle of wine.
 Actions taken by Mark:
 Mark is in the kitchen. He then advances towards the seventh kitchen cabinet.


 Question:
 If Mark thinks there isn’t a water glass inside the 7th kitchen cabinet, which one of the
 following statements is more likely to be true?
 (a) Mark has been trying to get a water glass.
 (b) Mark has been trying to get a cupcake.



Correct answer: b.

E.6   T YPE 2.3 E XAMPLE

The video input: https://youtu.be/IUJW6Zv0EWA.
The text input:
 What’s inside the apartment:
 The apartment consists of a bedroom, bathroom, living room, and kitchen.
 In the bedroom, there is a cabinet and a sofa. The cabinet contains a condiment bottle, an
 apple, two wine glasses, and a plate. The sofa holds three books.
 The bathroom features a cabinet, which is currently empty.
 The living room is furnished with a desk and a sofa, with a book resting on the sofa.
 The kitchen is equipped with eight cabinets, a sofa, an oven, a fridge, a kitchen table, a
 microwave, and a dishwasher. The first kitchen cabinet, from left to right, contains a bag
 of chips. The second and fourth cabinets are empty. The third cabinet houses a wine glass
 and a dish bowl. The seventh cabinet stores two plates. The fifth, sixth, and eighth
 cabinets are empty. The oven contains a cupcake. The fridge holds a plate and a dish
 bowl. The kitchen table is adorned with an apple, a bottle of wine, a plate, and a water
 glass. The microwave contains a condiment bottle and a salmon. Lastly, the dishwasher has
 a water glass inside.
 Actions taken by Mary:
 Mary is situated in the living room. She proceeds towards the kitchen and heads to the
 second kitchen cabinet. She opens it, then promptly closes it. She then opens the fourth
 kitchen cabinet and closes it as well. Following this, she opens the dishwasher and
 closes it. She then moves towards the sixth kitchen cabinet, opens it, and closes it.
 She repeats this action with the seventh kitchen cabinet. Finally, she walks towards the
 first kitchen cabinet, opens it, and then closes it.

 Question:
 Which one of the following statements is more likely to be true?
 (a) Mary has been trying to get a bag of chips.
 (b) Mary has been trying to get a condiment bottle.



Correct answer: b.

E.7   T YPE 2.4 E XAMPLE

The video input: https://youtu.be/Y4H_9cXR5mw.
The text input:
 What’s inside the apartment:
 The apartment consists of a bedroom, bathroom, living room, and kitchen.
 In the bedroom, there is a sofa, a cabinet, a desk, and a coffee table. A book rests on


                                             25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 the sofa. The cabinet houses an apple, a wine glass, two books, and two cupcakes. The
 coffee table holds a book, a water glass, a wine glass, and a remote control.
 The bathroom contains a single cabinet, which is currently empty.
 The living room is furnished with a sofa, a coffee table, and a desk. A water glass sits
 on the sofa, and a remote control is on the coffee table. The kitchen is equipped with
 eight cabinets, a microwave, a fridge, a dishwasher, a kitchen table, and an oven. The
 fourth and seventh cabinets from the left, as well as the eighth, are empty. The microwave
 contains a salmon, a cupcake, and a condiment bottle. The fridge is stocked with two
 bottles of wine, a cupcake, an apple, and two dish bowls. The dishwasher holds a dish
 bowl, a wine glass, and a plate. The second cabinet from the left contains a water glass.
 The first cabinet from the left holds a bag of chips and a wine glass. The fifth cabinet
 has an apple, and the third cabinet contains a condiment bottle. The sixth cabinet is
 empty. Lastly, there is a salmon in the oven.
 Actions taken by William:
 William is situated in the kitchen. He advances towards the first kitchen cabinet, opens
 it, and then shuts it. Finally, he moves towards the fifth kitchen cabinet.


 Question:
 Which one of the following statements is more likely to be true?
 (a) William has been trying to get a wine glass.
 (b) William has been trying to get a dish bowl.


Correct answer: b.


                                             26
