Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


T OWARDS C OMPLEX - QUERY R EFERRING I MAGE S EG -
MENTATION : A N OVEL B ENCHMARK

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

          Referring Image Understanding (RIS) has been extensively studied over the past
          decade, leading to the development of advanced algorithms. However, there has
          been a lack of research investigating how existing algorithms should be bench-
          marked with complex language queries, which include more informative descrip-
          tions of surrounding objects and backgrounds (e.g., "the black car." vs. "the
          black car is parking on the road and beside the bus."). Given the significant
          improvement in the semantic understanding capability of large pre-trained mod-
          els, it is crucial to take a step further in RIS by incorporating complex language
          that resembles real-world applications. To close this gap, building upon the ex-
          isting RefCOCO and Visual Genome datasets, we propose a new RIS bench-
          mark with complex queries, namely RIS-CQ. The RIS-CQ dataset is of high
          quality and large scale, which challenges the existing RIS with enriched, spe-
          cific and informative queries, and enables a more realistic scenario of RIS re-
          search. Besides, we present a nichetargeting method to better task the RIS-CQ,
          called dual-modality graph alignment model (D U M O G A), which outperforms
          a series of RIS methods. To provide a valuable foundation for future advance-
          ments in the field of RIS with complex queries, we release the datasets, pre-
          processing and synthetic scripts, and the algorithm implementations at https:
          //anonymous.4open.science/r/ICLR2024-D652/README.md.



1    I NTRODUCTION

Correctly comprehending the subtle alignment (i.e., grounding) between language and vision has
long been the pivotal research in the intersecting communities of computer vision and language
processing (Yang et al., 2020; 2019; Zhao et al., 2022). Among a range of vision-language grounding
topics, Referring Image Segmentation (RIS) has been proposed with the aim to ground a given
language query onto a specific region of an image, i.e., typically represented by a segmentation map,
as exemplified in Figure 1. By precisely bridging the semantics between the images and texts, RIS
plays a crucial role in various downstream cross-modal applications, including image editing (Chen
et al., 2018; Li et al., 2020), and language-based human-robot interaction(Wang et al., 2019; Zhang
et al., 2020).
Although attracting increasing research attention, the existing RIS benchmarks, unfortunately, can be
subject to the simplicity and naivety of the language queries. Specifically, via data statistics of
the current popular RIS datasets, including RefCOCO and RefCOCO+ (Yu et al., 2016; Mao et al.,
2016), we find that i) 85.3% text queries have short forms (i.e., with length ≤ 5 words), and ii) 83.8%
queries involve only one or two visual objects. We note that such characteristics would inevitably
lead to the key pitfalls that hamper the utility and applicability of RIS task.
    • On the one hand, caused by the inequality between vision and language, i.e., language is
      abstract and succinct while vision always entails richer details, simple short language queries
      with shallow object descriptions usually trigger ambiguity for the visual coreference. The
      sample in Figure 1 shows the case. More severely, in the existing RIS datasets, a significant
      majority of query sentences suffer from such ambiguity. Intuitively, RIS models, being trained
      on such overly simplistic data, would largely fail to disambiguate the image referring and lead
      to suboptimal performance.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     ➢ Existing Referring Image Segmentation (RIS)
                                                               simple but
        the person sitting on the stairs.                      ambiguous

     ➢ Our proposed RIS with Complex Query
         the person is sitting on the stairs
                                                                  complex but
         and holding a book looking around.                        specific



Figure 1: The comparison between the existing Referring Image Segmentation (RIS) and the
complex-query RIS proposed in this work.


   • On the other hand, in real-world applications, individuals are more likely to input detailed textual
     descriptions in complex forms, so as to accurately locate the desired objects. Although the
     recent RIS methods (Yang et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2018; Feng et al., 2021) achieve satisfactory
     performance on the in-house testing set, they can still struggle when confronted with complex and
     informative queries. Our preliminary experiment indicates that even the current top-performing
     RIS model, LAVT(Yang et al., 2022), drops dramatically (74.46 vs. 10.84 in mIoU on two RIS
     datasets) when testing on the complex query. In other words, being trained on existing RIS
     datasets can lead to the failure of generalizing to the input queries from realistic users in the
     wild.
The above observations imperatively motivate the exploration of Referring Image Segmentation with
Complex Queries (RIS-CQ). In this work, we propose a novel benchmark for RIS under such complex
scenario. Specifically, we construct a RIS-CQ dataset (cf. §2), which is of high quality and large scale.
Technically, we first extract the salient objects with their pertaining relations (spatial, action, etc.)
from an image, and then generate semantically detailed and meaningful descriptions for the referring
objects towards their surrounding objects, which serve as the complex-form queries. Notedly, the
recent large language models (LLMs), e.g., ChatGPT (Lund & Wang, 2023) have revealed the great
capability of human-level understanding of language semantics. Thus we take advantage of the LLM
to assist to generate large amounts of complex queries while without sacrificing the labeling quality.
Finally, we obtain a novel RIS-CQ dataset with 118,287 images and 13.18 words on average for each
query.
The key to accurate RIS recognition in our scenario essentially lies in the deep understanding of the
underlying semantics of different modalities, because of the intrinsic complex form of textual query
and the sophisticated visual content. To this end, we propose a novel dual-modality graph alignment
(dubbed D U M O G A) model (cf. §3) to benchmark the RIS-CQ task, where the input sentence and
image are represented with the semantic dependency graph (Peters et al., 2018) and semantic scene
graph (Tang et al., 2019), respectively. Meanwhile, the semantics of the two modalities should
be sufficiently interacted for deep comprehension of the inputs. Correspondingly, two levels of
cross-modal alignment learning are carried out in D U M O G A to capture the intrinsic correspondence
between the input text and vision, including the structural alignment between two semantic graphs and
the feature alignment between two semantic representations. On the RIS-CQ datasets our D U M O G A
achieves 24.4 in mIoU, outperforming the current state-of-the-art (SoTA) RIS method by more than
200%.
To sum up, this work contributes to the following three aspects. (1) We construct a novel benchmark
dataset, RIS-CQ, which challenges the existing RIS with complex queries, and enables a more
realistic scenario of RIS research. (2) We present a strong-performing system (D U M O G A) to model
the task, which brings a new SoTA results on the RIS-CQ dataset. (3) Series of in-depth analyses
are shown based on our dataset and the systems, where some important and interesting findings are
presented and concluded to shed light on the future exploration of this topic. All our data and resource
will be made open later to facilitate the follow-up research.


                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2     C ONSTRUCTING C OMPLEX Q UERY FOR R EFERRING I MAGE S EGMENTATION

2.1   P ROBLEM D EFINITION

Given an image I and a set of textual queries (i.e., long-form sentences with semantically complex
expressions) Q = {pi }M                                                                   M
                        i=1 , RIS-CQ aims to predict a set of segmentation masks S = {si }i=1 , where
each si correspond to each query pi that localizes it in the image. Note that M is the number of
referring expressions for a given image I, which is set as M ∈ [1, 10].

2.2   DATASET C ONSTRUCTION

In this section, we elaborate on how to elicit complex and contextualized queries from large language
models (i.e., ChatGPT) by leveraging diverse structured semantics in images (e.g., inter-object
relations). First, we extract holistic semantic relations for each image and then select more significant
objects that involve diverse interactions with other objects as the candidate objects. Second, we
utilize specially tailored prompts to guide ChatGPT in generating complex queries for each candidate
object based on rich visual context. Finally, we manually filter out or revise problematic queries (e.g.,
ambiguous references), to ensure the annotation quality.

Step-1: Relation extraction. To begin with, we utilize an off-the-shelf scene graph generation
model, VC-Tree, to directly extract the objects present in the images along with their relationships.
These relationships are stored in the form of triplets, such as <person, cup, holding>, which indicates
that the person is holding the cup. Additionally, during this step, we apply a simple filter to exclude
objects that have fewer than two relationships with other objects. We believe that generating queries
to describe these objects would be relatively straightforward, increasing the probability of ambiguous
references or incorrect references.

Step-2: Complex query generation. In this section, we devise a tailored set of prompts to
efficiently leverage the in-context learning capabilities of a large language model. For each object and
its corresponding relation triplets, we generate a descriptive text query using the model. For instance,
given a set of triplets associated with the target object person, <person, cup, holding>, <person, wall,
leaning on>, <table, person, next to>, ChatGPT can provide us with the output "the person is next to
the table, holding the cup and leaning on the wall."
Specifically, we utilize the gpt-3.5-turbo model as our large language model, with the API interface
provided by OpenAI. To ensure stable outputs from the model, we set the decoding temperature to
0. The relevant prompts used are detailed in the appendix for reference. An additional noteworthy
aspect is that the presence of the large language model entirely liberates us from the manual labor of
annotating images for generating language queries. This significantly reduces our workforce costs
while ensuring the quality of queries. Moreover, it facilitates the expansion of our dataset to the
magnitude of 100k.

Step-3: Post-processing. Finally, we manually filter out or revise queries with ambiguous refer-
ences to ensure a precise one-to-one correspondence between the queries and objects within the image.
After multiple iterations in constructing prompts, we have successfully developed prompts that yield
high-quality queries generated by ChatGPT. However, it is important to note that since ChatGPT
receives input solely from the relation triplets generated by the scene graph model, it lacks certain
contextual information from the image. As a result, there may be instances where the generated
queries exhibit ambiguous references to the objects being described. Unfortunately, these queries
cannot be filtered out automatically in our automated pipeline, necessitating manual intervention for
their removal.

2.3   DATASET S TATISTICS

Figure 3 presents the statistical analysis of objects and predicates in the RIS-CQ dataset, which
consists of a total of 133 object classes and 56 relation classes. The language queries generated are
solely based on the objects depicted in Figure 3 along with their corresponding relations. The objects
and relations are categorized into 9 groups and 6 groups respectively, with each group containing


                                                   3
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        Ground Truth                    LAVT               Ground Truth                     LAVT                       Ground Truth                    LAVT


        Beside the wall, the person is holding            The dirt has a person, motorcycle, and cow              The cup has a straw inside it and is placed
      another person who is leaning on him/her.                         standing on it.                                      on the dining table.


    While another person is cutting a pizza next                 The toy elephant on the bed is                         Placed on the counter, the toaster is
      to him/her, the person is looking away.                            next to a cat.                                      attached to the microwave.


             The person is sitting on the stairs and      The pavement has a car and a motorcycle                      The sports ball is flying, being looked at
                 holding a book looking around.               parked on it, and dirt is beside it.                        and about to be hit by a person.
                  (a) Misidentified referent              (b) Incorrect object classification                              (c) Failed segmentation

                          Figure 2: Failure cases of Complex-query Referring Image Segmentation.

             12
                                                              (a) Distribution of Object Categories
                                          Living Beings    Traffic and Signs           Food and Drinks                        Structures              Other Elements
                                          Vehicles         Sports and Recreation       Furniture and Household Items          Natural Elements
             10
log(count)


             8

             6

             4
                                            bird


                                 skateboard


                             table-merged


                                  cardboard
                                    keyboard

                                       blanket



                      pavement-merged


                            grass-merged


                                rug-merged
                                       person
                                         horse
                                        giraffe
                                     elephant
                                         sheep
                                            cow
                                         zebra
                                             dog
                                              cat
                                           bear
                                              car
                                           train
                                           boat
                                             bus
                                          truck


                                           oven
                                 motorcycle
                                      airplane
                                       bicycle
                                 traffic light
                                fire hydrant
                                    stop sign
                            parking meter
                                   surfboard
                                            skis
                                  sports ball
                                             kite
                              tennis racket
                                 snowboard
                               baseball bat
                                       frisbee
                           baseball glove
                                             cup
                                         bottle
                                           bowl
                                         donut
                                       banana
                                          pizza
                                           cake
                                       orange
                                    sandwich
                                         carrot
                                  wine glass
                                            fork
                                         apple
                                         spoon
                                      hot dog
                                            fruit
                                dining table
                                           chair
                                             bed
                          cabinet-merged


                                                tv
                                 teddy bear
                            window-other
                                           book
                                     handbag
                                          clock
                                     umbrella
                                  cell phone
                                         couch
                                     suitcase
                                      counter
                                          toilet
                                           vase
                                        laptop

                               potted plant
                                           shelf
                                      wall-tile
                                            sink
                                               tie
                                   wall-wood
                                       remote
                                   wall-brick
                                       curtain



                                         pillow
                             window-blind



                                        bench


                                           sand
                            fence-merged
                                          snow
                       mountain-merged
                              rock-merged
                                           river
                                        gravel
                      food-other-merged

                                      broccoli
                                           knife



                       wall-other-merged


                                refrigerator

                                            roof
                                  wall-stone
                                        mouse
                                 microwave

                                 toothbrush
                                      scissors
                                    hair drier
                                       toaster
                                           road

                                playingfield
                                           light
                                     platform
                                         house
                                        bridge
                                          towel
                                          stairs
                                            tent
                        sky-other-merged
                               tree-merged
                                dirt-merged
                                             sea


                                        flower
                           ceiling-merged
                            paper-merged
                                    backpack
                                       banner
                                             net
                                  floor-wood


                                   door-stuff



                                 mirror-stuff


                  building-other-merged
                                      railroad


                                water-other
                      floor-other-merged


             12
                                                              (b) Distribution of Relation Categories
                                                                             Spatial Relations              Motion and Movement                  Position and Resting
             10                                                              Attachment and Support         Interaction and Engagement           Action and Manipulation

              8
log(count)


              6
              4
              2
              0
                          carrying


                            exiting
                                  on


                     attached to
                            beside
                                over
                       in front of
                                   in
                  hanging from
                      on back of


                             eating

                         catching


                      leaning on


                         cleaning
                        falling off
                      walking on
                      running on
                          crossing


                           holding


                    playing with
                              biting


                           chasing
                      flying over
                  jumping from
                    going down
                  jumping over
                       looking at
                          wearing



                          drinking
                           guiding
                           feeding
                            kissing
                           picking
                    standing on
                       parked on
                        sitting on
                          lying on
                      painted on
                       driving on
                              riding
                           playing
                         touching
                         swinging

                    about to hit
                            driving
                        enclosing
                        talking to
                            pulling
                         throwing
                             slicing
                          pushing
                            kicking
                         entering

                          cooking
                         climbing
                          opening


 Figure 3: The distribution of object and relation categories, organized based on the parent classes.
 Best viewed by zooming in.


 elements that exhibit certain correlations. The group names represent abstract summaries of the
 shared attributes among the elements within each group.
 We analyze the failure cases of current models on RIS-CQ dataset. From Figure 2, we can summarize
 them into three types: misidentified referent, incorrect object classification, and failure segmentation.

 2.4               DATASET C OMPARISON

 RefCOCO/ RefCOCO+/ RefCOCOg. RefCOCO (Yu et al., 2016), RefCOCO+ (Yu et al., 2016),
 and RefCOCOg (Mao et al., 2016) are three visual grounding datasets with images and referred


                                                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                     Person5
                                                 Person11                                                    holding
                                                                                                                       Ball
                                                                                                                                           Graph Alignment
                                                                                                                                                                                          nodes in 𝐺𝑖
                                           Person3                 Person1                                              Person8
                                                                                                                                  𝐺𝑖                         𝐺𝑡


                                                                                         on / jumping from
                                                     standing on


                                                                                                                                                                         nodes in 𝐺𝑡
                                                on                           on                                        on


                                                                             Grass

                                              semantic scene graph                                                                                                                     similarity map
       input image



                                          visual feature representation                                                                                                                                 predicting
                                                                                                                                                                                       feature fusion

                                                                                                                                            Feature Alignment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     target matching


         the person holds a                                                                                                       visual feature
    ball over the grass
                                                                                                                                                       cross-attention
      query sentence                       semantic dependency graph                                                               text feature
                                                                                                                                                                                        feature map

                                           text feature representation

                      Dual-Modality Graph Representation                                                                                    Dual-Modality Alignment                                          Prediction



Figure 4: Our proposed D U M O G A framework, includes three procedures: Dual-modality Graph
Representation, Dual-modality Graph Alignment, and Prediction. Best viewed by zooming in.


objects selected from MS COCO (Lin et al., 2014). The referred objects are selected from the MS
COCO object detection annotations and belong to 80 object classes. RefCOCO (Yu et al., 2016)
has 19,994 images with 142,210 referring expressions for 50,000 object instances. RefCOCO+ has
19,992 images with 141,564 referring expressions for 49,856 object instances. RefCOCOg has 25,799
images with 95,010 referring expressions for 49,822 object instances.

Visual Genome. Visual Genome (VG v1.4) (Krishna et al., 2017) contains 108, 077 images with
21 relationships on average per image, which is split into 103, 077 training images and 5, 000 testing
images.


                          Table 1: Statistics of current Referring Image Understanding benchmarks.
               Dataset        RefCOCO RefCOCO+ RefCOCOg Visual Genome   RIS-CQ
               # Images        19,994   19,992   26,711    108,077       118,287
             # Text query      142,209 141,564   85,474      5.4M        285,781
           Avg. query length     3.61    3.53     8.43         5          13.18
          Avg. object / query    1.76    1.67     3.03         -           3.58
          Annotation methods   Manual   Manual   Manual     Manual    Auto + Manual


RIS-CQ. is our proposed referring image segmentation benchmark, which targets the explanation
of image contents. The image source for RIS-CQ is the union of VG (Krishna et al., 2017) and COCO
(Lin et al., 2014) datasets. RIS-CQ challenges RIS models to understand the rich object interactions
in daily activities. As shown in Table 1, we summarize the details of each dataset compared with our
RIS-CQ dataset.

3         P ROPOSED M ETHOD
Unlike classic dense prediction models with complex design in RIS (e.g. LAVT (Yang et al., 2022)),
which take expensive computational power to make inferences, the graph learning based architecture
provides efficient training process and promising results. To address the numerous descriptions of
surrounding objects and backgrounds within images, images are parsed into scene graphs, which are
treated as fine-grained image representations to analyze the relations of these objects with a graph
structure. On the other hand, following previous dependency-based RE methods (Guo et al., 2019),
we parse the queries into syntax dependency trees, which can provide information for dual-modality
graph alignment. As a result, we propose a graph learning-based method named D U M O G A to align


                                                                                                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the semantics in queries and the information in images, aiming at efficiently locating the target
instances. The whole structure of our proposed D U M O G A is shown in Fig 4.

3.1   D UAL -M ODALITY G RAPH R EPRESENTATION

Semantic Scene Graph Generation for Vision. We employ a classic SGG model (e.g. VCTree
(Tang et al., 2019)) to parse images into scene graphs. The whole process can be formulated as:
                                   Pr (G | I) = Pr (S, O, R | I) .                                   (1)

An image I can be segmented into a set of masks S. Each mask is associated with an object
with class label O. A set of relations R between objects are predicted. We construct the node set
Ni = {Oj |j ∈ [1, n]} of the scene graph, Oi is the ith object detected in the image. n represents the
number of detected object, and we set the maximum number of detected object for each image to
N. For the edge set Ei = {Ra,b = (Ia , Ib ) |a ∈ [1, n] , b ∈ [0, n − 1]}, Ra,b denotes the ath object
related with the bth object. As a result, the scene graph can be formulated as follows:
                                            Gi = (Ni , Ei ) .                                      (2)
Syntax Dependency Graph for Text. We use the syntax dependency tree to explore the dependency
between words in the sentence. Following (Peters et al., 2018), we use ELMo to obtain the dependency
tree for the input text after which each word from the text is connected by its governor and obtains
its related dependency triple. For the node set Nt = {Tj |j ∈ [1, l]} of the dependency tree, Tj
denotes the jth token in the sentence, and l represents the total length of the sentence. For the edge
set Et = {Ga,b = (Ta∗ , Ta ) |a ∈ [1, l]},Ta∗ denotes the governor of the ath token, and the graph
representation for the sentence can be formulated as follows:
                                           Gt = (Nt , Et ) .                                        (3)

3.2   D UAL - MODALITY A LIGNMENT

To accurately locate the target instance using the query sentence, the gap between visual and semantics
needs to be bridged. Thus, we propose the graph and feature alignment process to efficiently align
visual and language domains.
Graph Alignment. We approximate the node embedding matrix Pe by factorizing a similarity matrix
of the node identities, and align nodes between the above two graphs by greedily matching the most
similar embeddings from the other graph.
Following (Zheng et al., 2021), we combine Ni and Nt , and count both in and out degrees of k-top
neighbors for each node. Then we compute the similarity between every two nodes, getting a n × n
similarity matrix Pe. After that we subsets P1 and P2 from Pe. The P1 and P2 denote separate
representations for nodes in Gi and Gt .

                                     Pe1 , Pe2 = D N Pe ,                                      (4)
where D denotes the dividing operation of P by the number of nodes in Ni and Nt in order, and N
is normalization operation. When finishing graph structure alignment, we calculate the similarity
between node i from Pe1 and node j from Pe2 using the formula below:

                                                                   2
                                   aij = exp(− Pe1 [i] − Pe2 [j]       ).                            (5)
                                                                   2

With the similarities between nodes, the two graphs are transformed into a similarity map α, which
can be formulated as:
                                        α = (aij )|V1 |×|V2 | ,                                (6)
where aij represents the structural similarity between the ith word of the input text and the jth object
of the input image.
Feature Alignment. Though graph structure is efficient, the information within is not enough for the
task. We take the advantage of visual features from images and word embeddings from sentences to
promise a fine-grained searching space. Specifically, for each image I, we get its visual feature Fi


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Comparison with state-of-the-art methods in terms of overall IoU on three benchmark
datasets. GA represents Graph Alignment, FA represents Feature Alignment, and Full represents
Graph Alignment + Feature Alignment.
                                                               Refer Image Segmentation
    Method                       Backbone Model
                                                   mIoU    P@0.3 P@0.4 P@0.5 P@0.6             P@0.7
    MAttNet (Yu et al., 2018)      ResNet-101      8.00     9.61     7.90    6.15    5.51       4.58
    VPD (Zhao et al., 2023)          U-Net         24.0     29.5     27.5    23.8    21.5       19.3
    LAVT (Ding et al., 2021)        SWIN-B         21.2     26.6     21.6    17.1    13.7       10.9
    UNINEXT (Yan et al., 2023)     ResNet-50       19.8     22.3     21.8    21.0    19.9       19.2
    D U M O G A (GA)               ResNet-50       15.0     19.5     18.3    16.7    14.4       11.7
    D U M O G A (FA)               ResNet-50       16.4     21.1     19.4    17.8    15.5       13.4
    D U M O G A (FULL)             ResNet-50       24.4     31.8     29.7    26.8    23.1       19.3



from backbone model (e.g. ResNet-50 (He et al., 2016)). For each sentence Q, we get its semantic
embedding Fl using BERT (Devlin et al., 2019). We treat Fi as the query while Fl is treated as the
key and value, completing the attention process below:
                                                      T
                                                     qk
                                     Ra = Softmax √       v,                                   (7)
                                                       d
where d denotes the dimension of Fl .
Feature Fusion and Prediction. After obtaining the results from graph alignment and feature
alignment processes, we fuse them to make the final prediction.
              Rf = M LP ([Ra ; αFl ]) , s = j ∗ = Argmax(R1f , ...Rjf , ..., RN
                                                                              f
                                                                                ),      (8)
                                                          1≤j≤N
Where [; ] denotes concatenation, and we use the MLPs to project the feature to N dimension. s
denotes the output of the referring objects from the input with the largest probability.

3.3     T RAINING L OSS

For the N detected objects in the image, we match their masks with the ground truth mask and obtain
the gth object that share the most intersection over union with the ground truth. To maximize the
probability on the gth dimension of Rf , we employ a cross-entropy loss function below:

                                 PN      i     f           i          f
                          L=      i=1 [−K log(Ri ) − (1 − K )log(1 − Ri )].                         (9)

K represents a one-hot vector with all zeros except for the gth dimension, and K i denotes the ith
dimension of K. As a result, the probability on the gth dimension of Rf is maximized.

4      E XPERIMENT
4.1     E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

We employ a VCTree (Tang et al., 2019) with ResNet-50 (He et al., 2016) as its backbone for scene
graph generation and visual feature extraction. The maximum detected object in one image is set to
10. Specifically, the feature dimension for each of the detected object is 1024. For the query sentence,
we append the [CLS] and [SEP] tokens to the beginning and end of the sentence respectively. Then a
pre-trained BERT is used to generate sentence embedding and the dimension is set to 768. For our
D U M O G A model, it is trained with Adamw optimizer, where we set the base learning rate at 2e-5
and the batch size at 64.

4.2     E VALUATION M ETRICS

For the Referring Image Segmentation task, we follow previous works (Liu et al., 2017; Margffoy-
Tuay et al., 2018) and adopt Precision@X and IoU to verify the effectiveness. The IoU calculates


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: Visualization result of our proposed D U M O G A model on RIS-CQ dataset. It is noteworthy
that invalid prediction for LAVT was observed in the case of sample (b).


intersection regions over union regions of the predicted segmentation mask and the ground truth. The
Precision@X measures the percentage of test images with an IoU score higher than the threshold
X ∈ {0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7}, which focuses on the location ability of the method.

4.3   P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON

Table 2 shows the performance comparison with other SoTA methods on the RIS-CQ dataset, which
includes the following models:
LAVT (Yang et al., 2022) is a Transformer-based framework for referring image segmentation. Unlike
traditional approaches that fuse cross-modal information after feature extraction, LAVT incorporates
language-aware visual encoding directly into the model architecture;
VPD (Zhao et al., 2023) proposed a new framework that exploits the semantic information of a
pre-trained text-to-image diffusion model in visual perception tasks;
UNINEXT (Yan et al., 2023) reformulates diverse instance perception tasks into a unified object
discovery and retrieval paradigm and can flexibly perceive different types of objects by simply
changing the input prompts;
MAttNet (Yu et al., 2018) is a two-stage method that first extracts multiple instances by using an
instance segmentation network Mask RCNN (He et al., 2017), then utilizes language features to
select the target from the extracted instances. Due to the space limitation, we only list selected SoTA
methods, more details can be found in Supplementary Materials.
As shown in Table 2, our method achieves remarkably superior performance on RIS-CQ dataset
compared with other SoTA methods. Also our D U M O G A model is based on ResNet-50 (He et al.,
2016), which is not so strong as Swin-B (Liu et al., 2021), D U M O G A achieves over 100% to 200%
performance gain in all metrics compared with LAVT (Ding et al., 2021) on RIS-CQ dataset. With
stronger backbone models, the performance of our D U M O G A model can be further improved.
We also provide the visualization of the output of our D U M O G A model in Figure 5. Compared with
LAVT (Ding et al., 2021), our D U M O G A can accurately locate the referring object based on the
comprehensive understanding of visual-textual data, rather than response to partial words in the query
(such as the stop sign in Figure 5 (a)).

4.4   I N - DEPTH A NALYSIS

Q1: How to control the annotation quality? The annotation process for the RIS-CQ dataset
spanned over a period of 6 months and involved the collaboration of 5 undergraduate students. To
ensure the production of high-quality annotations, the annotators were supervised and adhered to
specific principles. Firstly, all annotators underwent rigorous training before commencing the actual


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


annotation process. Secondly, separate annotators were assigned for query and object selection
annotations. Annotators responsible for object selection were instructed to review the quality of
queries, ensuring that unclear or poor queries were either rectified or eliminated. This approach
simulated the evaluation process, guaranteeing the reasonableness of the queries while avoiding
subjective annotations. Lastly, guidelines were provided for the maximal lengths of language queries,
specifying limits of over 20 words for queries and over 5 for objects/background labels. We provide
more details in the Supplementary Materials.
Q2: What is the necessity of complex query? On the one hand, current RIS models are sensitive
to language queries. Even input two different queries which refer to the same object but contain
information in different granularities, current RIS models will output different regions. So we need
to construct a new RIS dataset with complex queries to validate the robustness of the proposed RIS
models. On the other hand, it is not the final path to general RIS model if restricted to train models
with downstream annotated benchmark datasets, such as RefCOCO with limited object classes and
short query length. It’s time to make a further step to real applications by combining with large
pre-trained models and propose a novel and informative RIS dataset with more relations among
objects.


5    W HAT T O D O N EXT ?

With the emergence of large pre-trained models (such as GPT-4 (Bubeck et al., 2023) and SAM (Kir-
illov et al., 2023)), the semantic understanding ability of dealing with multi-modal data has been
rapidly enhanced. Then, utilizing large pre-trained models is an irresistible trend due to their superi-
ority in open-vocabulary scenarios. In the next step, we can develop lightweight RIS modules (based
on the Graph Alignment and Feature Alignment modules in our D U M O G A model) to adapt large
pre-trained models in a plug-and-play manner. Besides, on the basis of our proposed RIS-CQ dataset,
we can explore more scenarios in real applications, such as referring object understanding in video
and audio modality. And evaluate the robustness of proposed RIS models even with none or multiple
referring objects according to the complex queries.


6    R ELATED W ORK

Referring image segmentation aims to segment a target region (e.g., object or stuff) in an image by
understanding a given natural linguistic expression, which was first introduced by (Hu et al., 2016).
Early works (Liu et al., 2017; Li et al., 2018; Margffoy-Tuay et al., 2018) first extracted visual and
linguistic features by CNN and LSTM, respectively, and directly concatenated two modalities to
obtain final segmentation results by an FCN (Long et al., 2015). In MAttNet (Yu et al., 2018), Yu et
al. proposed a two-stage method that first extracts instances using Mask R-CNN (He et al., 2017),
and then adopts linguistic features to choose the target from those instances. Then, a series of works
are proposed to adopt the attention mechanism. EFNet (Feng et al., 2021) designs a co-attention
mechanism to use language to refine the multi-modal features progressively, which can promote the
consistency of the cross-modal information representation. Some recent works leverage transformer
(Vaswani et al., 2017) to deal with the RES task with satisfying performance. VLT (Ding et al.,
2021) employs a transformer to build a network with an encoder-decoder attention mechanism for
enhancing the global context information. All these methods are trained with RIS datasets with
simple queries.


7    C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we propose a novel benchmark dataset for Referring Image Segmentation with Complex
Queries (RIS-CQ). The RIS-CQ dataset is of high quality and large scale, which challenges the
existing RIS with complex, specific and informative language queries, and enables a more realistic
scenario of RIS research. Besides, we propose a novel SoTA framework to task the RIS-CQ dataset,
called dual-modality graph alignment model (D U M O G A), which effectively captures the intrinsic
correspondence of the semantics of the two modalities. Experimental results and analyses demonstrate
the necessity of our proposed dataset and the model.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar,
  Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, et al. Sparks of artificial general intelligence:
  Early experiments with gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712, 2023.
Jianbo Chen, Yelong Shen, Jianfeng Gao, Jingjing Liu, and Xiaodong Liu. Language-based image
   editing with recurrent attentive models. In CVPR, pp. 8721–8729, 2018.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In NAACL, pp. 4171–4186, June 2019.
Henghui Ding, Chang Liu, Suchen Wang, and Xudong Jiang. Vision-language transformer and query
  generation for referring segmentation. In ICCV, pp. 16321–16330, 2021.
Guang Feng, Zhiwei Hu, Lihe Zhang, and Huchuan Lu. Encoder fusion network with co-attention
  embedding for referring image segmentation. In CVPR, pp. 15506–15515, 2021.
Zhijiang Guo, Yan Zhang, and Wei Lu. Attention guided graph convolutional networks for relation
  extraction. In ACL, pp. 241–251, 2019.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In CVPR, pp. 770–778, 2016.
Kaiming He, Georgia Gkioxari, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Mask r-cnn. In ICCV, pp. 2961–2969,
  2017.
Ronghang Hu, Marcus Rohrbach, and Trevor Darrell. Segmentation from natural language expres-
  sions. In ECCV, pp. 108–124, 2016.
Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, et al. Segment anything. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.02643, 2023.
Ranjay Krishna, Yuke Zhu, Oliver Groth, Justin Johnson, Kenji Hata, Joshua Kravitz, Stephanie
  Chen, Yannis Kalantidis, Li-Jia Li, David A Shamma, et al. Visual genome: Connecting language
  and vision using crowdsourced dense image annotations. IJCV, 123(1):32–73, 2017.
Bowen Li, Xiaojuan Qi, Thomas Lukasiewicz, and Philip HS Torr. Manigan: Text-guided image
  manipulation. In CVPR, pp. 7880–7889, 2020.
Ruiyu Li, Kaican Li, Yi-Chun Kuo, Michelle Shu, Xiaojuan Qi, Xiaoyong Shen, and Jiaya Jia.
  Referring image segmentation via recurrent refinement networks. In ICCV, pp. 5745–5753, 2018.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In ECCV, pp.
  740–755, 2014.
Chenxi Liu, Zhe Lin, Xiaohui Shen, Jimei Yang, Xin Lu, and Alan Yuille. Recurrent multimodal
  interaction for referring image segmentation. In ICCV, pp. 1271–1280, 2017.
Ze Liu, Yutong Lin, Yue Cao, Han Hu, Yixuan Wei, Zheng Zhang, Stephen Lin, and Baining
  Guo. Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows. In ICCV, pp.
  10012–10022, 2021.
Jonathan Long, Evan Shelhamer, and Trevor Darrell. Fully convolutional networks for semantic
  segmentation. In ICCV, pp. 3431–3440, 2015.
Brady D Lund and Ting Wang. Chatting about chatgpt: how may ai and gpt impact academia and
  libraries? Library Hi Tech News, 40(3):26–29, 2023.
Junhua Mao, Jonathan Huang, Alexander Toshev, Oana Camburu, Alan L Yuille, and Kevin Murphy.
  Generation and comprehension of unambiguous object descriptions. In CVPR, pp. 11–20, 2016.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Edgar Margffoy-Tuay, Juan C Pérez, Emilio Botero, and Pablo Arbeláez. Dynamic multimodal
  instance segmentation guided by natural language queries. In ECCV, pp. 630–645, 2018.
Matthew E. Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Matt Gardner, Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, and
 Luke Zettlemoyer. Deep contextualized word representations. In ACL, pp. 2227–2237, 2018.
Kaihua Tang, Hanwang Zhang, Baoyuan Wu, Wenhan Luo, and Wei Liu. Learning to compose
  dynamic tree structures for visual contexts. In CVPR, pp. 6619–6628, 2019.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. 2017.
Xin Wang, Qiuyuan Huang, Asli Celikyilmaz, Jianfeng Gao, Dinghan Shen, Yuan-Fang Wang,
  William Yang Wang, and Lei Zhang. Reinforced cross-modal matching and self-supervised
  imitation learning for vision-language navigation. In CVPR, pp. 6629–6638, 2019.
Bin Yan, Yi Jiang, Jiannan Wu, Dong Wang, Zehuan Yuan, Ping Luo, and Huchuan Lu. Universal
  instance perception as object discovery and retrieval. In CVPR, 2023.
Zhao Yang, Jiaqi Wang, Yansong Tang, Kai Chen, Hengshuang Zhao, and Philip HS Torr. Lavt:
  Language-aware vision transformer for referring image segmentation. In CVPR, pp. 18155–18165,
  2022.
Zhengyuan Yang, Boqing Gong, Liwei Wang, Wenbing Huang, Dong Yu, and Jiebo Luo. A fast and
  accurate one-stage approach to visual grounding. In ICCV, pp. 4683–4693, 2019.
Zhengyuan Yang, Tianlang Chen, Liwei Wang, and Jiebo Luo. Improving one-stage visual grounding
  by recursive sub-query construction. In ECCV, pp. 387–404, 2020.
Licheng Yu, Patrick Poirson, Shan Yang, Alexander C Berg, and Tamara L Berg. Modeling context
  in referring expressions. In ECCV, pp. 69–85, 2016.
Licheng Yu, Zhe Lin, Xiaohui Shen, Jimei Yang, Xin Lu, Mohit Bansal, and Tamara L Berg. Mattnet:
  Modular attention network for referring expression comprehension. In CVPR, pp. 1307–1315,
  2018.
Chao Zhang, Zichao Yang, Xiaodong He, and Li Deng. Multimodal intelligence: Representa-
  tion learning, information fusion, and applications. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal
  Processing, 14(3):478–493, 2020.
Heng Zhao, Joey Tianyi Zhou, and Yew-Soon Ong. Word2pix: Word to pixel cross-attention
  transformer in visual grounding. TNNLS, 2022.
Wenliang Zhao, Yongming Rao, Zuyan Liu, Benlin Liu, Jie Zhou, and Jiwen Lu. Unleashing
 text-to-image diffusion models for visual perception. ICCV, 2023.
Changmeng Zheng, Junhao Feng, Ze Fu, Yi Cai, Qing Li, and Tao Wang. Multimodal relation
  extraction with efficient graph alignment. In ACM MM, pp. 5298–5306, 2021.


                                              11
