Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E XPOSURE B IAS M ITIGATION FOR S ELF I NFORMA -
TION U PDATING OF L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         Current large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabili-
         ties in addressing users’ requests for various types of information. However, these
         models are limited by the most recent data available in their pretraining corpora,
         rendering them incapable of providing up-to-date information. While periodically
         updating LLM pretraining corpora is possible, the optimal updating strategy re-
         mains underexplored. Retraining LLMs from scratch is cost-prohibitive, and the
         effectiveness of continual fine-tuning on new corpora has not been thoroughly
         examined. Additionally, current update procedures typically demand significant
         human involvement to convert the information into more structured format, such
         as knowledge triples, conversational data or responses with human feedback. In
         this study, we conduct a comprehensive examination of a novel self information
         updating task in LLMs, which only requires the provision of informative text cor-
         pora without additional human intervention. For instance, we can use the latest
         news articles to update the LLMs’ existing knowledge. We define the self in-
         formation updating task and assess the continual fine-tuning approach for this
         purpose. We formulate this task as a self knowledge distillation task where the
         teacher model is the original LLM with a new corpus as the context. We observe
         that the naı̈ve distillation method can be problematic due to LLMs’ exposure bias,
         which prioritizes existing information over new information that we aim to incor-
         porate. When fine-tuned to accommodate instructions related to new information,
         LLMs tend to rely on pre-existing knowledge, neglecting recent facts and leading
         to incorrect reasoning chains that ultimately diminish the efficacy of information
         updates. Based on our theoretical analysis, we propose a straightforward yet ef-
         fective method to mitigate exposure bias by incorporating the selected relevant
         facts into training losses. To validate our hypothesis, we develop two datasets to
         evaluate information updates, one derived from news articles published in March
         and April 2023 (the latest available news by the time of dataset collection) and the
         other derived from the Natural Questions benchmark. The latter has been chosen
         due to its provided link between questions and relevant passages from Wikipedia,
         which can be utilized as the evaluation testbed and information updating corpus
         respectively. Experimental results demonstrate that our proposed approach sig-
         nificantly increases the factual consistency score (on a scale from 0 to 1) by up
         to 0.16. Furthermore, we perform a preliminary investigation into the forgetting
         issue associated with this task, unveiling that our method, with a compact replay
         buffer of only 2.3% of the training tokens, can significantly alleviate the forget-
         ting problem. This study thus marks a significant stride towards optimizing the
         procedures for updating LLMs with the latest information, promising enhanced
         accuracy and efficacy.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in addressing users’ di-
verse information needs, primarily owing to the extensive range of information sources in their pre-
training corpora. Nevertheless, LLMs are incapable of providing up-to-date information absent from
the pretraining corpora. The primary technical challenge lies in effectively updating the language
model with the most recent information sources such as news articles. Prior research on updating


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


neural models (Zhu et al., 2020; Mitchell et al., 2022a; De Cao et al., 2021; Hase et al., 2021; Meng
et al., 2022; Mitchell et al., 2022b) mainly concentrates on the instance level, where the annotated
instances with new information in various format, including knowledge triples, conversational data
or responses with human feedback, are used to enhance the models when they fail to produce accu-
rate predictions due to the lack of information. The updating process necessitates substantial human
involvement in generating such structured or semi-structured training data, which may affect the
timeliness of update. Consequently, we propose a more challenging task, namely Self Information
Updating (SIU), wherein the models must update itself with only the given unstructured information
sources rather than more structured annotated instances.
We consider the feasibility of this challenging task to be achievable with the advancements in
instruction-following models. These models can be prompted to examine the new information
sources and generate instruction-response pairs that are relevant to the provided information. The in-
structions and responses are usually questions and answers on the facts in the corpus for information
updating. We provide some examples in Table 1. This process of self-data creation also naturally
grounds each instruction-response pair to its corresponding information source. In this work, we
regard the individual articles within the information updating corpus as the sources of information.
We utilize this grounding approach to address a fundamental issue we have identified in updating the
model: the exposure bias in LLMs prioritizing existing information over new information we aim
to integrate. Our theoretical analysis suggests that this exposure bias leads to incorrect reasoning
chains that ultimately diminish the efficacy of updating models. This misguidance may exist in any
model updating approaches that rely on the language modeling probabilities. Leveraging the natural
alignment between instruction-response pairs and information sources, we propose a straightfor-
ward yet effective context-aware distillation method. This method continually finetunes the model,
reducing the exposure bias and enabling the acquisition of new information simultaneously.
For experimental validation, we utilize an instruction-finetuned model from LLaMA-7B as our base
model to study the SIU problem. We curate a corpus of news articles published after March 2023,
which serves as the source corpus for updating information. We also develop another corpus based
on the Natural Questions (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019) dataset by removing those questions that the
base model achieves high factual consistency scores without any fine-tuning. We evaluate the factual
consistency score (on a scale from 0 to 1) of the responses and observe a significant improvement
of 0.16 over baselines that are prone to exposure bias. Additionally, we perform an study on the
forgetting problem under a continual learning setting and discover that our approach maintains good
performance in following instructions related to the past information updating corpus using a replay
buffer of the past training data that is only 2.3% of the original training data.
To summarize, our major contributions include:

       • We introduce the Self Information Updating task for large language models. This task is
         more practical and requires minimal human intervention compared to previous research on
         language model updates.
       • We perform a theoretical analysis of the exposure bias problem in updating models, which
         is applicable to any approach that utilizes language modeling probabilities for prediction.
         We thereby propose a context-aware distillation approach to address the exposure bias prob-
         lem. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.

2     M ETHODOLOGY
2.1   P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

Definition 2.1 (Information Updating). Given an information updating corpus T containing new
information unknown to a language model A, the objective of information updating is to find an
updated language model A′ such that P (x|A′ ) ≡ P (x|A, T) for arbitrary text sequence x ∈ X .
When T consists solely of natural language articles without any additional human annotation, this
task is referred to as Self Information Updating.

In this work, we concentrate on the task of Self Information Updating for instruction-following
LLMs. Therefore, we limit the scope of A to be a large language model with basic instruction-
following capabilities. We consider samples of instruction-response pairs x = (i, r) in Definition 2.1


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and the objective stated is also re-formulated as,
                               P (r|A′ , i) ≡ P (r|A, i, T), ∀(i, r) ∈ X 2 .                          (1)
Here (i, r) are pairs of instructions and responses and some example pairs are given in Table 1.
Let C denote the pretraining corpus of A. In this work, we analyze the challenges of continually
finetuning A on the information updating corpus T .

2.2   F INE - TUNING DATA S AMPLING

Training A′ to satisfy the objective in Equation (1) theoretically requires training on the entire text
sequence space X , which is prohibitively expensive. To achieve efficient updates, we need to sample
a subset of X . In practice, we sample the fine-tuning data as instruction-response pairs, x = (i, r)
and further categorize the pairs into a subset of pairs querying the information in T as XT , and another
set unrelated to T as X \XT . To sample unrelated instructions from X \XT , we leverage the sparsity of
XT within X and simply select random instructions from X , since the likelihood of a random sample
belonging to XT is minimal. In practice, we can acquire this subset by keeping a replay buffer of
old training examples. To sample related instructions from XT , we provide T as additional context
and ask the instruction-following model A to generate instruction-response pairs relevant to T on its
own. We present the prompts we used in Appendix A.5. We denote the sampled fine-tuning dataset
of instruction-response pairs as S. Further implementation details can be found in Section 3.

2.3   NA ÏVE M ETHODS FOR I NFORMATION U PDATING

We analyze the following two naı̈ve methods in this section.
Definition 2.2 (Fact Fine-tuning). Fact fine-tuning is defined as the continual fine-tuning of the
LLM with the language modeling loss on the information updating corpus T,
                                        Lf act = − log P (T|A′ ).                                     (2)
Definition 2.3 (Naı̈ve Distillation). Naı̈ve distillation strictly follows the task formulation in Equa-
tion (1) using the distillation loss on the sampled instruction-response pairs {(i, r)}
                               Lnd = E(i,r)∼P (·|A,T ) − log P (r|A′ , i).                            (3)
Here P (r|A, i, T) is the probability from A when T is added as additional context (e.g., prefix).

However, we argue that both methods may be problematic for continual fine-tuning of A due to the
exposure bias, particularly when using a smaller sampled subset S. For the ease of analysis, we
provide a non-rigorous definition of the information in a text corpus.
Definition 2.4 (Information in Text Corpus). The information IS (T) of the corpus T with respect to
S is defined as the minimal sufficient statistic of T with respect to S, such that
                                P (r|i, T) ≡ P (r|i, IS (T)), (i, r) ∈ S.                             (4)
Remark. This definition is non-rigorous as the existence of such a minimal sufficient statistic is not
proved. Intuitively, IS (T) should consist of minimal text pieces containing new information from T
such as “Manchester City’s manager is Pep Guardiola”.
Remark. We assume without the loss of generality that IS (T) and IS (C) are independent. Otherwise
we can replace IS (T) with the conditional minimal sufficient statistic of IS (T) given IS (C), which
is intuitively equivalent to removing the text pieces consisting of existing information in C from T.
With these notations, the target probability in Equation (1) on the sampled subset S is
                    P (r|i, A′ ) = P (r|i, IS (T), A′ )P (IS (T)|i, A′ )
                                                                                                      (5)
                                   + P (r|i, IS (C), A′ )P (IS (C)|i, A′ ), (i, r) ∈ S.

Since we perform the continual fine-tuning of A′ from A pretrained on C, we hypothesize that
there will be an exposure bias towards existing information, i.e., P (IS (C)|i, A) > P (IS (T)|i, A).
For naı̈ve distillation that directly optimize P (r|i, A′ ), A′ will prioritize updates to better fit
P (r|i, IS (C), A′ ) rather than P (r|i, IS (T), A′ ) at the initial stages of training. Consequently, the


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                        Self Prompting


                                                                                                           Updating
                               Instruction                              Information
                                                                                                          Instruction-
                            Following Corpus                          Updating Corpus
                                                                                                         Response Pairs


                           Instruction Following
                                                                 Information Updating                    Updated LLM
                                    LLM


Figure 1: Overall self information updating pipeline. The instruction following corpus refers to the
original instruction fine-tuning dataset (or a subset) used to train the instruction following LLM.


language model will tend to fit responses based on previously learned information even for instruc-
tions related to the updating corpus, resulting in undesired reasoning chains that we aim to overcome.
Fact fine-tuning optimizes (considering only new information)
                                             X
                            P (IS (T)|A′ ) =   P (IS (T), i|A′ )
                                                                  i
                                                                 X                                                        (6)
                                                             =           P (IS (T)|i, A′ )P (i|A′ ).
                                                                  i

Although maximizing P (IS (T)|A ) is positively correlated with maximizing P (IS (T)|i, A′ ) from
                                                   ′

Equation 6, we hypothesize similarly that instructions related to the new information have lower lan-
guage model probabilities than instructions related to the existing information. Therefore, the model
learns to associate instructions related to the existing information more at the initial stage of train-
ing. Moreover, fact fine-tuning does not optimize the response generation term P (r|i, IS (T), A′ ) in
Equation (5), which degrades the response generation performance.

2.4      C ONTEXT- AWARE D ISTILLATION

Based on the analysis of the exposure bias problem mentioned earlier, we present a straightforward
yet highly effective approach to validate the analysis and address the problem by extending the naı̈ve
distillation approach. Recall that the fine-tuning dataset S comprises two subsets: ST , which pertains
to the new information, and SC , randomly sampled. We force the reasoning chains in Equation (5)
by adding indicator functions1 ,
                     Lcontext = − log [I(i ∈ ST )P (r|i, IS (T), A′ )P (IS (T)|i, A′ )
                                         +I(i ∈ SC )P (r|i, IS (C), A′ )P (IS (C)|i, A′ )]
                                                                                          .                               (7)
                                   = − log [I(i ∈ ST )P (IS (T), r|i, A′ )
                                                       +I(i ∈ SC )P (IS (C), r|i, A′ )] , (i, r) ∈ S.

For the implementation, we utilize IS (T) as the reference article that guides the base model A in
generating instruction-response pairs (i, s). When presented with an input instruction i, the model
undergoes fine-tuning to generate the corresponding news article first, followed by appending the re-
sponse. For samples unrelated to the new information, acquiring IS (C) directly from the pretraining
corpus of A proves challenging. To address this, we include a placeholder prompt that instructs the
model to answer based on information in the pretraining corpus C. Examples of training samples for
   1
       An indicator function I(a ∈ A) = 1 when a ∈ A, otherwise 0.


                                                                           4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          Table 1: Example Training Samples for Distillation.

 Methods             Related to New Information                    Not Related to New Information
                     Instruction: How has Bayern Mu-               Instruction: Tell me which of the fol-
                     nich changed since Thomas Tuchel              lowing are science fiction TV shows:
                     took over as manager?                         Lost, The X-Files, The Mandalorian,
                                                                   Millennium, Game of Thrones.
 Naı̈ve              Response: The club has returned to            Response: All except Game of
                     the top of the league and is under            Thrones are classified as science fic-
                     the guidance of former Chelsea coach          tion. Game of Thrones is considered
                     Thomas Tuchel.                                high fantasy.
                     Instruction: How has Bayern Mu-               Instruction: Tell me which of the fol-
                     nich changed since Thomas Tuchel              lowing are science fiction TV shows:
                     took over as manager?                         Lost, The X-Files, The Mandalorian,
                                                                   Millennium, Game of Thrones.
                     Response:The instruction is related           Response: The instruction is related
                     to the following information:                 to the following information: None.
                     Manchester City manager Pep                   The response to “Tell me which
                     Guardiola has said his team will              of the following are science fiction
 Context-aware       not take their quarterfinal clash with        TV shows” is : Lost, The X-Files,
                     Bayern Munich for granted... The              The Mandalorian, Millennium, Game
                     response to “How has Bayern Munich            of Thrones. ANSWER: All except
                     changed since Thomas Tuchel took              Game of Thrones are classified as sci-
                     over as manager?” is: The club has            ence fiction. Game of Thrones is con-
                     returned to the top of the league and is      sidered high fantasy.
                     under the guidance of former Chelsea
                     coach Thomas Tuchel.



context-aware distillation can be found in Table 1.2 The overall self information updating pipeline
is presented in Figure 1


3       E XPERIMENTS

3.1     BASE M ODEL FOR E XPERIMENTS

As our analysis in Section 2 is based on large language models with basic instruction-following
capability, we finetune a instruction-following model from the LLaMA-7B (Touvron et al., 2023)
as the base model. We combine the instruction-following data from Alpaca3 and InstructionWild4 .
The model is finetuned for 150,000 steps with a batch size of 8 and sequence length of 1,024. For
the remainder of this paper, we will refer to this instruction-following base model as MixInst.


3.2     DATASETS

We develop two datasets to evaluate the self information updating capability. Each dataset contains
an information updating corpus (a document collection), and a set of question-answer pairs related
to the information in the documents for evaluation. In order to further evaluate how well updated
models maintain the information learned in the instruction fine-tuning stage, we derive another set
of instruction-response pairs from the instruction fine-tuning datasets mentioned in Section 3.1.

    2
     We repeat the instruction (”the response to ... is” in context-aware responses) prior to generating the re-
sponse due to the limited context window span. The instruction may betruncated for lengthy related documents.
   3
     https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca
   4
     https://github.com/XueFuzhao/InstructionWild, we only use English subset.


                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.2.1      CNN N EWS

Updating Corpus We manually collected a small scale corpus of news articles that were published
on CNN’s website (https://www.cnn.com/) during the months of March and April 2023. We
randomly selected 50 news articles to serve as our information updating corpus. Although this
dataset is moderately sized, experimental results demonstrate the challenges in effectively acquiring
and applying information from even such a small corpus, primarily due to the exposure bias problem.

Evaluation QA Pairs In order to create a high quality evaluation set with minimal human efforts,
we prompt GPT-45 to generate question-answer pairs related to the facts in each news article. The
prompt is presented in Appendix A.5, which encourages GPT-4 to generate questions that are self-
contained and directly answerable with the information from the news articles. It is worth noticing
that the news articles are included as part of the prompts contain the news articles, which increases
the credibility of the answers generated. We conduct further manual filtering to remove or revise the
questions that are not answerable by itself. The remaining evaluation set contains 301 questions.

3.2.2      NQ VAL

Updating corpus We also develop another corpus based on the validation split of the Natural
Questions benchmark. We use the long answers (extracted paragraphs from Wikipedia pages) in
Natural Questions as the information updating corpus. Since some of the Wikipedia pages may
already be part of the training data of LLaMA model, we perform another round of filtering to
remove those paragraphs that the base model is capable of solving related problems. We provide the
detailed filtering procedure in Appendix A.4.

Evaluation QA Pairs We collect all the questions that has any of the document in the updating
corpus labeled as long answers. The short answers in the original Natural Questions annotations are
used as the gold standard answers.

3.2.3      O LD I NSTRUCTIONS

We randomly sample 300 instruction-response pairs from the instruction fine-tuning examples used
to train the base model. We also prompt GPT-4 to paraphrase the examples, because we aim to
evaluate whether the models learned the information instead of simply remembering the training
examples. The prompt is presented in Appendix A.5. This set is only used in testing phase. We use
the same subset for testing information updating on both CNN News and NQ Val.


3.3      E VALUATION M ETRICS

In order to evaluate whether the model has accurately learned the information from the corpus T,
we consider the factual consistency as the evaluation aspect and adopt the UniEval (Zhong et al.,
2022) factual consistency score. This score is computed by a neural evaluator based on T5 (Raffel
et al., 2020) between a pair of model output and source document. We evaluate two types of factual
consistency for both CNN News and NQ Val: Answer Consistency, where we compare the model
outputs with gold standard answers in Section 3.2. This is to evaluate whether the model generates
the correct facts to answer the question; Context Consistency, where we compare the model outputs
with the corresponding context (news articles or Wikipedia paragraphs). We consider this metric for
two reasons: (1) gold standard answers can be brief, which will cause the model outputs with richer
information to have lower Answer Consistency (2) we also want to examine whether the model
generates answers based on the correct information sources, or just accidentally get the correct
answer based on the existing knowledge. In the latter case, the model outputs may contain other
irrelevant context that is inconsistent with the news articles. For Old Instructions, we only compute
the answer consistency since there is no updating corpus in instruction-following datasets.

   5
       Snapshot of gpt-4-0314


                                                 6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.4   T RAINING D ETAILS

As demonstrated in Figure 1, there are two major steps in self information updating: self prompting
for updating data creation and information updating.

Self Prompting for Data Creation For each news article or Wikipedia paragraph, we prompt the
MixInst to generate instruction-response pairs. We didn’t use the prompt in Section 3.2 for GPT-4
due to two reasons. Firstly, the prompt is overly complex for a basic instruction-following model.
Secondly, due to our limitation on the maximum token numbers, which includes both the prompt
and the generated outputs (capped at 1,024 tokens), simultaneously generating instructions with
responses can result in many truncated outputs. We therefore prompt the MixInst in two steps. We
only generate instructions or questions in the first step and then prompt MixInst to answer each
generated question in the second step. The prompts are presented in Appendix A.5.

Information Update Training As shown in Figure 1, models are trained from multiple sources
of data in the information updating phase, including the instruction following corpus and updating
instruction-response pairs. Some baselines, as will be presented in Section 3.5, also use the infor-
mation updating corpus for training. During training, we sample training examples from multiple
sources with equal probabilities.

Sub-sampling Instruction Following Corpus It is not efficient to repetitively train on the entire
instruction following corpus every time we perform information updating. In Section 3.7, we inves-
tigate the relation between the sample sizes and forgetting phenomenon by using a series of subsets
with varying numbers of examples. For the results reported in Section 3.6, we use the full corpus.

3.5   M ETHODS IN C OMPARISON

We consider the following methods:

      • MixInst: The LLaMA-7B model finetuned on instruction following datasets mentioned in
        Section 3.1. All the following methods are further finetuned from this model.
      • Fact: Fine-tuned on the information updating corpus T and the instruction-following corpus
        without self prompting for instruction-response pair generation. This baseline measures
        how well the model can learn information by reading the facts.
      • Naı̈ve: The naı̈ve distillation approach mentioned in Section 2.3.
      • Fact+Naı̈ve: This baseline combines fact fine-tuning and naı̈ve distillation. The model is
        training on three sources, where the updating instruction-response pairs is prepared in the
        same way as the naı̈ve distillation.
      • Context-aware: Our proposed approach in Section 2.4 to fix the exposure bias problem.
        The updating instruction-response pairs are prepared as shown in Table 1. We evaluate our
        approach on the generated tokens after “The response to {question} is:”.

3.6   M AIN R ESULTS

We summarize our main results on the CNN News and the NQ Val in Table 2. Compared to base-
line methods, the answer and context factual consistency scores on both datasets concerning both
reference answers and related context have significantly improved, while the performance on gen-
eral instructions (Old) is not degraded significantly.. Interestingly, combining fact fine-tuning and
naı̈ve distillation, Fact+Naı̈ve also demonstrates improved factual consistency scores over Fact and
Naı̈ve baselines. This is because fact fine-tuning on the information updating corpus can also par-
tially alleviates the exposure bias on P (IS (T)|A, i) as discussed in Section 2.3. This observation
further supports our analysis on how exposure bias negatively affects the LLM fine-tuning to ac-
quire new information. Moreover, our approach still outperforms Fact+Naı̈ve by directly optimizing
P (IS (T)|A, i). We also provide an example case in the Appendix A.3 where naive distillation fails
due to existing old information but our approach successfully learns the new information.


                                                 7
   Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                           Table 2: Factual consistency scores on CNN News and NQ Val

                                                                Dataset                                    CNN News                                                              NQ Val
                                                                Metric                        Answer         Context                       Old                       Answer       Context        Old
                                                                MixInst                          0.399            0.460          0.699                                   0.187    0.268         0.699
                                                                Fact                             0.426            0.516          0.702                                   0.235    0.318         0.700
                                                                Naı̈ve                           0.409            0.499          0.707                                   0.228    0.337         0.699
                                                                Fact+Naı̈ve                      0.421            0.538          0.713                                   0.249    0.371         0.698
                                                                Context-aware                    0.480            0.695          0.696                                   0.256    0.380         0.691

                                                                           0.710                                                                             0.7 0.699                 0.691
Factual consistency scores on Old Instructions


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.676
                                                 0.70 0.6950.700                                          0.697
                                                                                                                    0.689
                                                                 0.678                                                                                       0.6
                                                 0.68


                                                                                                                                Factual consistency scores
                                                 0.66                                                                                                        0.5

                                                 0.64                                                                                                        0.4                       0.380                       0.366
                                                 0.62
                                                                                                                                                             0.3 0.268
                                                                                                                                                                                       0.256                       0.244
                                                 0.60
                                                                                                                                                             0.2 0.187
                                                 0.58
                                                                                                                                                             0.1                                        Old Instructions
                                                 0.56                           Performance after fine-tuning on CNN News                                                                               NQ Val Answer
                                                        0.549                   Base model performance before fine-tuning                                                                               NQ Val Context
                                                                                                                                        0.0
                                                         0      2000     4000      6000   8000    10000 12000 14000                Instruction (Base Model)                            NQ Val                    CNN News
                                                                         Number of replay examples                                                                               Fine-tuning Stages
   (a) Performance on Old Instructions after fine-tuning                                                                        (b) Continual learning performance on Old Instruc-
   on CNN News with varying number of replay exam-                                                                              tions and NQ Val. We evaluate the base model, the
   ples. We use subsets of 0(no replay), 240, 1.2k, 2.4k,                                                                       model after fine-tuning on NQ Val and the model that
   4,8k, 12k and 14.4k replay examples                                                                                          is further finetuned on the CNN News

                                                                                Figure 2: Forgetting of old knowledge under two settings


    3.7                                                 E FFECT OF R EPLAY E XAMPLES ON F ORGETTING OF O LD K NOWLEDGE

   In Table 2, we observe almost no forgetting problem on the Old Instructions when we sample replay
   examples from the entire instruction fine-tuning dataset. We carry out two additional experiments
   to study the forgetting problem in self information updating when we do sub-sampling of the past
   training data. Firstly, we investigate the relation between the number of replay instruction fine-tuning
   examples with the forgetting phenomenon. Then we conduct another continual learning experiments
   where the model sequentially acquire new information from the NQ Val and the CNN News dataset.

    3.7.1                                                  VARYING N UMBER OF R EPLAY E XAMPLES
   We evaluate the performance on Old Instructions when models are fine-tuned on varying number
   of replay examples from the instruction fine-tuning dataset together with the CNN News dataset.
   The result is shown in Figure 2a. We use subsets of 0(no replay), 240, 1.2k, 2.4k, 4,8k, 12k and
   14.4k replay examples. Since our testing old instructions is paraphrased from the original training
   examples, we also compute the number of these original training examples that are paraphrased into
   the testing examples in these subsets: 0/240, 8/1.2k, 17/2.4k, 39/4.8k, 108/12k, 136/14.4k.
   We observe from the results that even with only 240 examples, the fine-tuned model is able to main-
   tain a similar level of performance on the Old Instructions. Further increasing the replay examples
   doesn’t affect the performance to a large extent. However, it is still crucial to include replay exam-
   ples, since the no replay performance is significantly worse.

    3.7.2                                                  C ONTINUAL L EARNING OF T WO DATASETS
   We also conduct another continual learning experiments, where the model is first updated with the
   NQ Val corpus then CNN News corpus. When fine-tuning on the CNN News corpus, we include


                                                                                                                            8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


1,200 replay examples from the instruction fine-tuning datasets, and 1,290 replay examples (one ex-
ample per Wikipedia paragraph) from the NQ Val corpus. Note that we only keep the self-prompted
questions for the NQ Val corpus and use the models after fine-tuning on the NQ Val corpus to gen-
erate answers for the next stage of fine-tuning. This significantly reduce the number of tokens we
need to keep in the replay buffer by 97.7% from 919,624 to 21,124.
To investigate the forgetting problem, we evaluate the performance on Old Instructions and NQ
Val of the base model, the model after the NQ Val fine-tuning stage and the model after the CNN
News fine-tuning stage. The results are shown in Figure 2b. We observe only minor performance
degradation on the NQ Val evaluation set when keeping 2.3% of the training tokens. The main
reason of this advantage is that our model effectively learns P (IS (T)|A, i) and P (r|A, i, IS (T)) in
Equation 5, which reduces the buffering requirements to only keeping instructions (questions).


4   R ELATED W ORK

Model Editing Model editing aims to update the existing model with human curated training sam-
ples. Zhu et al. (2020) studies the task of knowledge modification and establishes a benchmark for
pre-trained language models containing hundreds of millions of parameters, defining knowledge
as subject-object-relation triples. Mitchell et al. (2022a); De Cao et al. (2021); Hase et al. (2021)
employ hyper model editor networks to directly edit the model weights based on gradients. Meng
et al. (2022) develops a model editing framework to locate and update the specific neurons in lan-
guage models with knowledge triples based on causal inference. Mitchell et al. (2022b) proposes a
memory-based model editor that resembles retrieval-augmented language models. Compared with
this line of model editing research relying on well-curated training data in specific formats such as
subject-object-relation triples, question-answer pairs or textual entailment pairs, we propose the task
of Self Information Update where minimal human intervention is required to ensure model update
is done in a timely fashion for practical use. Moreover, the exposure bias we study is a fundamental
problem in updating the large language model pretrained on a much larger corpus than the infor-
mation update corpus. Our proposed approach is essentially perpendicular to these methods, and
potential combinations with more advanced editing approaches are exciting future work to explore.

Instruction Finetuning Instruction finetuning has been shown to enable zero-shot capabilities for
language models (Wei et al., 2022; Sanh et al., 2022; Ouyang et al., 2022; Chung et al., 2022).
In this work, we require this instruction-following capability to accomplish the Self Information
Update task and experiment with a base model of 7 billion parameters. Though 7 billion is much
smaller than state-of-the-art foundation models such as GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) (175 billion)
and even larger GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023), we hypothesize the challenge of exposure bias also exists in
larger models and leave the exploration on larger models for future work.

Retrieval Augmented Language Models Retrieval augmented language models (RALMs) en-
hance the existing language models with an external retriever that acquiress external knowledge for
downstream tasks. There is a line of research (Guu et al., 2020; Khandelwal et al., 2020; Borgeaud
et al., 2022; Izacard et al., 2022) in RALMs that implements various retrievers for related informa-
tion regarding model inputs. However, it is impossible to maintain an infinitely large memory to
store the new information.


5   C ONCLUSIONS AND F UTURE W ORK

In this paper, we instroduce the task of self information updating for LLMs, which aims to update
the existing knowledge in LLMs using minimal human input from informative text corpora. Lever-
aging LLMs’ basic instruction-following capabilities, we analyze the exposure bias problem, which
prioritizes existing information over new information when following instructions. We then propose
a simple solution based on our analysis that significantly improves factual consistency. We also
study the forgetting phenomenon in self information updating under the continual learning setting
and find that our proposed method can largely maintain the updated knowledge by keeping a small
portion of the training data.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Jordan Hoffmann, Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford, Katie Mil-
  lican, George Bm Van Den Driessche, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Bogdan Damoc, Aidan Clark,
  Diego De Las Casas, Aurelia Guy, Jacob Menick, Roman Ring, Tom Hennigan, Saffron Huang,
  Loren Maggiore, Chris Jones, Albin Cassirer, Andy Brock, Michela Paganini, Geoffrey Irv-
  ing, Oriol Vinyals, Simon Osindero, Karen Simonyan, Jack Rae, Erich Elsen, and Laurent
  Sifre. Improving language models by retrieving from trillions of tokens. In Kamalika Chaud-
  huri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), Pro-
  ceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162 of Proceed-
  ings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2206–2240. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022. URL https:
  //proceedings.mlr.press/v162/borgeaud22a.html.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M.
  Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz
  Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec
  Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. CoRR,
  abs/2005.14165, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.14165.
Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Eric Li, Xuezhi
  Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, Albert Webson, Shixiang Shane Gu, Zhuyun Dai,
  Mirac Suzgun, Xinyun Chen, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Gaurav Mishra, Adams
  Yu, Vincent Y. Zhao, Yanping Huang, Andrew M. Dai, Hongkun Yu, Slav Petrov, Ed H. Chi, Jeff
  Dean, Jacob Devlin, Adam Roberts, Denny Zhou, Quoc V. Le, and Jason Wei. Scaling instruction-
  finetuned language models. CoRR, abs/2210.11416, 2022. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2210.11416. URL
  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2210.11416.
Nicola De Cao, Wilker Aziz, and Ivan Titov. Editing factual knowledge in language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2104.08164, 2021.
Kelvin Guu, Kenton Lee, Zora Tung, Panupong Pasupat, and Mingwei Chang. Retrieval augmented
  language model pre-training. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 3929–3938.
  PMLR, 2020.
Peter Hase, Mona Diab, Asli Celikyilmaz, Xian Li, Zornitsa Kozareva, Veselin Stoyanov, Mohit
  Bansal, and Srinivasan Iyer. Do language models have beliefs? methods for detecting, updating,
  and visualizing model beliefs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.13654, 2021.
Gautier Izacard, Patrick Lewis, Maria Lomeli, Lucas Hosseini, Fabio Petroni, Timo Schick, Jane
  Dwivedi-Yu, Armand Joulin, Sebastian Riedel, and Edouard Grave. Atlas: Few-shot learning
  with retrieval augmented language models. arXiv preprint arXiv, 2208, 2022.
Urvashi Khandelwal, Omer Levy, Dan Jurafsky, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Mike Lewis. Generaliza-
  tion through memorization: Nearest neighbor language models. In 8th International Conference
  on Learning Representations, ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020. OpenRe-
  view.net, 2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=HklBjCEKvH.
Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Redfield, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh, Chris Al-
  berti, Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Matthew Kelcey, Jacob Devlin, Kenton Lee, Kristina N.
  Toutanova, Llion Jones, Ming-Wei Chang, Andrew Dai, Jakob Uszkoreit, Quoc Le, and Slav
  Petrov. Natural questions: a benchmark for question answering research. Transactions of the
  Association of Computational Linguistics, 2019.
Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex Andonian, and Yonatan Belinkov. Locating and editing factual
  knowledge in gpt. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.05262, 2022.
Eric Mitchell, Charles Lin, Antoine Bosselut, Chelsea Finn, and Christopher D. Manning. Fast
  model editing at scale. In The Tenth International Conference on Learning Representations,
  ICLR 2022, Virtual Event, April 25-29, 2022. OpenReview.net, 2022a. URL https://
  openreview.net/forum?id=0DcZxeWfOPt.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Eric Mitchell, Charles Lin, Antoine Bosselut, Christopher D Manning, and Chelsea Finn. Memory-
  based model editing at scale. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 15817–
  15831. PMLR, 2022b.
OpenAI. GPT-4 technical report. CoRR, abs/2303.08774, 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2303.08774.
  URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2303.08774.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(1):5485–5551, 2020.
Victor Sanh, Albert Webson, Colin Raffel, Stephen H. Bach, Lintang Sutawika, Zaid Alyafeai,
  Antoine Chaffin, Arnaud Stiegler, Arun Raja, Manan Dey, M Saiful Bari, Canwen Xu, Urmish
  Thakker, Shanya Sharma Sharma, Eliza Szczechla, Taewoon Kim, Gunjan Chhablani, Nihal V.
  Nayak, Debajyoti Datta, Jonathan Chang, Mike Tian-Jian Jiang, Han Wang, Matteo Manica,
  Sheng Shen, Zheng Xin Yong, Harshit Pandey, Rachel Bawden, Thomas Wang, Trishala Neeraj,
  Jos Rozen, Abheesht Sharma, Andrea Santilli, Thibault Févry, Jason Alan Fries, Ryan Teehan,
  Teven Le Scao, Stella Biderman, Leo Gao, Thomas Wolf, and Alexander M. Rush. Multitask
  prompted training enables zero-shot task generalization. In The Tenth International Conference
  on Learning Representations, ICLR 2022, Virtual Event, April 25-29, 2022. OpenReview.net,
  2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=9Vrb9D0WI4.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Y. Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan
  Du, Andrew M. Dai, and Quoc V. Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. In
  The Tenth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2022, Virtual Event,
  April 25-29, 2022. OpenReview.net, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  gEZrGCozdqR.
Ming Zhong, Yang Liu, Da Yin, Yuning Mao, Yizhu Jiao, Pengfei Liu, Chenguang Zhu, Heng Ji, and
 Jiawei Han. Towards a unified multi-dimensional evaluator for text generation. In Proceedings
 of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 2023–2038,
 Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics.
 URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.131.
Chen Zhu, Ankit Singh Rawat, Manzil Zaheer, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, Daliang Li, Felix Yu, and
  Sanjiv Kumar. Modifying memories in transformer models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.00363,
  2020.


A       A PPENDIX
A.1      C OMPUTATION I NFRASTRUCTURE AND A DDITIONAL T RAINING D ETAILS

We use Google TPU v3-8 for all the training sponsored by the Google TPU Researc Cloud program.

Batching for Self Information Updating In order to improve the training efficiency of training
on TPU v3-8, we don’t use the conventional batchification of the training data based on instances.
Instead, we concatenate all the tokenized instruction-response pairs into a single list of tokens, and
chunk the list into segments of batch size × sequence length. We run training on 3 random seeds
and report average performances. We derive our training codebase from EasyLM6 . We will release
our code and data after publication.
    6
        https://github.com/young-geng/EasyLM


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          Table 3: Factual consistency scores on CNN News

                   Metric              Answer            Context          Old
                   Fact              0.426±0.014       0.516±0.008    0.702± 0.014
                   Naı̈ve            0.409±0.017       0.499±0.005    0.707± 0.012
                   Fact+Naı̈ve       0.421±0.008       0.538±0.002    0.713±0.018
                   Context-aware     0.480±0.003       0.695±0.034    0.691±0.014

                             Table 4: Factual consistency scores NQ Val

                   Metric              Answer            Context          Old
                   Fact              0.235±0.005       0.318±0.004    0.700±0.011
                   Naı̈ve            0.228±0.003          0.337±      0.699±0.007
                   Fact+Naı̈ve       0.249±0.001          0.371±      0.698±0.005
                   Context-aware     0.256±0.023       0.380± 0.013   0.691±0.051



Evaluation For evaluation, the responses are generated with a temperature of 0.2 for all the meth-
ods, which ispicked from {0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 1.0} based on the base model performance . We modify the
code from UniEval github repository7 with torch-xla8 to support running on TPUs.

A.2     A DDITIONAL E VALUATION R ESULTS

We provide the 5% confidence interval estimated from 3 runs using the student-t estimator in Table 3
and Table 4.

A.3     C ASE S TUDY

We provide an example case demonstrating where naive distillation fails but our context-aware ap-
proach successfully learns the information in Table. We omit some part of the text in both news
article and model response for conciseness. We observe that the naı̈ve distillation approach gener-
ates hallucinated information. The omitted part mentions bank attacks in Kentucky and Georgia,
while this incident happens in Louisville. This suggest the baseline model utilizes existing informa-
tion to generate the response.

        Table 5: An examples case where baseline fails but context-aware distillation succeeds.

  Fact in News Article: Louisville Metro Police Department Officer Nickolas
  Wilt is in critical condition after undergoing brain surgery following a shootout
  in a bank ... Mayor Craig Greenberg visited Wilt in the hospital, saying that he
  had made it through surgery and was in serious condition but in great hands...
  Instruction: What is the current state of Officer Wilt and what kind of recovery does he face?
  Naı̈ve                                       Context-aware
  Response:Nickolas Wilt is facing a           Response: Nickolas Wilt is in seri-
  long road to recovery after undergoing       ous condition after undergoing brain
  surgery to remove his right arm which        surgery following a shootout in a bank.
  was injured in the attack. He is currently   He faces a long road to recovery and is
  in serious condition in the hospital...      currently sedated...


   7
       https://github.com/maszhongming/UniEval
   8
       https://github.com/pytorch/xla


                                                  12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.4     P REPARATION D ETAILS OF NATURAL Q UESTIONS

Our goal is to keep only those questions (together with relevant Wikipedia paragraphs) from the
Natural Questions (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019) validation set where the base model (LLaMA-7B after
instruction fine-tuning) cannot generate good answers. The overall filtering process is:

Step 1. We first remove questions with ”None” answers in the Natural Questions validation set.

Step 2. We use the base model and the Alpaca template as in Appendix A.1 to generate the answers
to the rest questions in the Natural Questions validation set.

Step 3. We compute the factual consistency score (ranging from 0 to 1) from UniEval (Zhong et al.,
2022) between the generated answer and gold standard short answers. When there are multiple short
answers, we use the maximum consistency score. Those questions whose scores are lower than 0.5
are kept.

Step 4. We collect all the Wikipedia paragraphs that are labeled as the long answer of any kept
questions in Step 2 as the information updating corpus.

A.5     A C OMPREHENSIVE L IST OF P ROMPTS U SED IN THE E XPERIMENT

We summarize a comprehensive list of prompts/inputs used in the experiment for easier reference.
Some of these prompts are already covered in the main text.

Instruction Finetuning We train the instruction-following model following the template of Al-
paca 9 . Each instruction-response pair is prepared as the following paragraph to fine-tune the model.

          Below is an instruction that describes a task. Write a response that appropriately
          completes the request.

          ### Instruction:
          {instruction}

          ### Response:
          {response}

The losses are only computed for the tokens in responses. This template is also used for the
instruction-response pairs in the information update training.

Self Instruction Generation This prompt is given to the language model to be updated for self
data creation. This prompt instructs the model to generate instructions from the information updating
corpus.

          Given the input below, generate at least 5 questions that are directly related to
          the content of the input. Ensure that each question you generate does not contain
          coreferential words or pronouns (e.g., he, she, it, this, they, etc.). The questions
          should be clear, concise, and pertain specifically to details mentioned in the input.
          {Context}

The {Context} slot is filled with each individual news article from the information update corpus.

Self Answer Generation This prompt is given to the language model to be updated for self data
creation. This prompt instructs the model to generate responses for the instructions in the previous
step from the information updatingcorpus.

          Answer the question based on the facts from the input. If there is no relevant
          information in the input, answer ’None’. Question: {Instruction} {Context}
   9
       https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca


                                                   13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The {Context} slot is filled with each individual news article from the information update corpus.
The {Instruction} is from the outputs of last step. To ensure the generated instruction-response pairs
pertain to the corpus, we remove those pairs when the response is None.

Fact Finetuning Training Data This is the inputs to train the Fact Fine-tuning baseline in the
main text. It is just the news articles.

            {News Article}

Naı̈ve Distillation This is the inputs to the train the Naı̈ve Distillation Baseline. Only losses on
the tokens after “Response” is used for training.

            Below is an instruction that describes a task. Write a response that appropriately
            completes the request.

            ### Instruction:
            {Instruction}

            ### Response:
            {Response}

Here the {Instruction} and {Response} are paired outputs from Self Instruction Generation and Self
Answer Generation.

Context-aware Distillation This is the inputs to the train the Naı̈ve Distillation Baseline. Only
losses on the tokens after “Response” is used for training.

            Below is an instruction that describes a task. Write a response that appropriately
            completes the request.

            ### Instruction:
            {Instruction}

            ### Response:
            The instruction is related to the following information: {News Article}. The
            response to {Instruction} is: {Response}

Here the {Instruction} and {Response} are paired outputs from Self Instruction Generation and Self
Answer Generation. {News Article} is the corresponding news article from the information update
corpus. Note that for unrelated instructions, the {News Article} is filled with “None”. We repeat the
instruction one more time to compensate for the limited sequence length and reduce the possibility
of instructions being truncated. We think it may not be necessary to repeat the instruction if the
computational resources supports sufficiently long training sequences. Only losses on the tokens
after “Response” is used for training.

Evaluation Data Generation We generate CNN News evaluation data using GPT-4. This prompt
is given to GPT-4 to generate instruction-response pairs.

            Generate some questions10 with answers related to facts from the following para-
            graph. Make sure each question is self-contained and specific enough for readers
            to associate it with the information provided in the paragraph, rather than confus-
            ing it with other similar events. Avoid using words such as ”these”, ”this”, or ”the
            event”, ”the movie” referring to concepts not mentioned in the question. Please
            generate in the format of ”1. Question: ... Answer: ...” {News Article}.

Because we strictly required the format of the generation in the last sentence, it is easy to parse the
output pairs.

  10
       In this work, we focus on instruction-response pairs in a question-answering format


                                                       14
