Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


U NIFYING OVER - SMOOTHING AND OVER - SQUASHING
IN GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS : A PHYSICS INFORMED
APPROACH AND BEYOND

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have emerged as one of the leading approaches
         for machine learning on graph-structured data. Despite their great success, critical
         computational challenges such as over-smoothing, over-squashing, and limited
         expressive power continue to impact the performance of GNNs. In this study, in-
         spired from the time-reversal principle commonly utilized in classical and quantum
         physics, we reverse the time direction of the graph heat equation. The resulted
         reversing process yields a class of high pass filtering functions that enhance the
         sharpness of graph node features. Leveraging this concept, we introduce the
         Multi-Scaled Heat Kernel based GNN (MHKG) by amalgamating diverse filtering
         functions’ effects on node features. To explore more flexible filtering conditions, we
         further generalize MHKG into a model termed G-MHKG and thoroughly show the
         roles of each element in controlling over-smoothing, over-squashing and expressive
         power. Notably, we illustrate that all aforementioned issues can be characterized
         and analyzed via the properties of the filtering functions, and uncover a trade-off
         between over-smoothing and over-squashing: enhancing node feature sharpness
         will make model suffer more from over-squashing, and vice versa. Furthermore,
         we manipulate the time again to show how G-MHKG can handle both two issues
         under mild conditions. Our conclusive experiments highlight the effectiveness of
         proposed models. It surpasses several GNN baseline models in performance across
         graph datasets characterized by both homophily and heterophily.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have demonstrated exceptional performance in learning the represen-
tations of graph-structured data Ji et al. (2021); Wu et al. (2020). Within the diverse research avenues
of GNNs, one prominent aspect is to interpret GNNs via different perspectives, such as gradient
flow Di Giovanni et al. (2022); Han et al. (2022), neural diffusion Thorpe et al. (2021); Chamberlain
et al. (2021b), and testing of graph isomorphism Xu et al. (2019), all of which contribute to a deeper
comprehension of GNNs’ underlying working mechanism. Concurrently, another trajectory in GNN’s
development is oriented toward addressing specific challenges. Generally, three inherent issues in
GNNs have been identified: over-smoothing Cai & Wang (2020), over-squashing Topping et al.
(2021), and limitations in expressive power Xu et al. (2019), each of them is openly acknowledged
and arises due to various aspects of GNNs and its graph data input. As such, research efforts are
primarily focused on tackling these aspects to effectively address the mentioned problems. For
instance, to counteract the over-smoothing phenomenon, researchers have advocated for the aug-
mentation of feature variation by incorporating a source term Thorpe et al. (2021) or modulating the
energy regularization to prevent rapid diminishment Shao et al. (2022); Fu et al. (2022). To mitigate
over-squashing, strategies may encompass exploring graph topology through methods such as graph
re-weighting Shi et al. (2023a) and graph rewiring Topping et al. (2021). Lastly, enhancing the
capacity to discern non-isomorphic graphs could be achieved by assigning more intricate embeddings
to graph nodes Xu et al. (2019); Wijesinghe & Wang (2021).
While many efforts have been made on these three issues, little research (Nguyen et al., 2023; Giraldo
et al., 2022) have been done to consider these issues in a unified manner to reveal their underlying


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


relationships and further seeking for mitigating them via one specific GNN and an unified way. The
main difficulties for this situation may be due to
       • Some GNNs lack the necessary flexibility to serve as the subjects for investigating the
         aforementioned triad of issues in a cohesive manner.
       • The pursuit of greater flexibility in GNNs in general leads to increased model complexity.
         Consequently, effectively exploring the roles on GNNs components on these issues becomes
         a formidable task.
       • There’s a gap in research regarding the transition between addressing over-smoothing,
         typically focusing on node features, and tackling over-squashing and enhancing expressive
         power, which often concentrate on graph topology.
In the present study, we derive inspiration from the physical reality of graph heat equation, leading to
a novel perspective that examines the propagation of node features in the reverse direction of time.
We demonstrate that many prevailing GNNs can invert the feature propagation process, transitioning
from smoothing to sharpening effects, and vice versa. Accordingly, we propose a Multi-Scale
Heat Kernel GNN (MHKG) that propagates node features via the balance between smoothing and
sharpening effects induced by the low and high pass spectral filtering functions generated from the
heat and reverse heat kernels. Furthermore, we generalize the MHKG into a more flexible model,
referred to as G-MHKG, and provide a comprehensive examination of the components within G-
MHKG that regulate over-smoothing, over-squashing and expressive power. Notably, by utilizing
G-MHKG as an analytical tool and examining the properties of the associated filtering functions,
we uncover a trade-off between over-squashing and over-smoothing in the graph spectral domain.
This relationship is revealed under mild conditions on the filtering functions, offering fundamental
insights between these issues. Lastly, we manipulate the time again in G-MHKG to show that its
capability of sufficiently handling both issues for heterophily graphs and it is impossible to achieve
the same goal for homophily graphs.

Contribution and Outline Our main goal is to illustrate and verify the underlying relationship
between aforementioned issues via our proposed model inspired by the time reversal principle from
physics. In addition, we aim to show how our proposed model can handle these issues in an unified
manner. In Section 3, we explore the link between graph filtering functions and solutions of a
class of ordinary differential equations (ODEs) on graph node features. This connection propels
the introduction of two multi-scale heat kernel based models: MHKG and the generalized MHKG
(G-MHKG). In Section 4 we show how the filtering matrices in our model control the energy
dynamics of node features, thereby effectively addressing the over-smoothing challenge. In Section
5, we demonstrate the weight matrix in G-MHKG determines the model’s expressive power and
over-squashing. More importantly, in Section 6 and 7 we show there is trade-off between over-
smoothing and over-squashing. We also prove that it is impossible to sufficiently handle both two
issues for homophily graphs and for heterophily graphs G-MHKG can handle these issues by a simple
manipulation of time. We verify our theoretical claims via empirical studies in Section 8.

2    P RELIMINARIES
Graph basics and GNNs To begin, we let G = (V, E) with nodes set V = {v1 , v2 , · · · , vN } of
total N nodes and edge set E ⊆ V × V. We also denote the graph adjacency matrix as A ∈ RN ×N .
In addition, let A
                 e = A + IN be the adjacency matrix with self-loop on each node, one can define
the normalized adjacency matrix as A  b = D−1/2 ADe −1/2 where D is the diagonal degree matrix,
                                             P
with the i-th diagonal entry given by di = j e   aij the degree of node i. The normalized graph
Laplacian is given by Lb = I − A.b We further let ρ b denote the largest eigenvalue (also called the
                                                   L
highest frequency) of L.
                      b In terms of GNNs, we note that in general there are two types of GNNs, the
spatial-based GNNs such as graph convolution network (GCN) (Kipf & Welling, 2016) defines the
layer-wise propagation rule via the normalized adjacency matrix as
                                    H(t) = σ AHb (t−1) W(t) ,

                                                                                                  (1)
where we let H(t) as the feature matrix at layer t with H(0) = X ∈ RN ×c , the input feature matrix,
and W(t) is the learnable weight matrix performing channel mixing. On the other hand, spectral


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


GNNs such as ChebyNet (Defferrard et al., 2016) perform spectral filtering on the spectral domain of
the graph as
                               H(t) = σ Ugθ (Λ)U⊤ H(0) ,                                         (2)
where gθ (Λ) serves as the filtering function on normalized Laplacian, which utilizes an eigendecom-
         b = UΛU⊤ and U⊤ h is known as the Fourier transform of a graph signal h ∈ RN . In
position L
this paper, we let {(λi , ui )}N
                               i=1 be the set of eigenvalue and eigenvector pairs of L where ui are the
                                                                                     b
column vectors of U.

Graph heat kernel Generalizing from the so-called heat equation defined on a manifold, one can
                                      (t)
define graph heat equation as ∂H    ∂t    = −LHb (t) , in which H(t) is the feature representation at a
specific iteration time t. The solution of the graph heat equation, denoted as H(t) , is given by H(t) =
e−tL H(0) with H(0) = X as the initial condition. It is well-known that the application of Euler
    b

discretization leads to the propagation of the linear GCN models (Kipf & Welling, 2016; Wu et al.,
2019) and this process is with the name of Laplacian smoothing (Chung, 1997). The characteristic
of the solution is indeed governed by the so-called Heat Kernel, denoted by Kt = e−tL . The heat
                                                                                             b
                                                                                     (t+s)
kernel defines a continuous-time random walk, and defines a semi-group, i.e., H             = H(t) · H(s)
                                   (t)
for any t, s ≥ 0, and limt→∞ H = I (Chung, 1997). This fact indicates non-distinguishment for
the nodes with same degrees, known as over-smoothing. We included a more detailed discussion on
both heat operator and heat kernel in Appendix A.1

3       T URNING S MOOTHING TO S HARPENING
3.1       K ERNEL & F ILTER C ORRESPONDENCE : A P HYSICS INFORMED A PPROACH

We now delve deeper into the graph heat kernel Kt . At
a specific time t, if one considers t is flowed at integer
interval, then H(t) = e−tL H(0) can be interpreted as a
                             b

linear diffusion (i.e., e−L ) on H(0) repeated for t times.
                           b

Consequently, at each step, one can treat e−L as a low
                                                b

pass filtering function (monotonically decreasing) on
the graph spectra. More generally, one can assign one
function f onto L b to build a class of ODEs with the form
    ∂H(t)          b (t) and, similar to the basic heat
of ∂t = −f (L)H
equation, we can consider the generalized heat kernel       Figure 1: Top: The evolution of the
 b t = e−tf (L)                                             node feature of diffusion (smoothing) pro-
K               . We note that in the sequel, f (L)
                                                  b serve
              b
                                                            cess (i.e., from distinct features to over-
as a filtering function (i.e., polynomial or analytic func-
                                                            smoothing). Bottom: the reverse diffu-
tions) acting element-wisely on the eigenvalues of L,    b
                                                            sion (sharpening) process (i.e., from nearly
                             ⊤
that is f (L) = Uf (Λ)U .
           b                                                identical to distinct node features).
A physical interpretation of the aforementioned class of ODEs suggests that heat flows in a constant
direction and speed. This aligns with the second law of thermodynamics, indicating an inevitable
evolution of the heat distribution in an isolated system, leading to what is known as thermal equilib-
rium. In analogy to GNNs, such phenomenon indicates all node features eventually become equal
to each other, typically known as the over-smoothing issue. Together with the recent challenge on
fitting GNNs to the so-called heterophily graphs, GNNs are preferred to produce a mixed dynamic,
involving not only smoothing but also sharpening the features of connected nodes with different
labels. Therefore, we wish to turn the diffusion into a reverse direction which is equivalent
to providing external (anti)-force to the system and expect to achieve a fusion of heat in certain
areas of the system while allowing diffusion in others during each evolution step. Since for any
given f on L,
            b one can induce another system that produces reverse process by assigning a negative
sign before f . Accordingly, one can obtain a reverse filtering effect once the diffusion direction
is turned. Additionally, if we further require the filtering process F : RN ×c → RN ×c such that
F(H) = e−tf (L) H(0) to be bijective1 , then by replacing t to the −t, one can recover H(0) from
                b

    1
        Other requirements such as homeomorphism or isomorphism can also be applied.


                                                      3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H(t) . We note that, in this case, the propagation and recovery of H(0) is aligned with those physical
variables (i.e., electric potential, energy density of the electromagnetic field) that are unchanged
through inverse time operators in both classic and quantum mechanics. Figure 1 shows how graph
diffusion smooths the node feature and reverse diffusion makes features more distinct. With this
understanding, we next show how the novel heat kernel GCN is constructed.

3.2   M ULTI - SCALE H EAT K ERNEL GCN (MHKG)

Followed by the idea that at each discrete time step, i.e., from ℓ − 1 to ℓ, the heat kernel based GCN
model shall possess mixed dynamic (smoothing & sharpening) on node features. We thus propose
the multi-scale heat kernel GCN (MHKG) by combining the two directions of heat flow governed by
heat kernel e−f (L) and reverse heat kernel ef (L) :
                 b                              b

           H(ℓ) = Udiag(θ1 )Λ1 U⊤ H(ℓ−1) W(ℓ−1) + Udiag(θ2 )Λ2 U⊤ H(ℓ−1) W(ℓ−1) ,                         (3)
in which diag(θ1 ) and diag(θ2 ) are learnable filtering matrices with Λ1 = −f (Λ) =
diag({e−f (λi ) }N
                 i=1 ) and Λ2 = f (Λ) = diag({e
                                                f (λi ) N
                                                       }i=1 ). Referring to the previous note on
                        b = Udiag(θ)f (Λ)U⊤ .
f , one can denote fθ (L)

Beyond time reversal: an even more general case In light of the construction of MHKG, one can
consider a more generalized model with more flexible choice of dynamics as:
                            ∂H(t)                       (t)
                                         b (t) , ∂H = g(L)H   b (t) ,
                                   = f (L)H                                                      (4)
                              ∂t                     ∂t
                       b not necessarily equals −f (L).
where unlike in (3), g(L)                           b For simplicity, in this paper we only consider
two fixed dynamic on H and the conclusion we provided can be easily generalized to the multiple
dynamic cases. The corresponding GNN induced from Eq. (4) is:
        H(ℓ) = Udiag(θ1 )ef (Λ) U⊤ H(ℓ−1) W(ℓ−1) + Udiag(θ2 )eg(Λ) U⊤ H(ℓ−1) W(ℓ−1) .                     (5)
We named this generalized model as G-MHKG. It is not difficult to verify that G-MHKG is a general
form of various GNN models. The simplest case one can obtain is to set θ2 = 0N and ef (Λ) = e−ξΛ ,
where ξ ∈ R is a constant or learnable coefficient, we recover the GraphHeat proposed in (Zhao et al.,
2020). If we let g(Λ) = 0N ×N , and θ2 = cN , where cN as an N -dimensional vector with arbitrary
constant as c, then the model is equivalent to GRAND++ (Thorpe et al., 2022) with a layer dependent
source term, see Appendix B for more detailed illustrations. In the following sections, we show the
roles of θ and W in controlling the three aforementioned issues of GNNs.

4     F ILTERING MATRICES CONTROL MODEL DYNAMICS & OVER - SMOOTHING
In this section, we illustrate the role of the filtering matrices, i.e., diag(θ1 ) and diag(θ2 ), in G-MHKG
control model’s energy dynamic and how a controllable energy dynamic affects model’s adaption
on homophily and heterophily graphs. For the simplicity of the analysis we further assume that f (·)
and g(·) to be monotonically decrease/increase in the spectral domain of the graph so that they can
be considered as low/high pass filtering functions. We note that this assumption is aligned with the
settings in many recent works such as (Zheng et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023; Lin & Gao, 2023) and
the conclusion we represent can be easily applied to MHKG. To quantify model’s energy dynamics,
we consider the Dirichlet energy of the node features H, defined by E(H) = Tr(H⊤ LH).               b    It is
well-known that Dirichlet energy becomes 0 when the model encounters over-smoothing issue. To
represent such asymptotic energy behavior, Di Giovanni et al. (2022); Han et al. (2022); Shi et al.
(2023b) consider a general dynamic as Ḣ(t) = GN N θ (H(t) , t), with GN N θ (·) as an arbitrary GNN
function characterising its behavior by low/high-frequency-dominance (L/HFD).
Definition 1 ((Di Giovanni  et al., 2022)). Ḣ(t) = GN N θ (H(t) , t) is Low-Frequency-Dominant
(LFD) if E H(t) /∥H(t) ∥ →   − 0 as t →     − ∞, and is High-Frequency-Dominant (HFD) if

E H(t) /∥H(t) ∥ →− ρ b /2 as t →
                        L      − ∞, where ρ b stands for the largest eigenvalue of L.
                                                   L
                                                                                   b
Lemma 1 ((Di Giovanni et al., 2022)). A GNN model is LFD (resp. HFD) if and only if for each
                                                                         (t)   (t)
tj →
   − ∞, there exists a sub-sequence indexed by tjκ →
                                                   − ∞ and H∞ such that Hjκ /∥Hjκ ∥ →− H∞
and LH∞ = 0 (resp. LH∞ = ρLb H∞ ).
    b                 b


                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Remark 1 (Dirichlet energy, graph homophily and heterophily). It has been shown (Bronstein et al.,
2021) that if the graph is heterophily where the connected node are unlikely to share the same labels,
one may prefer a GNN with sharpening effect, corresponding to increase of energy. Whereas, when
the graph is highly homophily, a smoothing effect is preferred. Based on the settings above, we show
our conclusion on the property of energy dynamic of G-MHKG in the following.
Theorem 1. G-MHKG can induce both LFD and HFD dynamics. Specifically, let θ1 = 1N and
θ2 = ζ1N with a positive constant ζ. Then, with sufficient large ζ (ζ > 1) so that ef (Λ) + ζeg(Λ)
is monotonically increasing on spectral domain, G-MHKG is HFD. Similarly, if 0 < ζ < 1 and is
sufficient small such that ef (Λ) + ζeg(Λ) is monotonically decreasing, the model is LFD.
We leave the proof in Appendix C.1. Theorem 1 directly shows the benefits of constructing multi-
scale GNNs because such a model provides flexible control of the dominant dynamic that always
amplifies/shrinks the node feature differences at every step of its propagation. Accordingly, once the
model is HFD, there will be no over-smoothing issue. Furthermore, it is straightforward to verify
that single-scale GNN (Kipf & Welling, 2016; Chamberlain et al., 2021a) may satisfy the conditions
of frequency dominance described in Theorem 1, and in fact some of them can never be HFD to fit
heterophily graphs. See (Di Giovanni et al., 2022) for more details. Finally, we note that there are
many other settings of θ1 and θ2 that make the model HFD, the example in Theorem 1 is one of them
to illustrate its existence.
Remark 2. Recent research on GNNs dynamics (Di Giovanni et al., 2022) suggests that to induce
HFD, the weight matrix W must be symmetric and contain at least one negative eigenvalue. However,
from Theorem 1, G-MHKG can be L/HFD without considering the impact of W. This further
supports the flexibility and generalizability of G-MHKG. However, as we will illustrate in the next
section, W has direct impact on the model’s expressive power and over-squashing.

5   W EIGHTS C ONTROL E XPRESSIVE P OWER & OVER - SQUASHING
We have demonstrated in Section 4 that the L/HFD induced by G-MHKG does not impose any
specific conditions on the weight matrix W. However, it is intriguing to investigate the functionality
of W in G-MHKG. Recent developments in (Di Giovanni et al., 2023) shed light on the fact that
W significantly influences the model’s expressive power which refers to the class of functions that
GNN can learn, taking node features into consideration. This influence becomes evident through
the pairwise (over) squashing phenomenon, which interacts with the number of layers denoted as
ℓ, i.e. the depth of the model. Specifically, let Q : RN ×c → RN ×d be the function that GNNs aim
to learn, where d is the dimension of the node features after certain layers of propagation. One can
characterize the expressive power of one GNN model by estimating the amount of mixing of Q(X)
among any pair of nodes by the following definition.
Definition 2 (Maximal Mixing). For a smooth function Q of N × c variables, the maximal mixing
induced from Q associated with nodes u, v can be measured as:
                                                       ∂(Q(X))v
                                mixQ (v, u) = max               ,                                 (6)
                                                 X       ∂xu

where ∥ · ∥ is the spectral norm of the matrix. Here the mixQ (u, v) ∈ R depends on the maximal
component of Jacobian matrix between the output of GNN and the initial node features. Furthermore
if one replaces the Q(X) in Eq. (6) by the feature representation from an ℓ-layer GNN, the quantity
presented in Eq. (6) aligns with the so-called sensitivity which was proposed to measure the over-
squashing issue (Topping et al., 2021). Therefore, it is natural to see that if one GNN has strong
mixing (expressive) power, the over-squashing issue in this GNN tends to be smaller. We note
that similar definitions and discussions can be found in (Di Giovanni et al., 2023). Accordingly, we
define over-squashing (OSQ) as
                                                              −1
                                    OSQv,u = mixQ (v, u))        .                                (7)
Now we present the upper bound of mixQ (v, u) for G-MHKG, also standing for the upper bound
of its expressive power. Specifically, the upper bound of mixQ (v, u) is determined by W, depth ℓ
and S = A  bl + A             b l = I − UΛ1 U⊤ and A
                  b h , where A                         b h = I − UΛ2 U⊤ stand for the (weighted)
adjacency matrices generated from the low pass and high pass filtering functions, respectively. We
note that for the sake of simplicity, we set both θ1 = θ2 = 1N in Eq. (5).


                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma 2. Let Q(X) = H(ℓ) , ∥W(ℓ−1) ∥ ≤ w and S = A
                                                 bl + A
                                                      b h . Given u, v ∈ V, with ℓ layers,
then the following holds:
                                            (ℓ)
                                         ∂hv               ℓ
                                                  ≤ wℓ (S)v,u ,                                     (8)
                                         ∂xu
where ∥ · ∥ is the spectral norm of the matrix.

We present the proof in Appendix C.2. The conclusion in Lemma 2 indicates that the incorporation
of W serves a dual purpose: it not only plays a role in defining the model’s expressive capabilities
but also helps us understand the connection between the model’s expressiveness and the concern of
over-squashing.
Remark 3 (HFD, over-smoothing and over-squashing). Based on the discussion in Section 4, to
adapt G-MHKG to HFD dynamic, one shall require at least one of f (·) and g(·) to be monotonically
increasing and ensure that G-MHKG always amplifies the output induced from such high pass filter
determined domain (i.e., Theorem 1). Similarly, if one wants to decrease the over-squashing, it is
sufficient to increase all entries of S, so that the upper bound of mixing power increases, resulting
a potentially smaller over-squashing. We note that this observation supports that any graph re-
weighting that increases the quantity of S and graph rewiring that makes S denser can mitigate the
over-squashing issue. Therefore it is not difficult to verify that based on the form of S in Lemma
2, to increase S, it is sufficient to require (Udiag(θ1 )ef (Λ) + diag(θ2 )eg(Λ) U⊤ )i,j < Lb i,j ∀i, j.
This suggests that, similar to the model dynamics, the over-squashing issue can also be investigated
through the filtering functions in spectral domain.

6    T RADE - OFF B ETWEEN TWO ISSUES IN SPECTRAL DOMAIN
Building upon the findings from Section 4 and Section 5, this section explores a discernible trade-
off between over-smoothing and over-squashing. Assuming we have two G-MHKGs namely G-
MHKG(1) and G-MHKG(2), with the same assumptions in Lemma 2, additionally let two models
share the same weight matrix W. Then we are in a position to have the following conclusion.
Lemma 3 (Trade-off). For two G-MHKGs namely G-MHKG(1) and G-MHKG(2), if G-MHKG(1)
has lower over-squashing than G-MHKG(2) i.e., ef1 (Λ) + eg1 (Λ) < ef2 (Λ) + eg2 (Λ) , where f1 , g1
and f2 , g2 are filtering functions of two models, respectively. Then on any layer i.e., from H(ℓ−1) to
H(ℓ) . Taking H(ℓ−1) as the initial input feature at layer ℓ, we have the following inequality in terms
of Dirichlet energy of two models: E(H(ℓ) )1 < E(H(ℓ) )2 . In words, more feature smoothing effect
is induced from lower over-squashing model G-MHKG(1).

We include the proof in Appendix C.3. Our conclusion can be applied to single-scale GNNs. To gain
a clear understanding of the trade-off described in Lemma 3, one can consider that since the sum
of the filtering functions of G-MHKG(2) over G-MHKG(1) indicating a higher Dirichlet energy of
the node features, and thus G-MHKG(2) produces less smoothing than G-MHKG(1). Meanwhile,
the higher values of eigenvalues from G-MHKG(2) also increase model’s over-squashing based on
Lemma 2 and Remark 3. These observations directly suggest that imposing more sharpening effect
in a model to prevent over-smoothing will lead to more over-squashing.

7    T IME MANIPULATION : H OW TO HANDLE TWO ISSUES AND BEYOND
While we have illustrated the fundamental relationship (trade-off) between over-smoothing and
over-squashing, whether GNN models can handle both issues naturally becomes the next ques-
tion. Specifically, one shall require a GNN to be HFD to avoid over-smoothing and increasing
the quantities in S to decrease over-squashing. In terms of G-MHKG, one can see that due to the
property of exponential function, it is not possible to have the summation of the diagonal position of
diag(θ1 )ef (Λ) +diag(θ2 )eg(Λ) = 0 unless we set θ1 = θ2 = 0 under the situation that ef (Λ) ̸= eg(Λ) ,
or θ1 = −θ2 when ef (Λ) = eg(Λ) . Nonetheless, to satisfy the condition, we delay the occurrence of
HFD by setting θ1 = θ2 = 0 when λ = 0, and our result is summarized in the following theorem.
Theorem 2 (Delayed HFD (D-HFD)). G-MHKG is capable of handling both two issues with HFD
dynamic and non-increasing over-squashing. Specifically, let k be the number of connected compo-


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


nents of G and θ1 , θ2 ≥ 0 then both two issues can be sufficiently handled by setting diag(θ1 )i,i =
diag(θ2 )i,i = 0 i ∈ [1, k] and diag(θ1 )ef (Λi,i ) + diag(θ2 )eg(Λi,i ) < Λi,i i ∈ [k + 1, N ].

We included the detailed proof in Appendix C.4
with additional discussions and clarifications. Im-        θ1ef (λ) +θ2 eg(λ)                    θ1ef (λ) +θ2 eg(λ)
portantly from Theorem 2, the reason why we


                                                                                                                   λ


                                                                                                                                                            λ
consider zero eigenvalues of the graph is to suf-


                                                                               Q


                                                                                                  Q


                                                                                                               =


                                                                                                                                                       =
                                                                             OS


                                                                                                OS


                                                                                                            y


                                                                                                                                                    y
                                                                               in


                                                                                             in


                                                                                                                                                        SQ
ficiently decrease the over-squashing, one shall


                                                                                                               SQ
                                                                                             se
                                                                            se


                                                                                                                                                       O
                                                                                                              O


                                                                                                                                                       ng
                                                                                          rea
                                                                         rea


                                                                                                              ng


                                                                                                                                                     si
                                                                                                            si
require the filtered eigenvalues are not larger than


                                                                                                                                                   ea
                                                                                       Inc
                                                                      Inc


                                                                                                          ea


                                                                                                                                                 cr
                                                                                                        cr


                                                                                                                                               de
                                                                                                      de
                                                                                        D+
                                                                      D+


                                                                                                                                          on
the graph spectra. Therefore when eigenvalues are


                                                                                                  on
                                                                                               Q
                                                                                             OS


                                                                                      HF
                                                                    HF


                                                                                                                                          ea
                                                                                                                    Pure LFD


                                                                                                ea
                                                                                          in


                                                                                                                                        Ar
                                                                                       se


                                                                                              Ar
                                                                                  lay
                                                                                                                       Fixed Quantity
0, the sufficient condition is to require the filtering                             rea
                                                                                  ec


                                                                                De
                                                                                 D
                                                                             FD+
                                                                            H
results equal to 0 to maintain the over-squashing                   De
                                                                      lay
                                                                         ed
                                                                                                                                  HFD

level. Figure 2 shows the comparison between                λ1=λ2=· · ·=λk =0                              λk+i
                                                                          (a)                                   (b)
different kinds of filtering functions in regard to
the effect on over-smoothing and over-squashing. Figure 2: The figure on the left represents dif-
In addition, although Theorem 2 show how a D- ferent types of HFD filtering outcomes and the
HFD model handle two issues, this conclusion is trade-off between two issues. One can check
more applicable to heterophily graphs according that to induce more sharpening (filtering func-
to Remark 1. However, as we will show in the tion from bottom to top), the model will suffer
next theorem, it is not possible for the model to be more from OSQ. The figure on the right illus-
LFD and decrease over-squashing.                        trates the situation described in Theorem 3.
Theorem 3. Suppose θ1 and θ2 ≥ 0, then it is
impossible for the model to be LFD and decrease OSQ. In other words, there must exist at least one
                              ∗                    ∗
Λ∗ such that diag(θ1 )ef (Λ ) + diag(θ2 )eg(Λ ) is (1) monotonically increasing (HFD) or (2) with
constant quantity (thus not LFD) or (3) monotonically decreasing with image greater than Λ thus
OSQ is increased.

The proof of theorem is in Appendix C.5. Figure 2 (b) illustrates the situation in Theorem 3. The
model with the dynamic shown in Figure 2 (b) (i.e., first k components being 0 + dashed HFD + LFD)
is not a LFD and in fact asymptotically dominated by the HFD part, thereby according to Definition 1
and Lemma 1, the model is not L/HFD.

Relation to existing works Compared to the existing work (Giraldo et al., 2022) that claimed both
issues can not be alleviated simultaneously, our conclusion shows that once the model is HFD, it is
possible to handle both issues. This suggests the effectiveness for incorporating multi-scale GNNs in
terms of investigating the over-smoothing issue via model dynamics. Furthermore, although similar
motivation for inducing sharpening effect to the node features was explored (Choi et al., 2023), its
effect was only verified empirically. Our analysis under the scope of dominant dynamic and maximal
mixing of the function learned from GNNs pave the path of evaluating well-known GNN issues in
a unified platform. Moreover, recent studies (Nguyen et al., 2023) also attempted to mitigate both
issues via graph surgery by dropping highly positive cured edges which often lead to over-smoothing
issue and rewiring the communities connected with very negatively curved edges which is responsible
for the over-squashing issue (Topping et al., 2021). Although the relationship between the graph
edge curvature and spectra was explored (Bauer et al., 2011), a detailed comparison between spatial
(curvature based surgery) and spectral method is still wanted, especially on how the spatial surgery
affects the eigen-distribution of the graph spectra (Shi et al., 2023a).

8     E XPERIMENT
In this section, we show a variety of numerical tests for MHKG and G-MHKG. Specifically, Section
8.1 verifies how a controlled model dynamic enhances model’s adaption power on homophily and
heterophily graphs. In Section 8.2 we will compare model performance under four different dynamics
to illustrate how D-HFD dynamic assists model in handling two issues. Furthermore, Section 8.3 will
show the performance (node classification) of MHKG and G-MHKG via real-world citation networks
as well as large-scale graph datasets. We include more discussions (i.e., computational complexity)
and ablation studies in Appendix D. All experiments were conducted using PyTorch on Tesla V100
GPU with 5,120 CUDA cores and 16GB HBM2 mounted on an HPC cluster. The source code can be
found in https://anonymous.4open.science/r/G_MHKG_accept.


                                                             7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                    Cora                                                        Citeseer                                                                 Cornell                                                                       Wisconsin
                                      LFD                                                                   LFD                                                                      LFD                                                                              wisconsin
                     70               HFD+increase OSQ                     60                               HFD+increase OSQ                     60                                  HFD+increase OSQ                                                                 wisconsin
                                      D-HFD+increase OSQ                                                    D-HFD+increase OSQ                                                       D-HFD+increase OSQ                                    70                         wisconsin
                     60               D-HFD+decrease OSQ                                                    D-HFD+decrease OSQ                                                       D-HFD+decrease OSQ                                                               wisconsin


      Accuracy (%)


                                                            Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                  Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Accuracy (%)
                                                                           50                                                                    50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           60
                     50
                                                                           40                                                                    40
                     40                                                                                                                                                                                                                    50
                                                                           30                                                                    30
                     30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           40
                     20                                                                                                                          20
                                                                           20

                     10                                                                                                                          10                                                                                        30
                          20   40       60      80         100                  20                  40        60      80         100                         20          40            60             80                 100                     20     40     60     80          100
                          Number of Layers                                      Number of Layers                                                             Number of Layers                                                                     Number of Layers

Figure 4: Results on model with different dynamics. Number of layers from 8, 16, 32, 64, and 96.

Experiment Setup For the settings in MHKG, we followed form of MHKG defined in Eq. (3) by
setting f (Λ) = U(eΛ )U⊤ . We note that in general the form of f can be any monotonic positive
function on Λ, here we only choose the one in Eq. (3) for the consistency reason. In regarding
to G-MHKG, we assign one initial warm-up coefficient γ > 1 that is multiplied with f (L)      b if the
graph is homophily otherwise on g(L) if a graph is heterophily. We note that this operation aims to
                                      b
ensure G-MHKG to induce more smoothing/sharpening effect for fitting different types of graphs
according to Remark 1. We then re-scale the result of the filtering functions back to [0, 2] so that the
assumption of Lemma 2 holds. We included Cora, Citeseer, Pubmed for homophily datasets and
applied public split (Pei et al., 2020) and Wisconsin, Texas, Cornell as heterophily datasets with
60% for training, 20% for testing and validation. In addition, we also included one large-scale graph
dataset ogbn-arxiv to illustrate model scalability for large scale datasets. The summary statistics of
all included benchmarks as well as the model hyper-parameter search space are included in Appendix
D.1. We set the maximum number of epochs of 200 for citation networks and 500 for ogbn-arxiv.
The average test accuracy and its standard deviation come from 10 runs.

8.1            C ONTROLLED M ODEL DYNAMIC

In this section, we verify The-
orem 1 by assigning different                                                                       low = 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  90.0
                                                                                                    80
quantities of ζ so that G-MHKG                                                                      low = 2                                                                                                       87.5
                                                                                                    low = 3
                                                                                                    70
can be L/HFD. Specifically, we                                                                                                                                                                                    85.0
                                                                                     Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                                   Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  82.5
fixed θ1 = 1N , 2N , and 3N and                                                                     60

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  80.0
set the value of ζ from 0.5 to 3                                                                    50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  77.5
with the unit of change as 0.5                                                                      40                                                                                                            75.0

so that model dynamics changed                                      low = 1
                                                                    low = 2                         30                                                                                                            72.5

from HFD to LFD (i.e., ζ = 0.5).                                    low = 3
                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  70.0
                                                                                                     0.25      0.50    0.75       1.00                1.25        1.50        1.75          2.00                     0.25            0.50       0.75   1.00   1.25   1.50     1.75      2.00
All other hyperparameters were                         low / high                        low / high
fixed across the models. We con-
ducted the experiment on Cora Figure 3: Model Accuracy(%) via different ratios between filtering
and Texas, and Figure 3 shows matrices. Left: Accuracy on Cora, Right: Accuracy on Texas.
the changes in the learning accu-
racy on both datasets. It is clear to see that with the increase of ζ = θ1 /θ2 , model’s dynamics change
from LFD to HFD, resulting in more adaption power from homophily to heterophily graphs.

8.2            H ANDLING BOTH ISSUES WITH D-HFD AND ABLATION

In this section, we show how G-MHKG with D-HFD dynamic handles both over-smoothing and
over-squashing issues. Specifically, we compare G-MHKG’s performance via the following four
dynamics: LFD (θ1 > θ2 > 0), HFD + increase in OSQ (sufficient large of θ2 ), D-HFD + increase
in OSQ (θ2 sufficient large and first k components of both θ1 and θ2 are 0) and D-HFD + decrease
in OSQ (Theorem 2). We include more details on the model setup for inducing the aforementioned
dynamics in Appendix D.2. We select two homophily graphs (Cora with k = 25 and Citeseer
k = 115) and heterophily graphs (Cornell k = 6 and Wisconsin k = 16). We tested G-MHKG with
8, 16, 32, 64 and 96 layers to illustrate the asymptotic behavior of the model via different dynamics.
We note that this experiment can also be served as an ablation study which proves the advantage of
D-HFD for heterophily graphs. Figure 4 illustrates the accuracy comparison between four dynamics.
One can see from Figure 4 that for homophily graphs, LFD (blue) models always present the top


                                                                                                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


performances compared to other three dynamics, followed by the dynamic of D-HFD + decreasing
OSQ (violet) as such dynamic assists model to handle over-squashing issue. The last two ranks are
achieved by D-HFD + increase OSQ (orange) and HFD + increase OSQ (green) with the former
dynamic not increase OSQ with the first k eigenvalues and latter suffering from both issues. For
heterophily graphs, with the best accuracy achieved via D-HFD + decreased OSQ across all layers,
and the worst outcome in LFD which is unnecessary for homophily graphs.

8.3   R ESULTS OF N ODE CLASSIFICATION ON REAL - WORLD DATA

We include the introduction of the baseline models and the reason of choosing them in Appendix
D.1. We design MHKG and G-MHKG with two convolution layers followed by softmax activation
function. The results of node classification are included in Table 1, and all baseline results are listed
according to the existing publications. One can check that G-MHKG show remarkable performance
on both homophily and heterophily graphs.
          Table 1: Performance on node classification using public split. Top two in bold.
       Methods       Cora      Citeseer    Pubmed        Cornell     Texas      Wisconsin   Arxiv
         MLP       55.1       59.1        71.4           91.3±0.7    92.3±0.7   91.8±3.1    55.0±0.3
         GCN       81.5±0.5   70.9±0.5    79.0±0.3       66.5±13.8   75.7±1.0   66.7±1.4    72.7±0.3
         GAT       83.0±0.7   72.0±0.7    78.5±0.3       76.0±1.0    78.8±0.9   71.0±4.6    72.0±0.5
         GIN       78.6±1.2   71.4±1.1    76.9±0.6       78.0±1.9    74.6±0.8   72.9±2.5    64.5±2.5
       HKGCN       81.9±0.9   72.4±0.4    79.9±0.3       74.2±2.1    82.4±0.7   85.5±2.7    69.6±1.7
       GRAND       82.9±1.4   70.8±1.1    79.2±1.5       72.2±3.1    80.2±1.5   86.4±2.7    71.2±0.2
         UFG       83.3±0.5   71.0±0.6    79.4±0.4       83.2±0.3    82.3±0.9   91.9±2.1    72.6±0.1
         SJLR      81.3±0.5   70.6±0.4    78.0±0.3       71.9±1.9    80.1±0.9   66.9±2.1    72.0±0.4
        MHKG       82.8±0.2   71.6±0.1    78.9±0.3       86.2±0.6    84.5±0.3   88.9±0.3    72.1±0.6
       G-MHKG      83.5±0.2   72.8±0.2    80.1±0.4       90.2±0.9    89.6±0.6   91.2±1.5    72.4±0.3



8.4   D ISCUSSION ON L IMITATION AND WAYS FORWARD

Limitation on L/HFD, why there is an accuracy drop? We found that there is a considerable accu-
racy drop between the results in Table. 1 and model with four different dynamics and different layers.
This observation suggests that although L/HFD are proved to be more suitable for homo/heterophily
graphs, under large number of layers, i.e., GNNs propagates feature information from large hops, the
measure of homophily level (Zhu et al., 2021) become powerless, since such level varies through
hops and thus requiring GNNs to induce a layer-wise rather than overall dynamics when the layer
number is high. This observation aligns with the motivation of the recent work in (Lee et al., 2023).

The measure of OSQ Lemma 2 establishes an upper bound for the node sensitivity measure on
the issue of over-squashing. While Lemma 2 offers a necessary condition, it does not guarantee
that G-MHKG possesses the desired mixing power. Hence, a complementary lower bound that
provides a sufficient condition becomes essential. Thereby in scenarios where both over-smoothing
and over-squashing need to be considered, an adjusted conclusion is sought after.

9     C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we explored the underlying relationship between three fundamental issues of GNNs:
over-smoothing, over-squashing, and expressive power via proposed G-MHKG induced by reversing
the time direction of so-called graph heat equation. We revealed the roles of the filtering and weight
matrices via gradient flow and maximal mixing perspectives to illustrate their capability of controlling
aforementioned issues. Furthermore, we show that under mild conditions on the filtering equations in
G-MHKG, there is a fundamental trade-off between over-smoothing and over-squashing via graph
spectral domain. We further showed that our proposed model is capable of handling both issues and
own its advantage in terms of mixing smoothing and sharpening effects compared to single-scale
GNNs. While we have shown superior performance of G-MHKG empirically, many unknown issues
we have listed still inspire us to explore further. In future works, we will attempt to discover the
necessary conditions for one GNN that is capable of handling all mentioned issues.


                                                     9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Uri Alon and Eran Yahav. On the bottleneck of graph neural networks and its practical implications.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.

Frank Bauer, Jürgen Jost, and Shiping Liu. Ollivier-ricci curvature and the spectrum of the normalized
  graph laplace operator. arXiv preprint arXiv:1105.3803, 2011.

Michael M Bronstein, Joan Bruna, Taco Cohen, and Petar Veličković. Geometric deep learning:
 Grids, groups, graphs, geodesics, and gauges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.13478, 2021.

Chen Cai and Yusu Wang. A note on over-smoothing for graph neural networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2006.13318, 2020.

Ben Chamberlain, James Rowbottom, Maria I Gorinova, Michael Bronstein, Stefan Webb, and
  Emanuele Rossi. Grand: Graph neural diffusion. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 1407–1418. PMLR, 2021a.

Benjamin Chamberlain, James Rowbottom, Davide Eynard, Francesco Di Giovanni, Xiaowen
  Dong, and Michael Bronstein. Beltrami flow and neural diffusion on graphs. In M. Ran-
  zato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 1594–1609. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2021b. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2021/
  file/0cbed40c0d920b94126eaf5e707be1f5-Paper.pdf.

Jeongwhan Choi, Seoyoung Hong, Noseong Park, and Sung-Bae Cho. Gread: Graph neural reaction-
  diffusion networks. 2023.

Fan RK Chung. Spectral graph theory, volume 92. American Mathematical Soc., 1997.

Mark Crovella and Eric Kolaczyk. Graph wavelets for spatial traffic analysis. In IEEE INFO-
 COM 2003. Twenty-second Annual Joint Conference of the IEEE Computer and Communications
 Societies (IEEE Cat. No. 03CH37428), volume 3, pp. 1848–1857. IEEE, 2003.

Michaël Defferrard, Xavier Bresson, and Pierre Vandergheynst. Convolutional neural networks on
 graphs with fast localized spectral filtering. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
 29, 2016.

Francesco Di Giovanni, James Rowbottom, Benjamin P Chamberlain, Thomas Markovich, and
  Michael M Bronstein. Graph neural networks as gradient flows. arXiv:2206.10991, 2022.

Francesco Di Giovanni, T Konstantin Rusch, Michael M Bronstein, Andreea Deac, Marc Lackenby,
  Siddhartha Mishra, and Petar Veličković. How does over-squashing affect the power of gnns?
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03589, 2023.

Bin Dong. Sparse representation on graphs by tight wavelet frames and applications. Applied and
  Computational Harmonic Analysis, 42(3):452–479, 2017. doi: 10.1016/j.acha.2015.09.005.

Guoji Fu, Peilin Zhao, and Yatao Bian. p-laplacian based graph neural networks. In International
 Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6878–6917. PMLR, 2022.

Jhony H Giraldo, Fragkiskos D Malliaros, and Thierry Bouwmans. Understanding the relation-
  ship between over-smoothing and over-squashing in graph neural networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2212.02374, 2022.

David K Hammond, Pierre Vandergheynst, and Rémi Gribonval. Wavelets on graphs via spectral
  graph theory. Applied and Computational Harmonic Analysis, 30(2):129–150, 2011.

Andi Han, Dai Shi, Zhiqi Shao, and Junbin Gao. Generalized energy and gradient flow via graph
  framelets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.04124, 2022.

Elton P Hsu. Stochastic analysis on manifolds. Number 38. American Mathematical Soc., 2002.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Shaoxiong Ji, Shirui Pan, Erik Cambria, Pekka Marttinen, and S Yu Philip. A survey on knowledge
  graphs: Representation, acquisition, and applications. IEEE transactions on neural networks and
  learning systems, 33(2):494–514, 2021.
Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional networks.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02907, 2016.
Soo Yong Lee, Fanchen Bu, Jaemin Yoo, and Kijung Shin. Towards deep attention in graph neural
  networks: Problems and remedies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.02376, 2023.
Qimai Li, Zhichao Han, and Xiao-Ming Wu. Deeper insights into graph convolutional networks
  for semi-supervised learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence,
  volume 32, 2018.
Lequan Lin and Junbin Gao. A magnetic framelet-based convolutional neural network for directed
  graphs. In ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
  Processing (ICASSP), pp. 1–5. IEEE, 2023.
Xinliang Liu, Bingxin Zhou, Chutian Zhang, and Yu Guang Wang. Framelet message passing. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2302.14806, 2023.
Mauro Maggioni and Hrushikesh N Mhaskar. Diffusion polynomial frames on metric measure spaces.
 Applied and Computational Harmonic Analysis, 24(3):329–353, 2008.
Khang Nguyen, Nong Minh Hieu, Vinh Duc Nguyen, Nhat Ho, Stanley Osher, and Tan Minh Nguyen.
  Revisiting over-smoothing and over-squashing using ollivier-ricci curvature. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 25956–25979. PMLR, 2023.
Hongbin Pei, Bingzhe Wei, Kevin Chen-Chuan Chang, Yu Lei, and Bo Yang. Geom-gcn: Geometric
  graph convolutional networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.05287, 2020.
Zhiqi Shao, Andi Han, Dai Shi, Andrey Vasnev, and Junbin Gao. Generalized Laplacian regularized
  framelet gcns. arXiv:2210.15092, 2022.
Dai Shi, Andi Han, Junbin Gao, Yi Guo, et al. On the expressive equivalence between graph
  convolution and attention models. 2022.
Dai Shi, Yi Guo, Zhiqi Shao, and Junbin Gao. How curvature enhance the adaptation power of
  framelet gcns. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09768, 2023a.
Dai Shi, Zhiqi Shao, Yi Guo, Qibin Zhao, and Junbin Gao. Revisiting generalized p-laplacian
  regularized framelet gcns: Convergence, energy dynamic and training with non-linear diffusion.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15639, 2023b.
Jian Sun, Maks Ovsjanikov, and Leonidas Guibas. A concise and provably informative multi-scale
   signature based on heat diffusion. In Computer graphics forum, volume 28, pp. 1383–1392. Wiley
   Online Library, 2009.
Matthew Thorpe, Tan Minh Nguyen, Hedi Xia, Thomas Strohmer, Andrea Bertozzi, Stanley Osher,
 and Bao Wang. Grand++: Graph neural diffusion with a source term. In International Conference
 on Learning Representations, 2021.
Matthew Thorpe, Tan Minh Nguyen, Hedi Xia, Thomas Strohmer, Andrea Bertozzi, Stanley Osher,
 and Bao Wang. GRAND++: Graph neural diffusion with a source term. In International Confer-
 ence on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
 EMxu-dzvJk.
Jake Topping, Francesco Di Giovanni, Benjamin Paul Chamberlain, Xiaowen Dong, and Michael M
  Bronstein. Understanding over-squashing and bottlenecks on graphs via curvature. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Petar Veličković, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro Liò, and Yoshua
  Bengio. Graph attention networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2018.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yu Guang Wang and Xiaosheng Zhuang. Tight framelets on graphs for multiscale data analysis. In
  Wavelets and Sparsity XVIII, volume 11138, pp. 100–111. SPIE, 2019.
Asiri Wijesinghe and Qing Wang. A new perspective on" how graph neural networks go beyond
  weisfeiler-lehman?". In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Felix Wu, Amauri Souza, Tianyi Zhang, Christopher Fifty, Tao Yu, and Kilian Weinberger. Sim-
  plifying graph convolutional networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  6861–6871. PMLR, 2019.
Zonghan Wu, Shirui Pan, Fengwen Chen, Guodong Long, Chengqi Zhang, and S Yu Philip. A
  comprehensive survey on graph neural networks. IEEE transactions on Neural Networks and
  Learning Systems, 32(1):4–24, 2020.
Keyulu Xu, Weihua Hu, Jure Leskovec, and Stefanie Jegelka. How powerful are graph neural
  networks? In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=ryGs6iA5Km.
Mengxi Yang, Xuebin Zheng, Jie Yin, and Junbin Gao. Quasi-framelets: Another improvement to
 graph neural networks. arXiv:2201.04728, 2022.
Jialin Zhao, Yuxiao Dong, Jie Tang, Ming Ding, and Kuansan Wang. Generalizing graph convolutional
   networks via heat kernel. 2020.
Xuebin Zheng, Bingxin Zhou, Junbin Gao, Yuguang Wang, Pietro Lió, Ming Li, and Guido Montufar.
  How framelets enhance graph neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 12761–12771. PMLR, 2021.
Xuebin Zheng, Bingxin Zhou, Yu Guang Wang, and Xiaosheng Zhuang. Decimated framelet system
  on graphs and fast g-framelet transforms. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23:18–1, 2022.
Jiong Zhu, Ryan A Rossi, Anup Rao, Tung Mai, Nedim Lipka, Nesreen K Ahmed, and Danai Koutra.
   Graph neural networks with heterophily. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial
   intelligence, volume 35, pp. 11168–11176, 2021.
Chunya Zou, Andi Han, Lequan Lin, and Junbin Gao. A simple yet effective SVD-GCN for directed
  graphs. arXiv:2205.09335, 2022.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     R ELATED WORKS

A.1    H EAT OPERATOR AND HEAT KERNEL

In this section, we show a more detailed introduction of heat operator and heat kernel. Let M be
a compact Riemannian manifold possibly with boundary. The so-called heat diffusion process on
the manifold is denoted by the heat equation: ∆M u(x, t) = − ∂u(x,t)   ∂t , where ∆M is known as
Laplace-Beltrami operator of M. Given the initial heat distribution q : M → R, one can let S (t) (q)
satisfies the heat equation for all t and Limt→0 S (t) (q) = q. Then S (t) is called the heat operator.
One can check that both ∆M and S (t) maps a real function defined on M to another function, and
the transaction between them can be denoted as S (t) = e−t∆M . Therefore, both two operators share
the same eigen-functions, and if λi is the i-th eigenvalue of ∆M then e−tλi is the i-th eigenvalue
of S (t) . Based on the work in (Hsu, 2002; Sun et al., 2009), for any M, there exists a function
k (t) (x, y) : R+ × M × M → R such that:
                                                Z
                                 S (t) (q(x)) =    k (t) (x, y)q(y)dy,                             (9)
                                                 M

where dy is the volume form at y ∈ M. The minimum function k (t) (x, y) that satisfies Eq. (9) is
called the heat kernel which can be interpreted as the amount of heat that transacts from the point x to
y during the time period t. For any given continuous time period, the heat kernel shows a continuous
smoothing diffusion process of the temperature on the manifold. Now we analogize this notion to the
discrete graph domain where we replace the ∆M to the graph (normalized) Laplacian L,     b and for any
t > 0 the heat kernel of G can be served as the fundamental solution of the graph heat equation:
                                          ∂H(t)    b (t) ,
                                                = −LH                                              (10)
                                           ∂t
in which we denote the H(t) as the feature representation at a specific iteration time t of GNN with
H(0) = X. The solution of the graph heat equation, denoted as H(t) , is given by H(t) = e−tL H(0) .
                                                                                              b

It is well-known that the application of Euler discretization leads to the propagation of the linear
GCN models (Kipf & Welling, 2016; Wu et al., 2019) and this process is with the name of Laplacian
smoothing (Chung, 1997). The characteristic of the solution is indeed governed by the so-called Heat
Kernel, denoted by H b t = e−tLb . The heat kernel defines a continuous-time random walk, and defines
a semi-group, i.e., H(t+s) = H(t) · H(s) for any t, s ≥ 0, and limt→∞ H(t) = I (Chung, 1997). This
fact indicates non-distinguishment for the nodes with same degrees, known as over-smoothing.

A.2    M ULTI - SCALE GNN S AND G RAPH F RAMELETS

The notion of so-called multi-scale GNNs can be traced back to the application of graph wavelet
analysis (Crovella & Kolaczyk, 2003) for traffic forecasting. The work Maggioni & Mhaskar (2008)
applied the polynomials of a differential operator to build multi-scale transforms. The spectral graph
wavelet transforms (Hammond et al., 2011) define the graph spectrum from a graph’s Laplacian
matrix, where the scaling function is approximated by the Chebyshev polynomials. Dong (2017)
approximated piece-wise smooth functions with undecimated tight wavelet frames. Fast decompo-
sition and reconstruction become possible with the filtered Chebyshev polynomial approximation
and proper design of filter banks. Meanwhile, as an extension of the wavelet analysis, fast tight
framelet filter bank transforms on quadrature-based framelets are explored on graph domain (Wang
& Zhuang, 2019; Zheng et al., 2022). Based on these constructive works, multi-scale GNNs have
shown superior performances in terms of both node and graph level classification tasks. Specifically,
Zheng et al. (2021) formally deployed fast and tight framelet decomposition and reconstruction on
graph, resulting as a general form of multi-scale graph framelet convolution. Motivated by the idea of
adapting framelet onto direct graphs, Zou et al. (2022) proposed SVD based graph framelets, followed
by Yang et al. (2022) who further introduced quasi-framelet so that more flexible filtering functions
can be utilized. In fact, one can consider the learning process of multi-scale GNNs (including graph
framelet) as learning multiple kernels that conditional to the feature aggregation. Thereby including
more graph related information (i.e., curvature (Shi et al., 2023a)) to the propagation often leads to a
better learning outcomes.


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.3    C URRENT STUDY IN U NDERSTANDING ON B OTH I SSUES

Unlike the over-smoothing issue, which has been established for years (Li et al., 2018), the over-
squashing issue, however, was only identified and analyzed recently (Topping et al., 2021; Alon &
Yahav, 2020). Specifically, the majority of the GNN researches quantified the phenomenon of over-
smoothing through the measures of variation of the node features (i.e., Dirichlet energy or its variants)
generated from the propagation of GNNs. The connection between over-squashing and so-called
negative Forman curvature has been established recently (Topping et al., 2021). Accordingly, these
two different paths of investigating two issues lead GNNs towards different form of propagations,
causing lack of unified manner of exploring both problems. The recent research that consider both
problems can be found in (Giraldo et al., 2022) in which a curvature based rewiring method is
deployed to mitigate both issues, and claimed that both issue can not be solved simultaneously, which
paved the path of investigating both issues in an unified platform. Similar research using the sign of
curvature to link both issues can also be found in (Nguyen et al., 2023) in which a novel curvature
flow (Batch Ollivier-Ricci Flow) method is proposed to mitigate both issues.

B     L IST OF GNN S AS SPECIAL FORM OF THE PROPOSED MODEL
In this section, we list the relationship between popular GNNs and G-MHKG. Recall that the
propagation of G-MHKG is:
        H(ℓ) = Udiag(θ1 )ef (Λ) U⊤ H(ℓ−1) W(ℓ−1) + Udiag(θ2 )eg(Λ) U⊤ H(ℓ−1) W(ℓ−1) .               (11)
It is not hard to verify that, by setting either θ1 or θ2 = 0, we recover the GRAND (Chamberlain
et al., 2021a) with one additional channel mixing matrix W. Letting g(Λ) = 0, θ2 = cN , where
cN is a N -dimensional vector with all c as an arbitrary constant, we have the model equivalent to
GRAND++ (Thorpe et al., 2021) with a layer dependent source term that is H    e = Udiag(θ2 )U⊤ HW.
Furthermore, if one represents G-MHKG via spatial message passing followed by Lemma 2 i.e.,
H(ℓ) = SH(ℓ−1) W(ℓ−1) , where S = A        bl + A b h and Ab are the corresponding adjacency matrix.
Then one can obtain the reweighting matrix ξ = S ⊘ A     b and in this case, G-MHKG is same as those
GNNs with adjacency reweighting schemes such as GAT (Veličković et al., 2018) in single-scale and
Curvature framelet GCN (Shi et al., 2023a) as multi-scale.


More precisely, let g(Λ) = 0, the propagation of G-MHKG becomes
           H(ℓ) = Udiag(θ1 )ef (Λ) U⊤ H(ℓ−1) W(ℓ−1) + Udiag(θ2 )U⊤ H(ℓ−1) W(ℓ−1)
                = Udiag(θ1 )ef (Λ) U⊤ H(ℓ−1) W(ℓ−1) + H
                                                      e (ℓ−1) ,                                     (12)
in which the first term can be treated as the special graph neural diffusion model and the last
term is a layer dependent node feature, indicating a combination of the diffusion and a source term,
yielding a special form of GRAND++. Additionally, let S = A     b l +A           b l = I − UΛ1 U⊤ and
                                                                     b h , where A
Ab h = I − UΛ2 U⊤ stand for the (weighted) adjacency matrices generated from the low pass and high
pass filtering functions (i.e., f (·), g(cot)), respectively with Λ1 = f (Λ) = diag({ef (λi ) }N
                                                                                               i=1 ) and
                        g(λi ) N
Λ2 = g(Λ) = diag({e           }i=1 ). Then one can show that the adjacency information (S = Al + A
                                                                                               b     b h)
that propagated in G-MHKG is indeed the sum of two weighted adjacency matrices while preserving
the graph connectivity. Therefore, with ξ = S ⊘ A,   b one can show that G-MHKG is in fact align with
GNNs enhanced with reweighting scheme (i.e., GAT and curvature framelet GCN).

C     F ORMAL PROOFS
C.1    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1.

In this section, we show the proof of Theorem 1 which indicates that G-MHKG can induce both
energy dynamics under different settings of the filtering matrices diag(θ1 ) and diag(θ2 ).
Theorem 4 (Repeat of Theorem 1). G-MHKG can induce both LFD and HFD dynamics. Specifically,
let θ1 = 1N and θ2 = ζ1N with a positive constant ζ. Then, with sufficient large ζ (ζ > 1) so


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


that ef (Λ) + ζeg(Λ) is monotonically increasing on spectral domain, G-MHKG is HFD. Similarly, if
0 < ζ < 1 and is sufficient small such that ef (Λ) + ζeg(Λ) is monotonically decreasing, the model is
LFD.

Proof. As we aim to prove the existence of the filtering matrices for L/HFD. Without loss of generality,
we show the example with Theorem 1 holds. Recall that G-MHKG has the propagation rule as:
         H(ℓ) = Udiag(θ1 )ef (Λ) U⊤ H(ℓ−1) W(ℓ−1) + Udiag(θ2 )eg(Λ) U⊤ H(ℓ−1) W(ℓ−1)
               = Wl H(ℓ−1) W(ℓ−1) + Wh H(ℓ−1) W(ℓ−1)                                                      (13)
where we let Wl = Udiag(θ1 )ef (Λ) U⊤ and Wh = Udiag(θ2 )eg(Λ) U⊤ , respectively. Plugging
in the setting of θ1 and θ2 , we have Wl = Uef (Λ) U⊤ and Wh = Uζeg(Λ) U⊤ , respectively.
Furthermore, as in G-MHKG, every step we applied the same operation on the feature from the last
step, one can let t = mτ and τ = 1 for m time propagation and each propagation takes the step as 1.
Together with the conditions on θ1 and θ2 , Eq. (13) can be further expressed as:
                                                              m
                 vec(H(mτ ) ) = τ m (W ⊗ (Wℓ + ζWh )) vec(H(0))
                                    X                              m
                              = τm      λW
                                         k   ef (λi ) + ζeg(λi )     ck,i (0)ϕW
                                                                              k ⊗ ui ,                    (14)
                                       i,k
                        W c                                                                 W
where we let {(λW k , ϕk )}k=1 as the eigen-pairs of W and denote ck,i (0) = ⟨vec(H(0)), ϕk ⊗ ui ⟩.
                                                              (ℓ−1)    (ℓ−2)
It is worth noting that, without loss of generality, we set W       =W       = · · · = W, suggesting
a fixed weight matrix for all layers.
We now show that according to different quantity of ζ, the dynamic in Eq. (14) can be L/HFD.
Then with sufficient large of ζ so that ef (L) + ζeg(L) is  a monotonically increase, one can find
                                                     b           b

that the unique maximal image of |λW           k   ef (λi ) + ζeg(λi ) | at frequency ρLb . Furthermore, denote
                 W   f (ρL )       g(ρL )

δHFD := λk e             b   + ζe     b     and ζ > 1 sufficient large such that for all i where λi ̸= ρLb ,

|λWk   e f (λi )
                 + ζe g(λi )
                               | < δ HFD    holds. Then the dynamic is HFD and the dominant frequency is
ρLb . One can also verify the model can be LFD by utilizing the same approach.
More precisely,          based on   the Definition 1 P            and Lemma 1,                let δ       :=
                                                                          W              W            ⊤
maxi:λi ̸=ρL |λW
               k   e f (λi )
                             + ζe g(λi )
                                         |, also denote P ρ  =       k  (ϕk  ⊗  u  ρ )(ϕ k   ⊗   u ρ )  where
uρ is the eigenvector of L   b associated with eigenvalue ρ b (assuming the eigenvalue ρ b is simple).
                                                             L                                    L
Then we can decompose Eq. (14) as

    vec H(mτ )
         X                                   X X                                         m
  =τ m        m
             δHFD ck,ρL (0)ϕk ⊗ uρ+τ m                    λWk (e
                                                                 f (λi )
                                                                         + ζ(eg(λi ) )     ck,i (0)ϕk ⊗ ui
          k                                   k i:λi ̸=ρL
                                               m
                          XX               δ
  ≤τ m δHFD
        m
            (Pρ vec H(0) +                        ck,i (0)ϕk ⊗ ui ,
                                         δHFD
                             k i:λi ̸=ρL

                                                         vec H(mτ )     P (vec(H(0)))
where δ < δHFD . By normalizing the results, we obtain                − ∥Pρρ vec(H(0))∥ , as m →
                                                                      →                        − ∞,
                                                             ∥vec H(mτ ) ∥

where the latter is a unit vector h∞ satisfying (Ic ⊗ L)h
                                                      b ∞ = ρ b h∞ . This suggests the dynamic is
                                                             L
HFD according to Definition 1 and Lemma 1.
Remark 4. The key of proving Theorem 1 is to        evaluate the relative importance of the two terms
in the sum filtering functions ef (Λ) + ζeg(Λ) . It is worth noting that if one goes specifically to
the monotonicity of f (·) and g(·), i.e. both f (·) and g(·) monotonically increasing, then regardless
of the choice of ζ, the model is always HFD. When f (·) is monotonically decreasing and g(·) is
monotonically increasing, with sufficient large of ζ, the model remains HFD. Last, if both f (·) and
g(·) are monotonically decreasing, then regardless of the quantity of ζ the model is always LFD.

C.2    P ROOF OF L EMMA 2

In this section, we prove the upper bound of the maximal mixing of G-MHKG included in Lemma 2:


                                                     15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma 4 (Repeat of Lemma 2). Let Q(X) = H(ℓ) , ∥W(ℓ−1) ∥ ≤ w and S = A
                                                                     bl + A
                                                                          b h . Given
u, v ∈ V, with ℓ layers, then the following holds:
                                                          (ℓ)
                                                      ∂hv                    ℓ
                                                                    ≤ wℓ (S)v,u ,                                (15)
                                                      ∂xu

where ∥ · ∥ is the spectral norm of the matrix.

Proof. We note that the proof for the conclusion in the case of single-scale GNN (i.e. S = A)b is done
in (Shi et al., 2022). Here we directly generalize the proof to multi-scale case for self-completeness.
First recall that G-MHKG is with the propagation rule as:
          H(ℓ) = Udiag(θ1 )ef (Λ) U⊤ H(ℓ−1) W(ℓ−1) + Udiag(θ2 )eg(Λ) U⊤ H(ℓ−1) W(ℓ−1)

               = U diag(θ1 )ef (Λ) + diag(θ2 )eg(Λ) U⊤ H(ℓ−1) W(ℓ−1)
                  b ∗ H(m−1) W(m−1) ,
                 =L                                                                                              (16)

where diag(θ1 )L b l and diag(θ2 )L
                                  b h stand for the spectral filtering process on the corresponding
Laplacian induced from the filtering functions. Based on the relationship between spatial and
spectral GNNs, one can further denote the propagation in Eq. (16) with a spatial based form as:
H(ℓ) = SH(ℓ−1) W(ℓ−1) , where S = A          b h . Now we see that h(ℓ)
                                        b l +A                      v = (W
                                                                             (ℓ−1) ⊤
                                                                                  ) (H(ℓ−1) )⊤ sv =
              (ℓ−1) ⊤ (ℓ−1)
PN                                                 ⊤
   i=1 svi (W       ) hi     , where we denote si the i-th row of matrix S and sij the i, j-th entry of
S. Then by chain rule, we obtain
               (ℓ)                                          n                     (ℓ−1)
           ∂hv                                            X                     ∂hiℓ−1
                      = diag (W(ℓ−1) )⊤ (H(ℓ−1) )⊤ av ) ⊙     sviℓ−1 (W(ℓ−1) )⊤
           ∂xu                                            i =1
                                                                                 ∂xu
                                                                                    ℓ

            N                                 (ℓ−1)
            X
                                    (ℓ−1) ⊤
                                            ∂hiℓ−1
      ≤              sviℓ−1 (W            )
           iℓ−1 =1
                                                 ∂xu

                                                                                                           (0)
                  X                                                                                    ∂hi0
      ≤                          svim−1 siℓ−1 iℓ−2 · · · si1 i0 (W(ℓ−1) )⊤ (W(ℓ−2) )⊤ · · · (W(0) )⊤
           im−1 ,im−2 ,...,i0
                                                                                                       ∂xu
                 X
      =                         sviℓ−1 siℓ−1 iℓ−2 · · · si1 u       (W(ℓ−1) )⊤ (W(ℓ−2) )⊤ · · · (W(0) )⊤
           iℓ−1 ,iℓ−2 ,...,i1
                 ℓ
      ≤wℓ (S)v,u
where we have applied the second inequality recursively to obtain the third inequality.

C.3   P ROOF OF L EMMA 3

In this section we show the proof of the trade-off Lemma (Lemma 3) between over-smoothing and
over-squashing. It is worth noting that we still set θ2 = θ1 = 1N . Although with the same meaning
as Lemma 3, below we first show the full version of Lemma 3 in the following.
Lemma 5 (Trade-off). For two G-MHKGs namely G-MHKG(1) and G-MHKG(2), if G-MHKG(1)
has lower over-squashing than G-MHKG(2) i.e., ef1 (Λ) + eg1 (Λ) < ef2 (Λ) + eg2 (Λ) , where f1 , g1
and f2 , g2 are filtering functions of two models, respectively. Then on any layer i.e., from H(ℓ−1) to
H(ℓ) . Taking H(ℓ−1) as the initial input feature at layer ℓ, we have the following inequality in terms
of Dirichlet energy of two models
                                                   E(H(ℓ) )1 < E(H(ℓ) )2 .
In words, more feature smoothing effect is induced from lower over-squashing model G-MHKG(1).

Proof. First, without loss of generality, we further let all entries of the feature representation be
non-negative since this can be easily achieved by applying commonly used activation function of each


                                                                    16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


layer of G-MHKG, we omit here for simplicity reason. If G-MHKG(1) is with lower over-squashing
than G-MHKG(2), then, based on Lemma 2, it is sufficiently to have:

              U ef1 (Λ) + eg1 (Λ) U⊤       < U ef2 (Λ) + eg2 (Λ) U⊤         ∀i, j.        (17)
                                             i,j                                 i,j

Let Λ∗1 = ef1 (Λ) + eg1 (Λ) and Λ∗2 = ef2 (Λ) + eg2 (Λ) be the diagonal matrices with entries of
the filtered eigenvalues of two models, respectively. According to Eq. (17), we have (Λ∗1 )i,i <
(Λ∗2 )i,i ∀i ∈ [1, N ]. Since G-MHKG is linear i.e., at every iteration, the model assigns same
propagation rule to the node features. For any fixed graph G, it is easy to verify E(H)1 < E(H)2
according to the definition of Dirichlet energy (i.e., E(H) = Tr(H⊤ LH)).
                                                                      b

Remark 5. The result in Lemma 3 is general and it is not hard to apply it to the single-scale
GNNs. Furthermore, we note that the conclusion we reached is based on the sufficient requirement
(U(ef1 (Λ) + eg1 (Λ) )U⊤ )i,j < (U(ef2 (Λ) + eg2 (Λ) )U⊤ )i,j ∀i, j and without considering the effect
of filtering matrices (i.e., θ2 and θ1 ). We leave the discussion and analysis for more complicated
cases in future work.

C.4   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

In this section, we show the proof of Theorem 2 which indicates the G-MHKG can handle both
over-smoothing and over-squashing issues with so-called D-HFD.
Theorem 5 (Repeat of Theorem 2). G-MHKG is capable of handling both two issues with HFD
dynamic and non-increasing over-squashing. Specifically, let k be the number of connected compo-
nents of G and θ1 , θ2 ≥ 0 then both two issues can be sufficiently handled by setting diag(θ1 )i,i =
diag(θ2 )i,i = 0 i ∈ [1, k] and diag(θ1 )ef (Λi,i ) + diag(θ2 )eg(Λi,i ) < Λi,i i ∈ [k + 1, N ].

Proof. First, based on the spectral graph theory (Chung, 1997), if G has k connected components,
then λ1 = λ2 = · · · = λk = 0. Therefore, when λ = 0, one can only let diag(θ1 ) = diag(θ2 ) = 0,
otherwise the result of diag(θ1 )ef (0) + diag(θ2 )eg(0) will be greater than 0, suggesting to an increase
of over-squashing of the model according to Lemma 2. On the other hand, when λ ̸= 0, as long as
diag(θ1 )ef (λ) + diag(θ2 )eg(λ) < λ, the model is capable of decreasing over-squashing.

C.5   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3 AND EXTENSIONS

The theorem regarding to the improvised LFD is repeated as follows:
Theorem 6 (Repeat of Theorem 3). Suppose θ1 and θ2 ≥ 0, then it is impossible for the model to be
                                                                                               ∗
LFD and decrease OSQ. In other words, there must exist at least one Λ∗ such that diag(θ1 )ef (Λ ) +
             ∗
diag(θ2 )eg(Λ ) is (1) monotonically increasing (HFD) or (2) with constant quantity (thus not LFD)
or (3) monotonically decreasing with image greater than Λ thus OSQ is increased.

Proof. The claims of the theorem can be easily verified according to the definitions of L/HFD. Again,
without lost of generality, we additionally require diag(θ1 )ef (λ) +diag(θ2 )eg(λ) is still monotonic via
graph structure domain. As the result of diag(θ1 )ef (λ) + diag(θ2 )eg(λ) ≥ 0 to induce a decrease of
OSQ, it is sufficiently to require diag(θ1 )ef (Λ) + diag(θ2 )eg(Λ) = 0 for first k zero eigenvalues and
diag(θ1 )ef (Λ) + diag(θ2 )eg(Λ) < λ for the rest of λ. As we additionally require the model is LFD,
meaning that the function diag(θ1 )ef (Λ) + diag(θ2 )eg(Λ) is monotonically decrease. Accordingly,
there must exist at least one subset of the eigenvalue in which diag(θ1 )ef (Λ) + diag(θ2 )eg(Λ) is
increasing, since otherwise the filtering results will be less than 0. Additionally, it is not difficult
to verify that the increase part of diag(θ1 )ef (Λ) + diag(θ2 )eg(Λ) is conflict with either LFD or
decreasing OSQ by checking the cases listed in the Theorem, we omit it here.

We additionally show the equivalence between the situation described in Theorem 3 and GRAND++
(Thorpe et al., 2021).
Corollary 1. Suppose θ1 and θ2 ≥ 0, if diag(θ1 )i,i = diag(θ2 )i,i > 0 i ∈ [1, k], where k is the
number of connected components of G. Further let (Udiag(θ1 )ef (λi ) + diag(θ2 )eg(λi ) U⊤ )i,j =


                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


b∗ ≤ L
L      b i,j , i ∈ [k + 1, N ]. Then G-MHKG is equivalent to a special GRAND++ model with special
 i,j
design of source term.

Proof. Without loss of generality, we further let diag(θ1 )i,i = diag(θ2 )i,i = c, c > 0 i ∈ [1, k], then
we have:
                                                      c1 ef (0)                    c1 eg(0)
                                                                                                
                                                 
                                                      c2 ef (0)       
                                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                                   c2 eg(0)       
                                                                                                   
                                                          ..                         ..         
                                                           .                          .         
Udiag(θ1 )ef (λi ) +diag(θ2 )eg(λi ) U⊤= Udiag
                                                                                                 g(λ ) ⊤
                                                             f (0)      +diag             g(0)     e i U ,
                                                      ck e            
                                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                                   ck e           
                                                  (θ1 )k+1 ef (λk+1 )        (θ2 )k+1 eg(λk+1 ) 
                                                                                                
                                                           ..                         ..        
                                                            .                          .        
                                                      (θ1 )N ef (λN )             (θ2 )N eg(λN )
                                                                                                        (18)

where we have c1 = c2 · · · = ck = c. Let Udiag(θ1 )ef (λi ) + diag(θ2 )eg(λi ) U⊤ XW = L           b ∗ XW,
then Eq. (18) can be further expressed as:
                                                                                                
                                          0                             c1 (ef (0) + eg(0) )
                                                            
                                         0                          c2 (ef (0) + eg(0) )
                                          .
                                                                                                
                    
                                         ..
                                                             
                                                                                  ..           
                                                                                  .           
  b ∗ XW = Udiag                                                                          g(0)  U⊤ XW.
                                                                                                
  L                                      0                   + diag 
                                                             
                                                                       c k (e f (0)
                                                                                       + e     )
                                f (λ    )             g(λ   )
                    (θ )                                                                       
                     1 k+1 e k+1 + (θ2 )k+1 e k+1                               0             
                                           .
                                                                                                
                    
                                           ..
                                                                                   ..          
                                                                                      .
                                                                                              
                         (θ1 )N ef (λN ) + (θ2 )k+1 eg(λN )                        0
                                                                                                         (19)

Now we see Eq. (19) can be treated as a special diffusion process on L b ∗ that the results from filtering
function and matrices yield first k eigenvalues as 0 and the rest as θ1 ef (λ) + θ2 eg(λ) . Since we have
assumed c1 = c2 · · · = ck and both filtering functions are not periodical, we have
                                                               
                                           c1 (ef (0) + eg(0) )
                                         c2 (ef (0) + eg(0) )
                                                               
                                                    ..         
                                         
                                                     .         
                                                                 ⊤
                                  Udiag ck (ef (0) + eg(0) )
                                         
                                                                 U X,                                (20)
                                         
                                                    0          
                                                                
                                                     ..        
                                                      .        
                                                     0
as a fixed design of source term, and this completes the proof.

Remark 6. The conditions on k for inducing delayed LFD indicate a new perspective on enhancing
GNNs for fitting the non-connected graphs. Based on the property of delayed LFD, one can first
adjust the quantity of θ1 and θ2 such that Lb∗ ≥ L b i,j , i ∈ [1, k] suggesting to assign different amount
                                             i,j
of variations to different connected components. Then a LFD with decrease OSQ appears with
b∗ ≤ L
L       b i,j , i ∈ [k + 1, N ] indicating GNN is smoothing the node features within each connected
  i,j
components with a decreased over-squashing. We leave more detailed exploration in the future
research.

D    E XPERIMENT D ETAILS

In this section, we included detailed information on our empirical studies. Followed by the sequence
of experiments included in the main page. We order this section as follows:


                                                    18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



             Table 2: Statistics of the datasets, H(G) represent the level of homophily.

                        Datasets Class Feature Node  Edge H(G)
                          Cora     7    1433    2708  5278 0.825
                         Citeseer  6    3703    3327  4552 0.717
                        PubMed     3     500   19717 44324 0.792
                          Arxiv   23     128 169343 1166243 0.681
                        Wisconsin 5      251     499  1703 0.150
                          Texas    5    1703     183   279  0.097
                         Cornell   5    1703     183   277  0.386


       • We included the the details on the baseline models, summary statistics, and parameter
         searching space in Section D.1.
       • In addition to the Section 8.2, we include the setup of inducing four types of dynamics in
         Section D.2.
       • The computational complexity of our model is discussion in Section D.3.

D.1   E XPERIMENT DETAILS

Summary of baseline models        We include the introduction of the baseline models and the reason
of selecting them here.

       • MLP: Standard feed forward multiple layer perceptron, serving as the stat-of-the-art of most
         of heterophily graphs.
       • GCN (Kipf & Welling, 2016): GCN is the first of its kind to implement linear approximation
         to spectral graph convolutions.
       • GAT (Veličković et al., 2018): GAT generates attention coefficient matrix that element-
         wisely multiplied on the graph adjacency matrix according to the node feature based attention
         mechanism via each layer to propagate node features via the relative importance between
         them.
       • GIN (Xu et al., 2019) Graph isomorphism networks first explores the equivalence between
         the message passing paradigm in GNNs and the so-called Weisfeiler and Lehman isomor-
         phism test (WL). GIN shows the upper bound of the expressive power of message passing
         GNNs is as same as WL test.
       • HKGCN (Zhao et al., 2020) is the first paper to deploy the graph heat kernel to enhance
         GNN performance via homophily graphs.
       • GRAND (Chamberlain et al., 2021a) linked the graph heat equation and related PDEs to the
         GNNs’ propagation.
       • SJLR (Giraldo et al., 2022) is the first paper considers both over-smoothing and over-
         squashing issues, providing so-called curvature rewiring approach to mitigate both issues.
       • UFG: Graph Framelet (Zheng et al., 2022) a class of GNNs built upon framelet transforms
         utilizes framelet decomposition to effectively merge graph features into low-pass and high-
         pass spectra.

Summary of included benchmarks and parameter searching space We first include the summary
statistics of the included benchmarks in Table. 2. In regarding to the parameter searching space,
we tuned hyper-parameters using grid search method. The search space for learning rate was in
{0.1, 0.05, 0.01, 0.005}, number of hidden units in {16, 32, 64}, weight decay in {0.05, 0.01, 0.005},
dropout in {0.3, 0.5, 0.7}. In terms of the initial warm-up coefficient, we set γ = 1.1 for all included
datasets, and it is worth noting that γ is always applied to the domain that required to be dominated.
For example, for homophily graph, we apply γ = 1.1 to ef (Λ) whereas for heterophily graph γ is
multiplied with eg(Λ) .


                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.2     S ETUP FOR FOUR TYPES OF DYNAMICS

In this section, we show how four different model dynamics can be induced by simply change the
quantity of θ1 and θ2 in G-MHKG. We note that this can also be served as the experimental setup for
Section 8.2. In terms of inducing LFD, we set ζ = θ1 /θ2 = 2, for HFD+ increasing OSQ dynamic,
we set ζ = 0.2. Furthermore, we remain the same setting ζ = 0.2 for D-HFD + increase OSQ
while merely set up first k components of the filtered eigenvalues as 0. Finally, we let θ1 = 0.1 and
θ2 = 0.3 (thus ζ = 3) to induce D-HFD + decrease OSQ also with the filtering results less than all λ.
It is worth noting that we set all θ as constant vectors.

D.3     C OMPUTATIONAL C OMPLEXITY

Although the propagation of both G-MHKG and MHKG requires eigendecomposition of the graph
Laplacian, empirically one may refer to the following two approaches to boost the speed of the
model. First, the eigendecomposition results of the graph can be stored and read once it is done
by one time, therefore in fact there is only one step of eigendecomposition in both MHKG and G-
MHKG. Second, even though the filtering process is conducted on the spectral domain (i.e. Eq. (3)),
empirically, one can utilize polynomial approximation to approximate the UΛ1 U⊤ and UΛ2 U⊤ ,
where Λ1 = diag({e−f (λi ) }N  i=1 ) and Λ2 = diag({e
                                                        f (λi ) N
                                                               }i=1 ), respectively and then assign the
filtering matrices outside the decomposition. Thereby, the computational complexity of both of our
model is equivalent to the standard linear GCN (Kipf & Welling, 2016) and graph diffusion models
(Chamberlain et al., 2021a).

D.4     A DDITIONAL A BLATION S TUDY

D.4.1    A BLATION ON γ
In this section, we first conduct additional ablation study on the warm-up coefficient γ. Recall that
for MHKG, we set f (L)   b = U(eΛ )U⊤ followed by Eq. (3). For G-MHKG, we assign one initial
warm-up coefficient γ > 1 that is multiplied with f (L)b if the graph is homophily otherwise on g(L)   b
if a graph is heterophily. In this ablation study, we fixed all other parameters and only change the
value of γ and to evaluate G-MHKG’s performance changes. The values of γ included in this test are
0.1, 0.5, 1, 1.1 and 2, 3, 4, 5, where γ = 1.1 was the initial value that we applied to all experiments.
Taking homophily graph test as an example, multiplying f (L)   b with γ > 1 suggests the model focus
more on the low-pass filtering results, and this setting is similar to the functionality of ζ in terms of
determining the dominated dynamic in G-MHKG. The learning accuracy are included in Table 3.
Table 3: Ablation on the value of γ, the first two performances are in bold. γ is multiplied onto f (L)b
if graph is homophily and onto g(L) if graph is heterophily.
                                     b

        γ values            Cora         Citeseer        Pubmed     Cornell       Texas          Wisconsin
        γ = 0.1           75.0±1.1      60.4±1.3         62.8±0.9   83.5±0.7      79.9±0.1       81.8±0.3
        γ = 0.5           81.3±0.4      68.9±2.1         74.9±1.2   86.4±0.8      81.2±0.4       83.9±0.3
         γ=1              83.0±0.7      72.4±0.5         79.4±1.1   89.2±0.4      88.4±1.5       87.1±0.4
   γ = 1.1(G-MHKG)        83.5±0.2      72.8±0.2         80.1±0.4   90.2±0.9      89.6±0.6       91.2±1.5
         γ=2              83.2±0.4      72.5±0.4         80.0±0.8   90.5±1.4      90.3±0.8       87.9±0.1
         γ=3              83.1±0.8      72.9±0.4         79.4±0.3   91.0±0.4      88.7±0.7       91.5±1.5
         γ=4              83.7±0.7      69.9±0.8         79.5±0.9   88.4±1.3      85.2±0.8       88.7±0.4
         γ=5              80.3±0.2      71.3±0.2         78.3±0.6   80.5±0.9      82.3±0.9       82.9±2.0


Results Based on the results in Table 3, one can find that when γ < 1, meaning that model is not
concentrate on the frequency domain that shall dominant the dynamic, the learning accuracy for
both homo and heterophily graphs are relatively low. With the increase of γ, the performance of the
model gradually increase, suggesting an increasing power in adapting the different types of graphs.
Furthermore, we also observe that there is an certain accuracy drop when model is aligned with
relatively large γ (i.e., γ = 5). One possible interpretation of this observation is when the desirable
dynamic is significantly over its counterparts, the model can be simply regarded as a single scale
GNN that only shrink/sharpen the node features. In generally, this may not be desirable for both
types of graphs unless they are purely homo/heterophily. Finally, it is worth noting that this ablation


                                                    20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


study is with the same propose on testing model’s sensitivity on the specific time step t in (Zhao et al.,
2020).

D.4.2    A BLATION ON THE FORM OF FILTERING FUNCTIONS
In the formulation of MHKG and experimental setup, we mentioned that in general in MHKG, f can
take the form of any monotonic positive function on Λ rather than with the base of e. In this section,
we conduct the ablation study on the form of f . First we set f (L)
                                                                 b =Lb = UΛU⊤ by dropping the
exponential base that initially defined in MHKG. Accordingly, the form of MHKG becomes:
           H(ℓ) = Udiag(θ1 )Λ1 U⊤ H(ℓ−1) W(ℓ−1) + Udiag(θ2 )Λ2 U⊤ H(ℓ−1) W(ℓ−1) ,                      (21)
where Λ1 = −f (Λ) = −Λ and Λ2 = f (Λ) = Λ. We name the model defined in Eq. (21) as
MHKG-I standing for the initial version of MHKG.
Furthermore, one can let f (·) = sin(·) and g(·) = cos(·) and the corresponding model becomes:
 H(ℓ) = Udiag(θ1 )sin(Λ/8)U⊤ H(ℓ−1) W(ℓ−1) + Udiag(θ2 )cos(Λ/8)U⊤ H(ℓ−1) W(ℓ−1) , (22)
where the inclusion of the eigenvalue scaling Λ/8 is to ensure the filtering functions are monotonic in
their domains, and such setting is align with the popular graph framelet model (Zheng et al., 2021). In
fact, without considering the filtering matrices diag(θ1 ) and diag(θ2 ), it is not difficult to verify that
f (·)2 + g(·)2 = 1, suggesting a perfect decomposition and reconstruction process on the graph node
features, that is Usin2 (Λ/8) + cos2 (Λ/8)U⊤ H = H. It is worth noting that under this settings
of f and g, such decomposition and reconstruction process is same as the tightness principle of
graph framelet. Therefore, one can interpret the model defined in Eq. (22) is a special type of graph
framelet without tightness. Accordingly, we name the model as G-MHKG-F, standing for generalized
multi-scale heat kernel GCN align with graph framelet. We now conduct ablation studies on the form
of filtering functions via MHKG-I and G-MHKG-F.
                Table 4: Ablation on the form of filtering functions. Top two in bold.

     Methods           Cora         Citeseer      Pubmed        Cornell         Texas         Wisconsin
      MLP            55.1          59.1           71.4          91.3±0.7        92.3±0.7      91.8±3.1
      GCN            81.5±0.5      70.9±0.5       79.0±0.3      66.5±13.8       75.7±1.0      66.7±1.4
       GAT           83.0±0.7      72.0±0.7       78.5±0.3      76.0±1.0        78.8±0.9      71.0±4.6
       GIN           78.6±1.2      71.4±1.1       76.9±0.6      78.0±1.9        74.6±0.8      72.9±2.5
     HKGCN           81.9±0.9      72.4±0.4       79.9±0.3      74.2±2.1        82.4±0.7      85.5±2.7
     GRAND           82.9±1.4      70.8±1.1       79.2±1.5      72.2±3.1        80.2±1.5      86.4±2.7
       UFG           83.3±0.5      71.0±0.6       79.4±0.4      83.2±0.3        82.3±0.9      91.9±2.1
      SJLR           81.3±0.5      70.6±0.4       78.0±0.3      71.9±1.9        80.1±0.9      66.9±2.1
     MHKG-I          80.1±1.2      70.1±0.6       71.3±0.5      81.4±0.3        77.6±0.5      69.2±1.9
    G-MHKG-F         83.1±0.2      72.0±0.8       78.5±0.4      88.2±1.3        86.1±0.4      84.7±0.8


Results Based on the results included in Table 4, the performances of MHKG-I are in general,
worse than many baseline models. The reason for this is because with the negative filtering result
(i.e., −Λii < 0) from the high-pass domain, the matrix Udiag(θ1 )Λ1 + diag(θ2 )Λ2 U⊤ may no
longer be a SPD matrix without controlling the quantity of θ. This directly suggests the importance
of incorporating the base (i.e., e) for the setting of MHKG. Furthermore, one can observe that G-
MHKG-F shows nearly identical results compared to graph framelet (UFG) via homophily graph and
comparable or even superior performances via heterophily graphs. The first observation might require
a further exploration on whether so-called tightness principle is significant needed via practical graph
learning tasks. The second observation suggests graph framelet and G-MHKG-F can naturally adapt
to heterophily graph. We note that one can verify that both framelet and G-MHKG-F can induce both
L/HFD dynamic by simply applying the proof of Theorem 1 and similar works have been done in
(Han et al., 2022).


                                                    21
