Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


U NCOVERING C AUSAL VARIABLES IN T RANSFORM -
ERS USING C IRCUIT P ROBING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         Neural network models have achieved high performance on a wide variety of com-
         plex tasks, but the algorithms that they implement are notoriously difficult to in-
         terpret. In order to understand these algorithms, it is often necessary to hypothe-
         size intermediate variables involved in the network’s computation. For example,
         does a language model depend on particular syntactic properties when generating
         a sentence? However, existing analysis tools make it difficult to test hypotheses
         of this type. We propose a new analysis technique – circuit probing – that au-
         tomatically uncovers low-level circuits that compute hypothesized intermediate
         variables. This enables causal analysis through targeted ablation at the level of
         model parameters. We apply this method to models trained on simple arithmetic
         tasks, demonstrating its effectiveness at (1) deciphering the algorithms that mod-
         els have learned, (2) revealing modular structure within a model, and (3) tracking
         the development of circuits over training. We compare circuit probing to other
         methods across these three experiments, and find it on par or more effective than
         existing analysis methods. Finally, we demonstrate circuit probing on a real-world
         use case, uncovering circuits that are responsible for subject-verb agreement and
         reflexive anaphora in GPT2 small and medium.



1   I NTRODUCTION

Transformer models are the workhorse of modern machine learning, driving breakthroughs in sub-
fields as disparate as NLP (Devlin et al., 2018; Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020), computer
vision (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020), and reinforcement learning (Chen et al., 2021). Despite their suc-
cess, little is known about the algorithms that they learn to implement. This central problem has
inspired a flurry of analysis and interpretability research trying to “open the black box” (Rogers
et al., 2021; Elhage et al., 2021; Belinkov, 2022). Despite considerable effort, these models remain
almost entirely opaque.
One challenge that is inherent to interpreting a model that succeeds at a complex task is that re-
searchers often do not have a complete picture of the algorithm that they are attempting to uncover.
However, they may be able to propose high-level causal variables that are constituents of such an
algorithm. For example, one may intuit that computing the syntactic number of the subject noun
of a sentence might be useful for language modeling (Chomsky, 1965; Linzen et al., 2016). This
variable must be causally implicated in an algorithm that solves the language modeling task, as it
constrains the rest of the sentence due to agreement rules (i.e. the syntactic number of the main
verb must match the syntactic number of the subject). However, it leaves open infinite possibilities
in which other variables influence the prediction of the next token. Though we focus on language
modeling, this discussion applies more generally to any complex domain where neural networks are
applied, from vision Dosovitskiy et al. (2020) to astronomy (Ćiprijanović et al., 2020) to protein
folding (Jumper et al., 2021).
We propose circuit probing to enable the investigation of intermediate causal variables in Transform-
ers (Vaswani et al., 2017). Circuit probing introduces a trainable binary mask over model weights,
which is optimized to uncover a circuit that computes a high-level intermediate variable (if one ex-
ists). This technique enables researchers to (1) test whether high-level intermediate variables are
represented by the model, (2) test whether they are causally implicated in model behavior (rather


                                                 1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     Input                           Updates from Model Component
                                        T0                         Tm                          TN

              "The movies"

    "An artist near the cars"

                  "Doctors"

              "The person"



Figure 1: Schematic visualization of circuit probing for an intermediate variable representing the
syntactic number of the subject of a sentence. Plural subjects are represented in red, singular subjects
in blue. At step T0 , prior to training a binary mask, the model component (Attention block or MLP)
produces residual stream updates (Elhage et al., 2021) that are not partitioned by syntactic number.
Circuit probing optimizes a binary mask over model weights, resulting in a circuit whose updates
are partitioned by syntactic number at step TN .


than simply decodable from model representations), and (3) reveal the particular subset of model
weights that compute it.
We first demonstrate this method on a series of simple arithmetic tasks, showing that it is faithful to
the underlying model (i.e. it only provides evidence in support of causal variables that are actually
represented by the model) and reveals circuits that are causally implicated in model behavior. We
then use circuit probing to analyze two syntactic phenomena on GPT2 small and medium (Radford
et al., 2019), uncovering particular model components responsible for subject-verb agreement and
reflexive anaphora agreement1 .

Limitations of Existing Causal Methods We compare circuit probing to two other techniques
that seek to test for the existence of intermediate variables in neural networks: probing and causal
abstraction analysis. Probing involves learning a classifier to decode information about a hypothe-
sized intermediate variable from model activations (Tenney et al., 2019; Hewitt & Manning, 2019;
Ettinger, 2020; Li et al., 2022; Nanda et al., 2023). Prior work has demonstrated that probing of-
tentimes mischaracterizes the underlying computations performed by the model (Hewitt & Liang,
2019; Zhang & Bowman, 2018; Voita & Titov, 2020)). Among other methods (Ravfogel et al., 2020;
2022; Belrose et al., 2023), counterfactual embeddings were introduced to fix this problem, enabling
causal analysis using probes (Tucker et al., 2021). We empirically demonstrate that circuit probing
is more faithful to a model’s computation than linear or nonlinear probing (See Sections 3.2, 3.3),
and that counterfactual embeddings do not always solve this problem (See Sections 3.1, 3.2).
Causal abstraction analysis intervenes on the activation vectors produced by Transformer layers to
localize intermediate variables to particular vector subspaces (Geiger et al., 2021; 2023; Wu et al.,
2023). However, causal abstraction analysis requires hypothesizing a complete causal graph – a
high-level description of how inputs are mapped to predictions, including all interactions between
intermediate variables. This is impossible for most real-world tasks on which we want to apply
neural networks (such as language modeling). We empirically demonstrate the utility of recent
causal abstraction analysis techniques when full causal graphs are available, and show that circuit
probing arrives at the same results (See Sections 3.1, 3.2).


2       C IRCUIT P ROBING

The key intuition behind circuit probing is that model components that compute an intermediate vari-
able should produce outputs that are partitioned according to that variable. For example, if a model
component is computing the syntactic number of the subject noun, then that component should pro-
duce outputs that fall into one of two equivalence classes, corresponding to singular subjects and
plural subjects.
   1
     We release our code at: https://anonymous.4open.science/r/Circuit Probing-0672. Circuit probing is im-
plemented using the NeuroSurgeon package (Lepori et al., 2023a).


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The first step in circuit probing is to formalize the equivalence classes that we expect our intermedi-
ate variable to induce within a model component. To do so, we first label a dataset according to the
intermediate variable that we are interested in. For example, singular-subject sentences are mapped
to one label, and plural-subject sentences are mapped to another. Then, for a dataset of size N , we
construct an N by N idealized similarity matrix, which maps pairs of inputs with the same label
to 1 and pairs of inputs with different labels to 0. If the outputs produced by a model component
share this pairwise similarity structure, then we can say that this model component computes (some-
thing isomorphic to) the intermediate variable that we are testing (Kriegeskorte et al., 2008). Circuit
probing is illustrated in Figure 1.
It is unlikely that a model component will be fully dedicated to one hypothesized intermediate vari-
able. Recent work has shown that neural networks often exhibit structure at the level of subnetworks
(Csordás et al., 2020; Lepori et al., 2023b; Hod et al., 2021). Thus, we freeze the model’s param-
eters and optimize a binary mask over neurons in the model (i.e., over columns in the matrices of
the linear transformations that comprise MLP and attention blocks). Formally, given a model com-
ponent C, with parameters ✓, we introduce a set of mask parameters m, where the values of m are
tied across weights in a neuron. Model weights are elementwise multiplied with mask parameters,
which results in the circuit C✓ m . During training, we freeze ✓ and only optimize the parameters
in m. We use continuous sparsification (Savarese et al., 2020), a model pruning technique that an-
neals a soft mask into a discrete mask over training, to learn m (See Appendix B). Our optimization
objective is soft nearest neighbors loss (See Appendix C), a contrastive loss that minimizes (cosine)
distance between inputs of the same class, and maximizes (cosine) distance between inputs of differ-
ent classes (Salakhutdinov & Hinton, 2007; Frosst et al., 2019). We also train with l0 regularization
to encourage sparse binary masks. If this process is successful, it results in a sparse circuit within a
model component that computes the hypothesized intermediate variable.
We note that Transformers consist of a series of attention and MLP blocks that produce additive
updates to the residual stream (Elhage et al., 2021). Circuit probing looks within these attention and
MLP blocks to find circuits that compute high-level variables. In practice, we will search over all
blocks iteratively.

3       E XPERIMENTS
We present four diverse experiments in order to illustrate the breadth of questions that circuit probing
can help address. Experiments 1, 2, and 3 investigate toy models trained on simple arithmetic tasks,
where full causal graphs are easy to construct. These experiments both (1) nuance or reproduce
results from prior work and (2) contrast circuit probing with existing analysis methods. Experiment 4
applies circuit probing to language models to demonstrate that the method generalizes to a more
realistic model and setting.
Experiment 1 uses circuit probing to distinguish between two algorithms that a Transformer might
implement to solve an arithmetic task, and demonstrates that circuit probing agrees with all existing
analysis methods in this simple setting. Experiment 2 investigates the internal structure of Trans-
former representations and demonstrates the superiority of circuit probing over nonlinear probing
and causal abstraction analysis for this purpose. Experiment 3 investigates the formation of circuits
throughout training, and finds that circuit probing is more faithful to those circuits than linear prob-
ing. Finally, Experiment 4 analyzes a prominent language model (GPT2) on a task with an unknown
causal graph (language modeling)2 .

Circuit Probing Evaluation Across these four experiments, we evaluate the success of circuit
probing in two ways: (1) We train a 1-nearest neighbor classifier on the output vectors produced
by the discovered circuit, and then test this classifier on held-out data. If circuit probing has suc-
ceeded at finding a circuit that computes a particular intermediate variable, then its output vectors
are partitioned by the possible labels of this variable, and we expect this classifier to achieve high
performance. We employ a rather conservative strategy here, randomly sampling only 1 output vec-
tor for each label to train the nearest neighbors classifier. (2) We ablate the discovered circuit (i.e.
invert the learned binary mask) and analyze how the model’s behavior changes. This allows us to
investigate whether the circuit is causal with respect to the underlying model.
    2
        See Appendix A for all data and hyperparameter details.


                                                        3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.1    E XPERIMENT 1: D ECIPHERING N EURAL N ETWORK A LGORITHMS

Goal One of the central goals of interpretability research is to characterize the algorithms that
models implement Olah (2022). This lofty goal is made substantially more tractable when we can
adjudicate between two hypothesized alternatives. We demonstrate that circuit probing, linear and
nonlinear probing, and causal abstraction analysis all produce converging results when characteriz-
ing the algorithm implemented by a model trained on a simple arithmetic task.
      Two ways to solve (a2 - b2) (mod P)

      a2           -b2      a+b           a-b


            +                      *                Method         a2       1 ⇤ b2    a+b     a    b
                                                    Circuit       99%       99%        1%      1%
                                                    Linear       100%      100%        0%      0%
           mod P                  mod P             Nonlinear    100%      100%        1%      1%

                                                  Table 1: Accuracy of all probing methods for each
Figure 2: Two hypothesized causal graphs          intermediate variable in Experiment 1. All methods
that represent solutions to the task in Experi-   converge to the conclusion that the model is repre-
ment 1.                                           senting a2 b2 , rather than (a + b) ⇤ (a b).

Task We train a 1-layer GPT2 model to solve a task defined by the function (a2 b2 )(mod P),
where P is set to 113, and a and b are input variables. The input sequences are of the form [a, b, P ],
and the model is tasked with predicting the answer based on the output embedding of the final
token. All inputs are symbolic - they are one hot vectors mapping to learnable embeddings. We
exhaustively generate all possible data points with a and b taking values 0 112. Note that this
input-output mapping permits at least two possible solutions, because a2 b2 = (a + b) ⇥ (a b).
This is visualized by the two causal graphs depicted in Figure 2.

Analysis Methods We use circuit probing to determine which of the two alternative solutions
the trained neural network adopts. Specifically, we search for the intermediate variables a2 , ( 1 ⇤
b2 ), (a + b), and (a b), all mod 113. We optimize binary masks using the output vectors from
the attention and MLP blocks when they are operating on the P token, which is where the final
prediction is made.
We compare circuit probing to linear and nonlinear probing. We train either a linear or nonlinear
classifier to map from embeddings of the P token to the value of the intermediate variable that we
are attempting to decode. We train counterfactual embeddings using the trained linear and nonlin-
ear probing classifiers for this task (Tucker et al., 2021) in order to assess whether the probes are
decoding information that is causally implicated in model behavior. We also compare to boundless
distributed alignment search (boundless DAS; Wu et al. (2023)), a state-of-the-art causal abstrac-
tion analysis technique that is effective when one can fully specify the expected causal graph (as is
the case here). Causal abstraction analysis measures whether model behavior changes as a result
of interventions on intermediate variables, rather than whether the variable can be decoded directly
from model representations. Thus, we can answer the same research question with causal abstrac-
tion analysis, but the results are not directly comparable to probing results (i.e., cannot be easily
displayed in the same table).

Results We expect all methods to achieve high performance on either a2 and 1 ⇤ b2 or a + b and
a b. This would adjudicate between the two alternative solutions to the arithmetic task. Indeed, we
see that circuit probing, linear probing, and nonlinear probing all converge to show that the model
computes a2 b2 , rather than (a + b) ⇥ (a b) (See Table 1). With circuit probing, we can ablate the
discovered circuits to ensure that they change model behavior, and thus are causally implicated in
the algorithm that the model is implementing. We confirm that the circuits are causal in Appendix E.
Additionally, all methods converge toward more negative results from the MLP block, indicating that
the intermediate variables are computed by the attention block (See Appendix D for MLP results).


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                     Task 1                           Task 2



                             a (mod P)       b (mod P')       a (mod P)       c (mod P'')


                                         +                                +


Figure 3: Causal graphs representing the Multitask dataset in Experiment 2. Note that Task 1 and
Task 2 share one intermediate variable (blue) and differ by one intermediate variable (red and green).

         Train Task     Variable     Task 1 Ablation Accuracy                 Task 2 Ablation Accuracy
            Task 1       Shared                      3.7%                                    3.7%
            Task 1        Free                       3.2%                                   28.1%
            Task 2       Shared                      3.6%                                    3.6%
            Task 2        Free                       48%                                     4.8%

Table 2: Experiment 2 circuit probing ablation results. Targeted ablations of the circuits returned
by circuit probing reveal a stark difference between the internal representations of the Free and
Shared variables. A targeted ablation of the shared variable circuit destroys performance on both
tasks, whereas a targeted ablation of Task 1’s free variable harms performance on Task 1 far more
(underlined) than Task 2 (bolded). The same is true in the opposite direction.


Causal abstraction analysis also supports these conclusions (See Appendix F). On the other hand,
we find that counterfactual embeddings fail to elicit counterfactual behavior in all cases, and thus
do not provide evidence in either direction (See Appendix G). Finally, we run a transfer learning
experiment, which behaviorally demonstrates that the model is representing the task as a2 b2 ,
rather than (a + b) ⇥ (a b) (See Appendix H). Overall, our results demonstrate that circuit probing
agrees with existing analysis techniques when characterizing the algorithm implemented by a small
model trained on a simple task.

3.2   E XPERIMENT 2: M ODULARITY OF I NTERMEDIATE VARIABLES

Goal We now apply circuit probing to analyze the internal organization of Transformer models,
which has been the subject of several recent studies (Lepori et al., 2023b; Csordás et al., 2020; Hod
et al., 2021; Mittal et al., 2022). We show that circuit probing can be used to characterize whether
computations are implemented in a modular and reusable manner within a Transformer, and that
nonlinear probing and counterfactual embeddings do not reveal such structure.

Task We train a model on a simple multitask modular arithmetic task, represented by the causal
graph in Figure 3. We set P = 29, P 0 = 31, P 00 = 23. The input sequences are of the form
[T, a, b, c, N ], and the model is tasked with predicting the solution. N is a separator token, and T is
a task token. For Task 1, we exhaustively generate all possible data points with a and b taking values
0 112, and c being a random token in the same range. Similarly for Task 2. Note that both tasks
share one intermediate variable (a “shared variable”), and each task has one intermediate variable
that the other does not (a “free variable”).

Analysis Methods First, we probe for intermediate variables. We use circuit probing to probe
each task individually, assessing which intermediate variables are computed when solving Task 1,
and which are computed when solving Task 2. Specifically, we search for the intermediate variables
a(mod P), b(mod P’), and c(mod P”). We optimize binary masks using the output vectors from
the attention and MLP blocks when they are operating on the N token, which is where the final
prediction is made. We compare circuit probing to linear and nonlinear probing. We train either a


                                                          5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: All probing results for Experiment 2. We find that circuit probing and linear probing
generally converge to find evidence of the Free and Shared variable for both tasks, and no evidence
of the irrelevant variable (“other”). On the other hand, nonlinear probing suggests that the irrelevant
variable is represented.


linear or nonlinear classifier to map from embeddings of the N token to the value of the intermediate
variable that we are attempting to decode. We also run causal abstraction analysis using boundless
DAS.
Next, we investigate modularity directly. We hypothesize that the model implements a reusable
computation for the shared variable a(mod P) – that the same computation is used in both Task 1
and Task 2. Similarly, we hypothesize that the free variables are implemented modularly, – that
Task 1’s free variable computation can be ablated without completely destroying performance on
Task 2, and vice-versa. We use targeted ablations of the circuits returned by subnetwork probing
to provide evidence in support of this hypothesis. We compare against a similar analysis using
counterfactual embeddings. Note that one cannot address this question using causal abstraction
analysis – causal abstractions measures specific changes in model behavior, rather than investigating
model representations directly.

Results We first present our probing results. We expect models to compute their free and shared
variables (a(mod P) and b(mod P’) for Task 1, and a(mod P) and c(mod P”) for Task 2), and not
to compute the other variable. Our results for the attention block are shown in Figure 4. All three
methods decode free and shared variables with high accuracy, indicating that the relevant variables
for a given task are computed in the attention block. However, nonlinear probing (and only non-
linear probing) decodes the other variable with high accuracy. Causal Abstraction analysis agrees
with circuit probing and linear probing (see Appendix F). This accords with prior work questioning
whether expressive probes accurately reflect the causal structure of neural networks (Voita & Titov,
2020; Zhang & Bowman, 2018).
Next, we present modularity results. We expect that ablating the circuit computing the shared vari-
able for either task should destroy performance across both tasks. On the other hand, we expect that
ablating the circuit computing the free variable for Task 1 should destroy performance on Task 1
while having less of an effect on Task 2 performance (and vice-versa). In Appendix I, we analyze
the morphology of the two free variable circuits returned by circuit probing and find that the circuits
are only distinct in one tensor within the attention block. Thus, we only ablate the circuits within
that tensor. From Table 2, we see that ablating the circuit that computes the shared variable for either
Task 1 or Task 2 destroys performance on both tasks. On the other hand, ablating the free variable in
Task 1 destroys performance on Task 1, while maintaining some performance on Task 2. Similarly
for the free variable in Task 2.
We investigate the internal structure of this model using counterfactual embeddings in Appendix J,
and find that counterfactual embeddings fail to provide evidence of modularity. We conclude that
counterfactual embeddings act more as adversarial examples for our trained nonlinear probe, rather


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: (Left) Experiment 3 training curve on train and test sets. We see generalization long
after overfitting. (Right) Linear and circuit probing for a2 throughout training. Linear probing
converges to perfect accuracy very early in training, while circuit probing reveals that the circuit for
a2 is formed gradually through training, but achieves high performance before the overall model
generalizes perfectly.


than as meaningful counterfactual inputs to the model. Overall, our results demonstrate that circuit
probing is superior to competing techniques at characterizing how models structure their computa-
tions.

3.3   E XPERIMENT 3: C IRCUIT P ROBING AS A P ROGRESS M EASURE

Goal Circuit probing allows us to gain insight into the training dynamics of Transformers at the
level of intermediate variables. Recent work has shown that models may abruptly learn to generalize
long after they overfit to the training data (Power et al., 2022). Despite this rather discontinuous
switch from overfitting to generalization (often called grokking), Nanda et al. (2022) revealed that
the circuit that computes the generalizable algorithm is formed continuously throughout training.
While their work required reverse-engineering the entire algorithm to gain this insight into circuit
formation, we reproduce their finding in a slightly different setting using circuit probing (which
only requires us to hypothesize a high-level intermediate variable). In this setting, we demonstrate
that circuit probing is more faithful to the circuits implemented by the underlying model than linear
probing.

Task We train a model on the task (a2 + b)(mod P), with P = 113. The input sequences are of
the form [a, b, P ], and the model is tasked with predicting the solution. Our model exhibits grokking
on this task - it generalizes long after it overfits. Generalization performance increases rather slowly
from epoch 0 until 10000, then rapidly climbs to near-perfect accuracy by epoch 17500. See Figure 5
(Left).

Analysis Methods First, we probe for the development of the intermediate variable a2 throughout
training using circuit probing and linear probing. Next, we perform a selectivity analysis on the
trained model – we probe for a variable that is not causally implicated in model behavior (b2 ), and
verify that circuit probing does not decode this intermediate variable.

Results First, we investigate the development of the circuit computing a2 . We expect the perfor-
mance of circuit probing to increase steadily throughout training, converging to a high value before
the overall model generalizes. This finding would align with Nanda et al. (2022)’s finding that
“circuit formation” occurs continuously, and that it completes before the overall model generalizes.
We provide results from circuit probing on the attention block (See Appendix K for MLP results).
From Figure 5 (Right), we see that circuit probing accuracy increases throughout training, achieving
>90% accuracy before epoch 10000. Thus, we can conclude that the circuit that allows the model
to generalize is formed before overall model’s generalization behavior would imply. However, this
circuit is not available from the outset and is developed throughout training. Linear probing tells a


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


markedly different story, implying that the variable required to generalize was present nearly from
the beginning of training. Next, we present results from our selectivity analysis. We expect our
probing methods to achieve poor accuracy when probing for b2 , a variable that is not causally im-
plicated in model behavior. Circuit probing achieves 54.9% accuracy3 at decoding b2 from the fully
trained model, whereas linear probing achieves 100% accuracy. See Appendix L for results through-
out training. Overall these results demonstrate that circuit probing is more faithful to the underlying
circuitry than linear probing.

3.4   E XPERIMENT 4: C IRCUIT P ROBING FOR L ANGUAGE M ODELS

Goal The previous experiments focused on toy tasks in which a full causal graph could be speci-
fied. However, the reason that we are interested in developing interpretability tools is to analyze
models that are used in practice, on tasks where a causal graph cannot be constructed. Here,
we use circuit probing to investigate how pretrained GPT2-small and GPT2-medium perform lan-
guage modeling. In particular, we investigate two linguistic phenomena that rely on syntactic num-
ber: subject-verb agreement and reflexive anaphora. Subject-verb agreement refers to the English-
language phenomenon where the subject of a sentence must agree with the main verb of a sentence
in syntactic number. For example: The keys are on the table is grammatical, whereas The keys
is on the table is ungrammatical. We hypothesize that an intermediate variable representing the
syntactic number of the subject noun is computed when predicting the main verb of a sentence.
Reflexive Anaphora ensures that reflexive pronouns agree with their referents. For example: the
consultants injured themselves is grammatical, and the consultants injured herself is ungrammati-
cal. We hypothesize that an intermediate variable representing the syntactic number of the referent
is computed when predicting a reflexive pronoun.

Task For both phenomena, we use the templates from Marvin & Linzen (2018) to generate sen-
tence prefixes, where the continuation of the prefixes are likely to be either a main verb (when
studying subject-verb agreement) or a reflexive pronoun (when studying reflexive anaphora). See
Appendix M for example prefixes.

Analysis Methods For each phenomenon, we run circuit probing on the last word of sentence
prefixes to uncover the circuit that computes the syntactic number of the subject noun or referent.
We then ablate the discovered circuit, and evaluate the model’s ability to grammatically continue
held-out sentence prefixes. Specifically, we assess whether the model is more likely predict tokens
that are consistent or inconsistent with the syntactic number of the subject/referent. For subject-verb
agreement, we inspect the logits for the tokens is and are – if the logit for is is higher than the logit for
are when the subject is singular (e.g. The officer...), then we consider the model to have succeeded
on that sentence prefix. For reflexive anaphora, we run the analysis twice, once comparing the logits
of herself and themselves, and again comparing the logits of himself and themselves.
Even if we recover positive results from this analysis, it could be the case that we are simply remov-
ing too many parameters from the model – rather than ablating a specialized circuit, we could be
destroying the entire model. As a control, we sample 5 random subnetworks from the complement
set of neurons that are in our circuit and rerun this analysis. We ensure that the random subnetworks
contain the same number of parameters as our circuit in each tensor.

Results For both phenomena, we expect that ablating the discovered circuit will render the model
worse at distinguishing the syntactic number of the subject/referent. We expect that ablating random
subnetworks should not harm model performance on either dataset. We run circuit probing over
all model components for both GPT2-small and medium. We present results from GPT2-small in
the main body, and present GPT2-medium results in Appendix P4 . For both datasets, we find that
syntactic number is computed in Layer 6’s attention block5 . Ablating the circuit returned by circuit
    3
      Random chance for circuit probing is 50%, as only two distinct integers in our dataset map to the same
value of b2 (mod 113), and we are using a 1-nearest neighbor classifier.
    4
      In brief, our results on GPT2-medium are largely reproduce what we find in GPT2-small, though our
ablation result for subject-verb agreement is weaker.
    5
      For reflexive anaphora, we note that the underlying model achieves higher accuracy when predicting the
masculine pronoun. This is clear evidence of gender bias in language models, which has been well-documented
elsewhere (Marvin & Linzen, 2018; May et al., 2019; Rudinger et al., 2018; Weidinger et al., 2021).


                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 6: GPT2-Small ablation results on Layer 6’s attention block. Across both Subject-Verb
Agreement (Left) and Reflexive Anaphora evaluated using the masculine (Middle) and feminine
(Right) pronoun, we see that ablating the discovered circuit renders the model worse at distinguish-
ing the syntactic number of the subject/referent. Ablating randomly sampled subnetworks has little
impact on the model’s ability to distinguish singular and plural subjects/referents.


probing drops performance substantially for both phenomena, while ablating random subnetworks
does not impact model performance (See Figure 6). Other blocks do not return this characteristic
pattern as strongly (See Appendix O). This accords with prior work suggesting that syntactic de-
pendencies are represented in middle layers of Transformers (Tenney et al., 2019; Vig & Belinkov,
2019). See Appendix N for an investigation of KNN performance, Appendix Q for an analysis of
circuit overlap, and Appendix R for qualitative results.

4   D ISCUSSION

Related Work Circuit probing is related to recent efforts in mechanistic interpretability – a bur-
geoning field that attempts to reverse-engineer neural network algorithms. Through substantial man-
ual effort, researchers have uncovered the algorithms that both toy models (Olsson et al., 2022;
Nanda et al., 2022; Chughtai et al., 2023) and more realistic models (Wang et al., 2022; Hanna et al.,
2023; Merullo et al., 2023) are implementing. More broadly, there has been substantial work an-
alyzing the syntactic (Linzen & Baroni, 2021; Goldberg, 2019; Tenney et al., 2018; McCoy et al.,
2018) and semantic capabilities Pavlick (2022; 2023); Yu & Ettinger (2020); Hupkes et al. (2020);
Dziri et al. (2023) of language models. Circuit probing is most directly related to work that attempts
to decompose neural networks into functional subnetworks Csordás et al. (2020); Hamblin et al.
(2022); Lepori et al. (2023b); Zhang et al. (2021); Panigrahi et al. (2023); Hod et al. (2021); Cao
et al. (2021). The success of circuit probing across the diverse set of experiments presented here is
further evidence that subnetworks are a useful lens through which to analyze models.

Limitations Circuit probing is weaker than both counterfactual embeddings and causal abstrac-
tion analysis in one key respect: it does not allow for counterfactual interventions. It is currently
unknown how multiple circuits compose within a given block to create one additive update to the
residual stream, so one cannot replace individual variables to elicit counterfactual behavior. Future
work might seek to understand how circuits compose with one another.

Conclusion Through four experiments, we have demonstrated the effectiveness of circuit prob-
ing for investigating the internal representations of models. With circuit probing, one can gain
insights into the underlying algorithms the model is implementing, how these algorithms are struc-
tured within the model, and how they develop throughout training. Circuit probing is more faithful
to the underlying model than linear or nonlinear probing, and does not require specifying a full
causal graph before testing hypotheses.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5   E THICS S TATEMENT
We believe that the present work is in compliance with the ICLR code of ethics. Circuit probing
can be used to uncover computations that a neural network is performing. This may have future
implications for bias, fairness, and safety of neural network models. However, we emphasize that
the current iteration of circuit probing should not be used in isolation to assess models for social
biases in real-world systems. Circuit probing can provide positive evidence that a computation
is implemented, but cannot yet be used to provide evidence that a computation is definitely not
implemented in a real-world system.

6   R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
To foster reproducibility, we provide details on model training and hyperparameters in Appendices A
and B. We provide details of our experimental design for all experiments throughout the main text,
as well as in our appendices. Additionally, we provide a high-level explanation of the circuit probing
algorithm in Section 2, and provide details on the loss function in Appendix C. Finally, we make our
code publicly available.

R EFERENCES
Yonatan Belinkov. Probing classifiers: Promises, shortcomings, and advances. Computational
  Linguistics, 48(1):207–219, 2022.
Nora Belrose, David Schneider-Joseph, Shauli Ravfogel, Ryan Cotterell, Edward Raff, and
  Stella Biderman. Leace: Perfect linear concept erasure in closed form. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.03819, 2023.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Steven Cao, Victor Sanh, and Alexander M Rush. Low-complexity probing via finding subnetworks.
  In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 960–966, 2021.
Lili Chen, Kevin Lu, Aravind Rajeswaran, Kimin Lee, Aditya Grover, Misha Laskin, Pieter Abbeel,
  Aravind Srinivas, and Igor Mordatch. Decision transformer: Reinforcement learning via sequence
  modeling. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:15084–15097, 2021.
Noam Chomsky. Aspects of the Theory of Syntax. Number 11. MIT press, 1965.
Bilal Chughtai, Lawrence Chan, and Neel Nanda. A toy model of universality: Reverse engineering
  how networks learn group operations. ArXiv, abs/2302.03025, 2023. URL https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:256615287.
Aleksandra Ćiprijanović, Gregory F Snyder, Brian Nord, and Joshua EG Peek. Deepmerge: Classi-
  fying high-redshift merging galaxies with deep neural networks. Astronomy and Computing, 32:
  100390, 2020.
Róbert Csordás, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Are neural nets modular? inspect-
  ing functional modularity through differentiable weight masks. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2020.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An
  image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Nouha Dziri, Ximing Lu, Melanie Sclar, Xiang Lorraine Li, Liwei Jian, Bill Yuchen Lin, Peter West,
  Chandra Bhagavatula, Ronan Le Bras, Jena D Hwang, et al. Faith and fate: Limits of transformers
  on compositionality. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18654, 2023.

Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann,
  Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, et al. A mathematical framework for
  transformer circuits. Transformer Circuits Thread, 1, 2021.

Allyson Ettinger. What bert is not: Lessons from a new suite of psycholinguistic diagnostics for
  language models. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 8:34–48, 2020.

Nicholas Frosst, Nicolas Papernot, and Geoffrey Hinton. Analyzing and improving representations
  with the soft nearest neighbor loss. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2012–
  2020. PMLR, 2019.

Atticus Geiger, Hanson Lu, Thomas Icard, and Christopher Potts. Causal abstractions of neural
  networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:9574–9586, 2021.

Atticus Geiger, Zhengxuan Wu, Christopher Potts, Thomas Icard, and Noah D Goodman. Finding
  alignments between interpretable causal variables and distributed neural representations. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2303.02536, 2023.

Yoav Goldberg. Assessing bert’s syntactic abilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.05287, 2019.

Chris Hamblin, Talia Konkle, and George Alvarez. Pruning for interpretable, feature-preserving
  circuits in cnns. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.01627, 2022.

Michael Hanna, Ollie Liu, and Alexandre Variengien. How does gpt-2 compute greater-than?: In-
 terpreting mathematical abilities in a pre-trained language model, 2023.

John Hewitt and Percy Liang. Designing and interpreting probes with control tasks. In Proceedings
  of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th Inter-
  national Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 2733–2743,
  2019.

John Hewitt and Christopher D Manning. A structural probe for finding syntax in word representa-
  tions. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Pa-
  pers), pp. 4129–4138, 2019.

Shlomi Hod, Daniel Filan, Stephen Casper, Andrew Critch, and Stuart Russell. Quantifying local
  specialization in deep neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.08058, 2021.

Dieuwke Hupkes, Verna Dankers, Mathijs Mul, and Elia Bruni. Compositionality decomposed:
  How do neural networks generalise? Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 67:757–795,
  2020.

John Jumper, Richard Evans, Alexander Pritzel, Tim Green, Michael Figurnov, Olaf Ronneberger,
  Kathryn Tunyasuvunakool, Russ Bates, Augustin Žı́dek, Anna Potapenko, et al. Highly accurate
  protein structure prediction with alphafold. Nature, 596(7873):583–589, 2021.

Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.

Nikolaus Kriegeskorte, Marieke Mur, and Peter A Bandettini. Representational similarity analysis-
  connecting the branches of systems neuroscience. Frontiers in systems neuroscience, pp. 4, 2008.

Michael A Lepori, Ellie Pavlick, and Thomas Serre. Neurosurgeon: A toolkit for subnetwork anal-
 ysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.00244, 2023a.

Michael A Lepori, Thomas Serre, and Ellie Pavlick. Break it down: evidence for structural compo-
 sitionality in neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.10884, 2023b.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Kenneth Li, Aspen K Hopkins, David Bau, Fernanda Viégas, Hanspeter Pfister, and Martin Watten-
  berg. Emergent world representations: Exploring a sequence model trained on a synthetic task.
  In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.

Tal Linzen and Marco Baroni. Syntactic structure from deep learning. Annual Review of Linguistics,
  7:195–212, 2021.

Tal Linzen, Emmanuel Dupoux, and Yoav Goldberg. Assessing the ability of lstms to learn syntax-
  sensitive dependencies. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 4:521–
  535, 2016.

Rebecca Marvin and Tal Linzen. Targeted syntactic evaluation of language models. In Proceedings
  of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 1192–1202,
  2018.

Chandler May, Alex Wang, Shikha Bordia, Samuel Bowman, and Rachel Rudinger. On measuring
  social biases in sentence encoders. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North Ameri-
  can Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
  Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 622–628, 2019.

R Thomas McCoy, Robert Frank, and Tal Linzen. Revisiting the poverty of the stimulus: hierarchical
  generalization without a hierarchical bias in recurrent neural networks. In 40th Annual Meeting
  of the Cognitive Science Society: Changing Minds, CogSci 2018, pp. 2096–2101. The Cognitive
  Science Society, 2018.

Jack Merullo, Carsten Eickhoff, and Ellie Pavlick. Language models implement simple word2vec-
  style vector arithmetic, 2023.

Sarthak Mittal, Yoshua Bengio, and Guillaume Lajoie. Is a modular architecture enough? Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:28747–28760, 2022.

Neel Nanda, Lawrence Chan, Tom Lieberum, Jess Smith, and Jacob Steinhardt. Progress mea-
  sures for grokking via mechanistic interpretability. In The Eleventh International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2022.

Neel Nanda, Andrew Lee, and Martin Wattenberg. Emergent linear representations in world models
  of self-supervised sequence models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.00941, 2023.

Christopher Olah. Mechanistic interpretability, variables, and the importance of interpretable bases.
  Transformer Circuits Thread, 2022.

Catherine Olsson, Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Nicholas Joseph, Nova DasSarma, T. J. Henighan,
  Benjamin Mann, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Dawn Drain, Deep Gan-
  guli, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Scott Johnston, Andy Jones, John Kernion, Liane
  Lovitt, Kamal Ndousse, Dario Amodei, Tom B. Brown, Jack Clark, Jared Kaplan, Sam McCan-
  dlish, and Christopher Olah. In-context learning and induction heads. ArXiv, abs/2209.11895,
  2022. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:252532078.

Abhishek Panigrahi, Nikunj Saunshi, Haoyu Zhao, and Sanjeev Arora. Task-specific skill localiza-
  tion in fine-tuned language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.06600, 2023.

Ellie Pavlick. Semantic structure in deep learning. Annual Review of Linguistics, 8:447–471, 2022.

Ellie Pavlick. Symbols and grounding in large language models. Philosophical Transactions of the
  Royal Society A, 381(2251):20220041, 2023.

Alethea Power, Yuri Burda, Harri Edwards, Igor Babuschkin, and Vedant Misra. Grokking: Gen-
  eralization beyond overfitting on small algorithmic datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.02177,
  2022.

Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Shauli Ravfogel, Yanai Elazar, Hila Gonen, Michael Twiton, and Yoav Goldberg. Null it out: Guard-
  ing protected attributes by iterative nullspace projection. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meet-
  ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 7237–7256, 2020.
Shauli Ravfogel, Michael Twiton, Yoav Goldberg, and Ryan D Cotterell. Linear adversarial concept
  erasure. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 18400–18421. PMLR, 2022.
Anna Rogers, Olga Kovaleva, and Anna Rumshisky. A primer in bertology: What we know about
  how bert works. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 8:842–866, 2021.
Rachel Rudinger, Jason Naradowsky, Brian Leonard, and Benjamin Van Durme. Gender bias in
  coreference resolution. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 2 (Short
  Papers), pp. 8–14, 2018.
Ruslan Salakhutdinov and Geoff Hinton. Learning a nonlinear embedding by preserving class neigh-
  bourhood structure. In Artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 412–419. PMLR, 2007.
Pedro Savarese, Hugo Silva, and Michael Maire. Winning the lottery with continuous sparsification.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:11380–11390, 2020.
Ian Tenney, Patrick Xia, Berlin Chen, Alex Wang, Adam Poliak, R Thomas McCoy, Najoung Kim,
  Benjamin Van Durme, Samuel R Bowman, Dipanjan Das, et al. What do you learn from context?
  probing for sentence structure in contextualized word representations. In International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2018.
Ian Tenney, Dipanjan Das, and Ellie Pavlick. Bert rediscovers the classical nlp pipeline. In Proceed-
  ings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4593–4601,
  2019.
Mycal Tucker, Peng Qian, and Roger Levy. What if this modified that? syntactic interventions with
 counterfactual embeddings. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2021.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
Jesse Vig and Yonatan Belinkov. Analyzing the structure of attention in a transformer language
  model. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACL Workshop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting
  Neural Networks for NLP, pp. 63–76, 2019.
E Voita and I Titov. Information-theoretic probing with minimum description length. In EMNLP
  2020-2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, Proceedings of
  the Conference, pp. 183–196, 2020.
Kevin Wang, Alexandre Variengien, Arthur Conmy, Buck Shlegeris, and Jacob Steinhardt. In-
  terpretability in the wild: a circuit for indirect object identification in gpt-2 small. ArXiv,
  abs/2211.00593, 2022.       URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
  253244237.
Laura Weidinger, John Mellor, Maribeth Rauh, Conor Griffin, Jonathan Uesato, Po-Sen Huang,
  Myra Cheng, Mia Glaese, Borja Balle, Atoosa Kasirzadeh, et al. Ethical and social risks of harm
  from language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.04359, 2021.
Zhengxuan Wu, Atticus Geiger, Christopher Potts, and Noah D Goodman. Interpretability at scale:
  Identifying causal mechanisms in alpaca. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.08809, 2023.
Lang Yu and Allyson Ettinger. Assessing phrasal representation and composition in transformers.
  In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
  (EMNLP), pp. 4896–4907, 2020.
Dinghuai Zhang, Kartik Ahuja, Yilun Xu, Yisen Wang, and Aaron Courville. Can subnetwork
  structure be the key to out-of-distribution generalization? In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 12356–12367. PMLR, 2021.


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Kelly Zhang and Samuel Bowman. Language modeling teaches you more than translation does:
  Lessons learned through auxiliary syntactic task analysis. In Proceedings of the 2018 EMNLP
  Workshop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP, pp. 359–361,
  2018.


                                             14
