Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C OOPERATIVE G RAPH N EURAL N ETWORKS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Graph neural networks are popular architectures for graph machine learning, based
         on iterative computation of node representations of an input graph through a series
         of invariant transformations. A large class of graph neural networks follow a
         standard message-passing paradigm: at every layer, each node state is updated
         based on an aggregate of messages from its neighborhood. In this work, we propose
         a novel framework for training graph neural networks, where every node is viewed
         as a player that can choose to either ‘listen’, ‘broadcast’, ‘listen and broadcast’,
         or to ‘isolate’. The standard message propagation scheme can then be viewed as
         a special case of this framework where every node ‘listens and broadcasts’ to all
         neighbors. Our approach offers a more flexible and dynamic message-passing
         paradigm, where each node can determine its own strategy based on their state,
         effectively exploring the graph topology while learning. We provide a theoretical
         analysis of the new message-passing scheme which is further supported by an
         extensive empirical analysis on a synthetic dataset and on real-world datasets.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Graph neural networks (GNNs) (Scarselli et al., 2009; Gori et al., 2005) are a class of deep learning
architectures for learning on graph-structured data. Their success in various graph machine learning
tasks (Shlomi et al., 2021; Duvenaud et al., 2015; Zitnik et al., 2018) has led to a surge of different
architectures (Kipf & Welling, 2017; Xu et al., 2019; Veličković et al., 2018; Hamilton et al., 2017;
Li et al., 2016). GNNs are based on an iterative computation of node representations of an input
graph through a series of invariant transformations. Gilmer et al. (2017) showed that the vast majority
of GNNs can be implemented through message-passing, where the fundamental idea is to update
each node’s representation based on an aggregate of messages flowing from the node’s neighbors.
The message-passing paradigm has been very influential in graph ML,
but it also comes with well-known limitations related to the informa-                u v w
tion flow on a graph, pertaining to long-range dependencies Dwivedi
et al. (2022). In order to receive information from k-hop neighbors,
a message-passing neural network needs at least k layers. In many
types of graphs, this typically implies an exponential growth of a node’s    Figure 1: Node w listens
receptive field. The growing amount of information needs then to             only to v. Applying the
be compressed into fixed-sized node embeddings, possibly leading to          same choice iteratively, w
information loss, referred to as over-squashing (Alon & Yahav, 2021).        receives information from
                                                                             a subgraph marked in gray.
Motivation. Our goal is to generalize the message-passing scheme by
allowing each node to decide how to propagate information from or to its neighbors, thus enabling a
more flexible flow of information. As a motivating example, consider the graph depicted in Figure 1
and suppose that, at every layer, the black node w needs information only from the neighbors which
have a yellow neighbor (node v), and hence only information from a subgraph (highlighted with gray
color). Such a scenario falls outside the ability of standard message-passing schemes because there is
no mechanism to condition the propagation of information on the two-hop information.
The information flow becomes more complex if the nodes have different choices across layers, since
we cannot anymore view the process as merely focusing on a subgraph. This kind of message-passing
is then dynamic across layers. Consider the example depicted in Figure 2: the top row shows the
information flow relative to the node u across three layers, and the bottom row shows the information
flow relative to the node v across three layers. Node u listens to every neighbor in the first layer, only


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



          ℓ=0                                     ℓ=1                                      ℓ=2
  s                                       s                                        s
      u   v   w                               u   v       w                            u   v   w

  r                                       r                                        r

  s                                       s                                        s
      u   v   w                               u   v       w                            u   v   w

  r                                       r                                        r

Figure 2: Example information flow for two nodes u, v. Top: information flow relative to u across
three layers. Node u listens to every neighbor in the first layer, but only to v in the second layer, and
only to s and r in the last layer. Bottom: information flow relative to v across three layers. The node
v listens only to w in the first two layers, and only to u in the last layer.

to v in the second layer, and to nodes s and r in the last layer. On the other hand, node v listens to
node w for the first two layers, and to node u in the last layer.
Main idea. In the above examples, for each node, we need to learn whether or not to listen to a
particular node in the neighborhood. To achieve this, we regard each node as a player that can take
the following actions in each layer:

 • S TANDARD (S): Broadcast to neighbors that listen and listen to neighbors that broadcast.
 • L ISTEN (L): Listen to neighbors that broadcast.
 • B ROADCAST (B): Broadcast to neighbors that listen.
 • I SOLATE (I): Neither listen nor broadcast, effectively isolating the node.

The case where all nodes perform the action S TANDARD corresponds to the standard message-passing
scheme used in GNNs. Conversely, having all the nodes I SOLATE corresponds to removing all the
edges from the graph implying node-wise predictions. The interplay between these actions and the
ability to change them locally and dynamically makes the overall approach richer and allows to
decouple the input graph from the computational one and incorporate directionality into message-
passing: a node can only listen to those neighbors that are currently broadcasting, and vice versa.
We can emulate the example from Figure 2 by making u choose the actions ⟨L, L, S⟩, v and w the
actions ⟨S, S, L⟩, and s and r the actions ⟨S, I, S⟩.
Contributions. In this paper, we develop a new class of architectures, dubbed cooperative graph
neural networks (C O -GNNs), where every node in the graph is viewed as a player that can perform
one of the aforementioned actions. C O -GNNs comprise two jointly trained cooperating message-
passing neural networks: an environment network η (for solving the given task), and an action network
π (for choosing the best actions). Our contributions can be summarized as follows:

 • We propose a novel, flexible message-passing mechanism for graph neural networks, which leads
   to C O -GNN architectures that effectively explore the graph topology while learning (Section 4).
 • We provide a detailed discussion on the properties of C O -GNNs (Section 5.1) and show that they
   are more expressive than 1-dimensional Weisfeiler-Leman algorithm (Section 5.2), and more
   importantly, better suited for long-range tasks due to their adaptive nature (Section 5.3).
 • Empirically, we focus on C O -GNNs with basic action and environment networks to carefully
   assess the virtue of the new message-passing paradigm. We first experimentally validate the
   strength of our approach on a synthetic task (Section 6.1). Afterwards, we conduct experiments
   on real-world datasets, and observe that C O -GNNs always improve compared to their baseline
   models, and further yield multiple state-of-the-art results (Sections 6.2 and 6.3). We complement
   these with further experiments reported in the Appendix. Importantly, we illustrate the dynamic
   and adaptive nature of C O -GNNs (Appendix B) and also provide experiments to evaluate
   C O -GNNs on long-range tasks (Appendix D).

Proofs of the technical results and additional experimental details can be found in the Appendix.


                                                      2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2    BACKGROUND
Graph neural networks. We consider simple, undirected attributed graphs G = (V, E, X), where
X ∈ R|V |×d is a matrix of (input) node features, and xv ∈ Rd denotes the feature of a node v ∈ V .
We focus on message-passing neural networks (MPNNs) (Gilmer et al., 2017) that encapsulate the
                                                                              (0)
vast majority of GNNs. An MPNN updates the initial node representations hv = xv of each node v
for 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ L − 1 iterations based on its own state and the state of its neighbors Nv as:

                      h(ℓ+1)
                        v     = ϕ(ℓ) h(ℓ)
                                        v ,ψ
                                             (ℓ)
                                                   h(ℓ)    (ℓ)
                                                    v , {{hu | u ∈ Nv }}       ,

where {{·}} denotes a multiset and ϕ(ℓ) and ψ (ℓ) are differentiable update and aggregation functions,
respectively. We denote by d(ℓ) the dimension of the node embeddings at iteration (layer) ℓ. The
                        (L)
final representations hv of each node v can be used for predicting node-level properties or they
                                                     (L)
can be pooled to form a graph embedding vector zG , which can be used for predicting graph-level
properties. The pooling often takes the form of simple averaging, summation, or element-wise
maximum. In this paper, we largely focus on the basic MPNNs of the following form:

                      hv(ℓ+1) = σ Ws(ℓ) h(ℓ)         (ℓ)       (ℓ)
                                           v + Wn ψ {{hu | u ∈ Nv }}            ,
          (ℓ)         (ℓ)
where Ws and Wn are d(ℓ) × d(ℓ+1) learnable parameter matrices acting on the node’s self-
representation and on the aggregated representation of its neighbors, respectively, σ is a non-linearity,
and ψ is either mean or sum aggregation function. We refer to the architecture with mean aggregation
as M EAN GNNs and to the architecture with sum aggregation as S UM GNNs (Hamilton, 2020). We
also consider prominent models such as GCN (Kipf & Welling, 2017) and GIN (Xu et al., 2019).
Straight-through Gumbel-softmax estimator. In our approach, we rely on an action network for
predicting categorical actions for the nodes in the graph, which is not differentiable and poses a
challenge for gradient-based optimization. One prominent approach to address this is given by the
Gumbel-softmax estimator (Jang et al., 2017; Maddison et al., 2017) which effectively provides
a differentiable, continuous approximation of discrete action sampling. Consider a finite set Ω of
actions. We are interested in learning a categorical distribution over Ω, which can be represented in
terms of a probability vector p ∈ R|Ω| , whose elements store the probabilities of different actions. Let
us denote by p(a) the probability of an action a ∈ Ω. Gumbel-softmax is a special reparametrization
trick that estimates the categorical distribution p ∈ R|Ω| with the help of a Gumbel-distributed vector
g ∈ R|Ω| , which stores an i.i.d. sample g(a) ∼ G UMBEL(0, 1) for each action a. Given a categorical
distribution p and a temperature parameter τ , Gumbel-softmax scores can be computed as follows:
                                                       exp ((log(p) + g)/τ )
                  Gumbel-softmax (p; τ ) = P
                                                   a∈Ω exp ((log(p(a)) + g(a))/τ )

As the softmax temperature τ decreases, the resulting vector tends to a one-hot vector. Straight-
through Gumbel-softmax estimator utilizes the Gumbel-softmax estimator during the backward pass
only (for a differentiable update), while during the forward pass, it employs an ordinary sampling.

3    R ELATED WORK
Most of GNNs used in practice are instances of MPNNs (Gilmer et al., 2017) based on the message-
passing approach, which has roots in classical GNN architectures (Scarselli et al., 2009; Gori et al.,
2005) and their modern variations (Kipf & Welling, 2017; Xu et al., 2019; Veličković et al., 2018;
Hamilton et al., 2017; Li et al., 2016).
Despite their success, MPNNs have some known limitations. First of all, their expressive power is
upper bounded by the 1-dimensional Weisfeiler-Leman graph isomorphism test (1-WL) (Xu et al.,
2019; Morris et al., 2019) in that MPNNs cannot distinguish any pair of graphs which cannot be
distinguished by 1-WL. This drawback has motivated the study of more expressive architectures,
based on higher-order graph neural networks (Morris et al., 2019; Maron et al., 2019; Keriven & Peyré,
2019), subgraph sampling approaches (Bevilacqua et al., 2022; Thiede et al., 2021), lifting graphs to
higher-dimensional topological spaces (Bodnar et al., 2021), enriching the node features with unique


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


identifiers (Bouritsas et al., 2022; Loukas, 2020; You et al., 2021) or random features (Abboud et al.,
2021; Sato et al., 2021). Second, MPNNs generally perform poorly on long-range tasks due to their
information propagation bottlenecks (Li et al., 2018; Alon & Yahav, 2021). This motivated approaches
based on rewiring the input graph (Klicpera et al., 2019; Topping et al., 2022; Karhadkar et al., 2023)
by connecting relevant nodes and shortening propagation distances to minimize bottlenecks, or
designing new message-passing architectures that act on distant nodes directly, e.g., using shortest-
path distances (Abboud et al., 2022; Ying et al., 2021). Lately, there has been a surging interest in the
advancement of Transformer-based approaches for graphs (Ma et al., 2023; Ying et al., 2021; Yun
et al., 2019; Kreuzer et al., 2021; Dwivedi & Bresson, 2021), which can encompass complete node
connectivity beyond the local information classical MPNNs capture, which in return, allows for more
effective modeling of long-range interactions. Finally, classical message passing updates the nodes in
a synchronous manner, which does not allow the nodes to react to messages from their neighbors
individually. This has been recently argued as yet another limitation of classical message passing
from the perspective of algorithmic alignment (Faber & Wattenhofer, 2022).
Through a new message-passing scheme, our work presents new perspectives on these limitations
by dynamically changing the information flow depending on the task, and resulting in more flexible
architectures than the classical MPNNs, while also allowing asynchronous message passing across
nodes. Our work is related to the earlier work of Lai et al. (2020), where the goal is to update each node
using a potentially different number of layers, which is achieved by learning the optimal aggregation
depth for each node through a reinforcement learning approach. C O -GNNs are orthogonal to this
study both in terms of the objectives and the approach (as detailed in Section 5).

4    C OOPERATIVE GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS
C O -GNNs view each node in a graph as players of a multiplayer environment, where the state
of each player is given in terms of the representation (or state) of its corresponding node. In this
environment, every node is updated following a two-stage process. In the first stage, each chooses an
action from the set of actions given their current state and the states of their neighboring nodes. In
the second stage, every node state gets updated based on their current state and the states of a subset
of the neighboring nodes, as determined by the actions in the first stage. As a result, every node can
determine how to propagate information from or to its neighbors.
Formally, a C O -GNN (π, η) architecture is given in terms of two cooperating GNNs: (i) an action
network π for choosing the best actions, and (ii) an environment network η for updating the node
                                                                      (ℓ)
representations. A C O -GNN layer updates the representations hv of each node v as follows. First,
                                                                               (ℓ)
an action network π predicts, for each node v, a probability distribution pv ∈ R4 over the actions
{S, L, B, I} that v can take, given its state and the state of its neighbors Nv , as follows:

                                 p(ℓ)          (ℓ)     (ℓ)
                                   v = π hv , {{hu | u ∈ Nv }} .                                (1)
                                                (ℓ)       (ℓ)
Then, for each node v, an action is sampled av ∼ pv using the Straight-through Gumbel-softmax
estimator, and an environment network η is utilized to update the state of each node in accordance
with the sampled actions, as follows:
                       (
                                 (ℓ)                                     (ℓ)
               (ℓ+1)     η (ℓ) hv , {{}} ,                              av = I ∨ B
             hv      =           (ℓ)    (ℓ)          (ℓ)                 (ℓ)                    (2)
                         η (ℓ) hv , {{hu | u ∈ Nv , au = S ∨ B}} , av = L ∨ S.

This corresponds to a single layer update, and, as usual, by stacking L ≥ 1 layers, we obtain the
                 (L)
representations hv for each node v. In its full generality, a C O -GNN (π, η) architecture can use any
GNN architecture in place of the action network π and the environment network η. For the sake of
our study, we focus on simple
                        P     models such as S UM GNNs, M EAN GNNs, GCN, and GIN, which are
respectively denoted as , µ, ∗ and ϵ. For example, we write C O -GNN(Σ, µ) to denote a C O -GNN
architecture which uses S UM GNN as its action network and M EAN GNN as its environment network.
Fundamentally, C O -GNNs update the node states in a fine-grained manner as formalized in Equa-
tion (2): if a node v chooses to I SOLATE or to B ROADCAST then it gets updated only based on its
previous state, which corresponds to a node-wise update function. On the other hand, if a node v
chooses the action L ISTEN or S TANDARD then it gets updated based on its previous state as well as
the state of its neighbors which perform the actions B ROADCAST or S TANDARD at this layer.


                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



              H                     H (0)                         H (1)                        H (2)
    s                       s                             s                            s
        u    v    w             u   v   w                     u   v   w                    u   v       w

    r                       r                             r                            r
    (a) Input graph H.    (b) Computation at ℓ = 0.   (c) Computation at ℓ = 1.    (d) Computation at ℓ = 2.

Figure 3: The input graph H and its computation graphs H (0) , H (1) , H (2) at the respective layers.
The computation graphs are a result of applying the following actions: ⟨L, L, S⟩ for the node u;
⟨S, S, L⟩ for the nodes v and w; ⟨S, I, S⟩ for the nodes s and r; ⟨S, S, S⟩ for all other nodes.


5       M ODEL PROPERTIES

In this section, we provide a detailed analysis of C O -GNNs, focusing on its conceptual novelty, its
expressive power, and its suitability to long-range tasks.


5.1         C ONCEPTUAL PROPERTIES OF THE LEARNABLE MESSAGE - PASSING PARADIGM

Task-specific: Standard message-passing updates nodes based on their local neighborhood, which is
completely task-agnostic. By allowing each node to listen to the information only from ‘relevant’
neighbors, C O -GNNs can determine a computation graph which is best suited for the target task.
For example, if the task requires information only from the neighbors with a certain degree then the
action network can learn to listen only to these nodes, as we experimentally validate in Section 6.1.
Directed: The outcome of the actions that the nodes can take amounts to a special form of ‘directed
rewiring’ of the input graph: an edge can be dropped (e.g., if two neighbors listen without broadcast-
ing); an edge can remain undirected (e.g., if both neighbors apply the standard action); or, an edge
can become directed implying directional information flow (e.g., if one neighbor listens while its
neighbor broadcasts). Taking this perspective, the proposed message-passing can be seen as operating
on a potentially different directed graph induced by the choice of actions at every layer. Formally,
given a graph G = (V, E), let us denote by G(ℓ) = (V, E (ℓ) ) the directed computational graphs
induced by the actions chosen at layer ℓ, where E (ℓ) is the set of directed edges at layer ℓ. We can
rewrite the update given in Equation (2) concisely as follows:

                            h(ℓ+1)
                             v     = η (ℓ)
                                             h(ℓ)
                                              v   , {
                                                    {h(ℓ)
                                                      u   | (u, v) ∈ E (ℓ)
                                                                           }
                                                                           }   .

Consider the input graph H from Figure 3: u gets messages from v only in the first two layers, and v
gets messages from u only in the last layer, illustrating a directional message-passing between these
nodes. This abstraction allows for a direct implementation of C O -GNNs by simply considering the
induced graph adjacency matrix at every layer.
Dynamic: In this setup, each node learns to interact with the ‘rel-
evant’ neighbors and does so only as long as they remain relevant:                                         r
C O -GNNs do not operate on a pre-fixed computational graph, but                                   s
                                                                                           u       r       u
rather on a learned computational graph, which is dynamic across
layers. In our running example, observe that the computational graph               v               v       s
is a different one at every layer (depicted in Figure 4). This brings
                                                                                           w               w
advantages for the information flow as we outline in Section 5.3.
Feature and structure based: Standard message-passing is com-
pletely determined by the structure of the graph: two nodes with
the same neighborhood get the same aggregated message. This is
not necessarily the case in our setup, since the action network can   ℓ=3      2    1    0
learn different actions for two nodes with different node features,
e.g., by choosing different actions for a red node and a blue node. Figure 4: The computational
This enables different messages for different nodes even if their graph of H.
neighborhoods are identical.


                                                      5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Asynchronous: Standard message-passing updates all nodes synchronously at every iteration, which
is not always optimal as argued by Faber & Wattenhofer (2022), especially when the task requires to
treat the nodes non-uniformly. By design, C O -GNNs enable asynchronous updates across nodes.
Efficient: While being more sophisticated, the proposed message-passing algorithm is efficient in
terms of runtime, as we detail in Appendix C. C O -GNNs are also parameter-efficient: they use the
same policy network and as a result a comparable number of parameters to their baseline models.

5.2   E XPRESSIVE POWER OF COOPERATIVE GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS

The environment and action networks of C O -GNN architectures are parameterized by standard
MPNNs. This raises an obvious question regarding the expressive power of C O -GNN architectures:
are C O -GNNs also bounded by 1-WL? Consider, for instance, the non-isomorphic graphs G1 and
G2 depicted in Figure 5. Standard MPNNs cannot distinguish these graphs, while C O -GNNs can:
Proposition 5.1. Let G1 = (V1 , E1 , X1 ) and G2 = (V2 , E2 , X2 ) be two non-isomorphic graphs.
Then, for any threshold 0 < δ < 1, there exists a parametrization of a C O -GNN architecture using
                                          (L)     (L)
sufficiently many layers L, satisfying P(zG1 ̸= zG2 ) ≥ 1 − δ.
The explanation for this result is the following: C O -GNN architectures
learn, at every layer, and for each node u, a probability distribution     G1
over the actions. These learned distributions are identical for two iso-
morphic nodes. However, the process relies on sampling actions from
these distributions, and clearly, the samples from identical distributions
can differ. This makes C O -GNN models invariant in expectation, and       G2
the variance introduced by the sampling process helps to discriminate
nodes that are 1-WL indistinguishable. Thus, for two nodes indistin-
guishable by 1-WL, there is a non-trivial probability of sampling a Figure 5: G1 and G2 are
different action for the respective nodes, which in turn makes their indistinguishable by a wide
direct neighborhood differ. This yields unique node identifiers (see, class of GNNs. C O -GNNs
e.g., (Loukas, 2020)) with high probability and allows us to distinguish can distinguish these graphs.
any pair of graphs assuming an injective graph pooling function (Xu
et al., 2019). Our result is analogous to GNNs with random node features (Abboud et al., 2021;
Sato et al., 2021), which are more expressive than their classical counterparts. Another relation is
to subgraph GNNs (Bevilacqua et al., 2022; Papp et al., 2021), which bypass 1-WL expressiveness
limitation by considering subgraphs extracted from G. In our framework, the sampling of different
actions has an analogous effect. Note that C O -GNNs are not designed for more expressive power, and
our result relies merely on variations in the sampling process, which should be noted as a limitation.
We validate the stated expressiveness gain on a synthetic experiment in Appendix D.

5.3   DYNAMIC MESSAGE - PASSING FOR LONG - RANGE TASKS

Long-range tasks necessitate to propagate information between distant nodes: we argue that a dynamic
message-passing paradigm is highly effective for such tasks since it becomes possible to propagate
only relevant task-specific information. Suppose, for instance, that we are interested in transmitting
information from a source node to a distant target node: our message-passing paradigm can efficiently
filter irrelevant information by learning to focus on the shortest path connecting these two nodes,
hence maximizing the information flow to the target node. We can generalize this observation towards
receiving information from multiple distant nodes and prove the following:
Theorem 5.2. Let G = (V, E, X) be a connected graph with node features. For some k > 0, for
any target node v ∈ V , for any k source nodes u1 , . . . , uk ∈ V , and for any compact, differentiable
                  (0)           (0)
function f : Rd × . . . × Rd → Rd , there exists an L-layer C O -GNN computing final node
                                                               (L)
representations such that for any ϵ, δ > 0 it holds that P(|hv − f (xu1 , . . . xuk )| < ϵ) ≥ 1 − δ.
This means that if a property of a node v is a function of k distant nodes then C O -GNNs can
approximate this function. This follows from two findings: (i) the features of k nodes can be
transmitted to the source node without loss of information in C O -GNNs and (ii) the final layer of
a C O -GNN architecture, e.g., an MLP, can approximate any differentiable function over k node
features (Hornik, 1991; Cybenko, 1989). We validate these findings empirically on long-range
interactions datasets (Dwivedi et al., 2022) in Appendix D.


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5.4   OVER - SQUASHING AND OVER - SMOOTHING

Over-squashing refers to the failure of message passing to propagate information on the graph.
Topping et al. (2022); Di Giovanni et al. (2023) formalized over-squashing as the insensitivity of an
r-layer MPNN output at node u to the input features of a distant node v, expressed through a bound
                      (r)
on the Jacobian ∥∂hv /∂xu ∥ ≤ C r (Âr )vu , where C encapsulated architecture-related constants
(e.g., width, smoothness of the activation function, etc.) and the normalized adjacency matrix Â
captures the effect of the graph. Graph rewiring techniques amount to modifying Â so as to increase
the upper bound and thereby reduce the effect of over-squashing.
Since the actions of every node in C O -GNNs result in an effective graph rewiring (different at every
layer), the action network can choose actions that transmit the features of node u ∈ V to node v ∈ V
as shown in Theorem 5.2, resulting in the maximization of the bound on the Jacobian.
Over-smoothing refers to the tendency of node embeddings to become increasingly similar across
the graph with the increase in the number of message passing layers (Li et al., 2018). Recently, Rusch
et al. (2022) showed that over-smoothing can be mitigated through the gradient gating mechanism,
which adaptively disables the update of a node from neighbors with similar features. Our architecture,
through the choice of B ROADCAST or I SOLATE actions, allows to mimic this mechanism.

6     E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS
We evaluate C O -GNNs on (i) a synthetic experiment comparing with classical MPNNs, (ii) real-world
node classification datasets (Platonov et al., 2023), and (iii) real-world graph classification datasets
(Morris et al., 2020). We provide a detailed analysis regarding the actions learned by C O -GNNs
on different datasets in Appendix B, illustrating the task-specific nature of C O -GNNs. Finally, we
report a synthetic expressiveness experiment and an experiment on long-range interactions datasets
(Dwivedi et al., 2022) in Appendix D.
Implementation. We trained and tested our model on NVidia GTX V100 GPUs with Python 3.9,
Cuda 11.8, PyTorch 2.0.0, and PyTorch Geometric (Fey & Lenssen, 2019).

6.1   S YNTHETIC EXPERIMENT ON ROOT N EIGHBORS
                                                                                  r
Task. In this experiment, we compare C O -GNNs to a
                                                                   u                v
class of MPNNs on a new dataset: ROOT N EIGHBORS.
Specifically, we consider the following regression task:
given a rooted tree, predict the average of the features of
root-neighbors of degree 6. This is an intricate task since    (a) Example tree for ROOT N EIGHBORS.
it requires first identifying the neighbors of the root node
with degree 6 and then returning the average feature                                  ⟨L⟩
of these nodes as the target value. ROOT N EIGHBORS           ⟨B⟩              ⟨B⟩                    ⟨L⟩
consists of trees of depth 2 with random node features
of dimension d = 5. The data generation ensures, for
each root in each tree has at least one neighbor which
is of degree 6 (detailed in Appendix E.2). One example                            ⟨L⟩
tree is shown in Figure 6a: the root node r has only
two neighbors with degree 6 (u and v) and the target (b) Example of an optimal directed subgraph,
prediction value is (xu + xv )/2.                            where the nodes with a degree of 6 (v and w)
                                                            B ROADCAST, while other nodes L ISTEN.
Setup. We trained GCN (Kipf & Welling, 2017), Graph-
SAGE (Hamilton et al., 2017), GAT (Veličković et al., Figure 6: ROOT N EIGHBORS example.
2018), S UM GNN, M EAN GNN, as baselines and com-
pared them to C O -GNN(Σ, Σ), C O -GNN(µ, µ) and C O -GNN(Σ, µ). We used the Adam optimizer
and reported all hyperparameters in the appendix (Table 8). We report the Mean Average Error
(MAE).
Results for MPNNs. The results are presented in Table 1, which includes the random baseline: the
average MAE obtained via a random prediction. All MPNNs perform poorly on this task. GCN,
GAT, and M EAN GNN fail to identify node degrees, making it impossible to detect nodes with a


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


specific degree, which is crucial for the task. GCN and GAT are only marginally better than the
random baseline, whereas M EAN GNN performs substantially better than the random baseline. The
latter can be explained by the fact that M EAN GNN employs a different transformation on the source
node rather than treating it as a neighbor (unlike the self-loop in GCN/GAT) and this yields better
average MAE. SAGE and S UM GNN use sum aggregation and can identify the node degrees, but they
struggle in averaging the node features, which yield comparable MAE results to that of M EAN GNN.
Results for C O -GNNs. The ideal mode of operation for C O - Table 1: Results on ROOT-
GNNs would be as follows:                                           N EIGHBORS. Top three mod-
                                                                    els are colored by First, Second,
 1. The action network chooses either the action L ISTEN or S TAN - Third.
    DARD for the root node, and the action B ROADCAST or S TAN -
    DARD for the root-neighbors which have a degree 6,
                                                                       Model                MAE
 2. The action network chooses either the action L ISTEN or the         Random               0.474
    action I SOLATE for all the remaining root-neighbors, and           GCN                  0.468
                                                                        SAGE                 0.336
 3. The environment network updates the root node by averaging
                                                                        GAT                  0.442
    the features of its neighbors which are currently broadcasting.
                                                                        S UM GNN             0.370
                                                                        M EAN GNN            0.329
This is depicted in Figure 6 and can be achieved with a single-layer
C O -GNN assuming (1)-(3) can be accomplished. The best result        C O -GNN(Σ, Σ) 0.196
is achieved by C O -GNN(Σ, µ), because S UM GNN (as the action        C O -GNN(µ, µ) 0.339
network) can accomplish (1) and (2), and M EAN GNN (as the            C O -GNN(Σ, µ) 0.079
environment network) can accomplish (3). This model leverages
the strengths of the S UM GNN model and the M EAN GNN model
to cater to the different roles of the action and environment networks, making it the most natural
C O -GNN model for the regression task. The next best model is C O -GNN(Σ, Σ), which also uses
S UM GNN as the action network, accomplishing (1) and (2). However, it uses another S UM GNN
as the environment network which cannot easily mimic the averaging of the neighbor’s features.
Finally, C O -GNN(µ, µ) performs weakly, since M EAN GNN as an action network cannot achieve
(1) hindering the performance of the whole task. Indeed, C O -GNN(µ, µ) performs comparably to
M EAN GNN suggesting that the action network is not useful in this case.
To shed light on the performance of C O -GNN models, we computed the percentage of edges which
are accurately retained or removed by the action network in a single layer C O -GNN model. We
observe an accuracy of 57.20% for C O -GNN(µ, µ), 99.55% for C O -GNN(Σ, Σ), and 99.71% for
C O -GNN(Σ, µ), which empirically confirms the expected behavior of C O -GNNs. In fact, the exam-
ple tree shown in Figure 6 is taken from the ROOT N EIGHBORS, and reassuringly, C O -GNN(Σ, µ)
learns precisely the actions that induce the shown optimal subgraph.

6.2   N ODE CLASSIFICATION

One of the strengths of C O -GNNs is their capability to utilize task-specific information propagation,
which raises an obvious question: could C O -GNNs outperform the baselines on heterophilious
graphs, where standard message passing is known to suffer? To answer this question, we assess the
performance of C O -GNNs on heterophilic node classification datasets from (Platonov et al., 2023).
Setup. We evaluate C O -GNN(Σ, Σ) and C O -GNN(µ, µ) on the 5 heterophilic graphs, following
the 10 data splits and the methodology of Platonov et al. (2023) and report the accuracy and
standard deviation for roman-empire and amazon-ratings, and mean ROC AUC and standard deviation
for minesweeper, tolokers, and questions. The classical baselines GCN (Kipf & Welling, 2017),
GraphSAGE (Hamilton et al., 2017), GAT (Veličković et al., 2018), GAT-sep, GT (Shi et al., 2021) and
GT-sep are from (Platonov et al., 2023). We use the Adam optimizer and report all hyperparameters
in the Appendix E.4.
Results. All results are reported in Table 2: C O -GNNs achieve state-of-the-art across results
the board, despite using relatively simple architectures as their action and environment networks.
Overall, C O -GNNs demonstrate an average accuracy improvement of 2.23% compared to all baseline
methods, across all datasets, surpassing the performance of more complex models such as GT. These
results are reassuring as they establish C O -GNNs as a strong method in the heterophilic setting.


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Table 2: Results on node classification. Top three models are colored by First, Second, Third.

                     roman-empire     amazon-ratings      minesweeper         tolokers       questions
    GCN               73.69 ± 0.74      48.70 ± 0.63      89.75 ± 0.52      83.64 ± 0.67    76.09 ± 1.27
    SAGE              85.74 ± 0.67      53.63 ± 0.39      93.51 ± 0.57      82.43 ± 0.44    76.44 ± 0.62
    GAT               80.87 ± 0.30      49.09 ± 0.63      92.01 ± 0.68      83.70 ± 0.47    77.43 ± 1.20
    GAT-sep           88.75 ± 0.41      52.70 ± 0.62      93.91 ± 0.35      83.78 ± 0.43    76.79 ± 0.71
    GT                86.51 ± 0.73      51.17 ± 0.66      91.85 ± 0.76      83.23 ± 0.64    77.95 ± 0.68
    GT-sep            87.32 ± 0.39      52.18 ± 0.80      92.29 ± 0.47      82.52 ± 0.92    78.05 ± 0.93
    C O -GNN(Σ, Σ) 91.57 ± 0.32         51.28 ± 0.56      95.09 ± 1.18      83.36 ± 0.89    80.02 ± 0.86
    C O -GNN(µ, µ) 91.37 ± 0.35         54.17 ± 0.37      97.31 ± 0.41      84.45 ± 1.17    76.54 ± 0.95


    Table 3: Results on graph classification. Top three models are colored by First, Second, Third.

                         IMDB-B IMDB-M REDDIT-B                 NCI1       PROTEINS ENZYMES
       DGCNN             69.2 ± 3.0 45.6 ± 3.4   87.8 ± 2.5   76.4 ± 1.7   72.9 ± 3.5    38.9 ± 5.7
       DiffPool          68.4 ± 3.3 45.6 ± 3.4   89.1 ± 1.6   76.9 ± 1.9   73.7 ± 3.5    59.5 ± 5.6
       ECC               67.7 ± 2.8 43.5 ± 3.1     OOR        76.2 ± 1.4   72.3 ± 3.4    29.5 ± 8.2
       GIN               71.2 ± 3.9 48.5 ± 3.3   89.9 ± 1.9   80.0 ± 1.4   73.3 ± 4.0    59.6 ± 4.5
       GraphSAGE         68.8 ± 4.5 47.6 ± 3.5   84.3 ± 1.9   76.0 ± 1.8   73.0 ± 4.5    58.2 ± 6.0
       ICGMMf            71.8 ± 4.4 49.0 ± 3.8   91.6 ± 2.1   76.4 ± 1.4   73.2 ± 3.9        -
       SPN(k = 5)            -          -            -        78.6 ± 1.7   74.2 ± 2.7    69.4 ± 6.2
       C O -GNN(Σ, Σ) 70.8 ± 3.3 48.5 ± 4.0 88.6 ± 2.2 80.6 ± 1.1 73.1 ± 2.3             65.7 ± 4.9
       C O -GNN(µ, µ) 72.2 ± 4.1 49.9 ± 4.5 90.4 ± 1.9 79.4 ± 0.7 71.3 ± 2.0             68.3 ± 5.7



6.3     G RAPH CLASSIFICATION

In this experiment, we evaluate C O -GNNs on the TUDataset (Morris et al., 2020) graph classification
benchmark.
Setup. We evaluate C O -GNN(Σ, Σ) and C O -GNN(µ, µ) on the 7 graph classification benchmarks,
following the risk assessment protocol of Errica et al. (2020), and report the mean accuracy and
standard deviation. The results for the baselines DGCNN (Wang et al., 2019), DiffPool (Ying et al.,
2018), Edge-Conditioned Convolution (ECC) (Simonovsky & Komodakis, 2017), GIN (Xu et al.,
2019), GraphSAGE (Hamilton et al., 2017) are from Errica et al. (2020). We also include ICGMMf
(Castellana et al., 2022), and SPN(k = 5) (Abboud et al., 2022) as more recent baselines. OOR (Out
of Resources) implies extremely long training time or GPU memory usage. We use Adam optimizer
and StepLR learn rate scheduler, and report all hyperparameters in the appendix (Table 11).
Results. C O -GNN models achieve the highest accuracy on three datasets out of six as reported in Ta-
ble 3 and remain competitive on the other datasets. C O -GNN yield these performance improvements,
despite using relatively simple action and environment networks, which is intriguing as C O -GNNs
unlock a large design space which includes a large class of model variations.


7     C ONCLUSIONS

We proposed a novel framework for training graph neural networks which entails a new dynamic
message-passing scheme. We introduced the C O -GNN architectures, which can explore the graph
topology while learning: this is achieved by a joint training regime including an action network
π and an environment network η. Our work brings in novel perspectives particularly pertaining to
the well-known limitations of GNNs. We have empirically validated our theoretical findings on
real-world datasets and synthetic datasets and provided insights regarding the model behavior. We
think that this work brings novel perspectives to graph machine learning which need to be further
explored in future work.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


8   R EPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
To ensure the reproducibility of this paper, we include the Appendix with five main sections. Ap-
pendix A includes detailed proofs for the technical statements presented in the paper. Appendix E
provides data generation protocol for ROOT N EIGHBORS and further details of the real-world datasets
that are used in Section 6. The experimental results in the paper are reproducible with the hyperpa-
rameter settings for all results contained in Tables 8 to 11 in Appendix E.4. The code to reproduce
all experiments, along with the code to generate the datasets and tasks we propose is released at
https://anonymous.4open.science/r/CoGNN.

R EFERENCES
Ralph Abboud, İsmail İlkan Ceylan, Martin Grohe, and Thomas Lukasiewicz. The surprising power
  of graph neural networks with random node initialization. In IJCAI, 2021.
Ralph Abboud, Radoslav Dimitrov, and İsmail İlkan Ceylan. Shortest path networks for graph
  property prediction. In LoG, 2022.
Uri Alon and Eran Yahav. On the bottleneck of graph neural networks and its practical implications.
  In ICLR, 2021.
Beatrice Bevilacqua, Fabrizio Frasca, Derek Lim, Balasubramaniam Srinivasan, Chen Cai, Gopinath
  Balamurugan, Michael M. Bronstein, and Haggai Maron. Equivariant subgraph aggregation
  networks. In ICLR, 2022.
Cristian Bodnar, Fabrizio Frasca, Nina Otter, Yuguang Wang, Pietro Liò, Guido F. Montúfar, and
  Michael M. Bronstein. Weisfeiler and lehman go cellular: CW networks. In NeurIPS, 2021.
Giorgos Bouritsas, Fabrizio Frasca, Stefanos Zafeiriou, and Michael M Bronstein. Improving graph
  neural network expressivity via subgraph isomorphism counting. In PAMI, 2022.
Xavier Bresson and Thomas Laurent. Residual gated graph convnets. In arXiv, 2018.
Daniele Castellana, Federico Errica, Davide Bacciu, and Alessio Micheli. The infinite contextual
  graph Markov model. In ICML, 2022.
Ming Chen, Zhewei Wei, Zengfeng Huang, Bolin Ding, and Yaliang Li. Simple and deep graph
 convolutional networks. In ICML, 2020.
George Cybenko. Approximation by superpositions of a sigmoidal function. In MCSS, 1989.
Francesco Di Giovanni, Lorenzo Giusti, Federico Barbero, Giulia Luise, Pietro Lio, and Michael M
  Bronstein. On over-squashing in message passing neural networks: The impact of width, depth,
  and topology. In ICLR, 2023.
David Duvenaud, Dougal Maclaurin, Jorge Aguilera-Iparraguirre, Rafael Gómez-Bombarelli, Tim-
  othy Hirzel, Alán Aspuru-Guzik, and Ryan P. Adams. Convolutional networks on graphs for
  learning molecular fingerprints. In NeurIPS, 2015.
Vijay Prakash Dwivedi and Xavier Bresson. A generalization of transformer networks to graphs. In
  AAAI Workshop on Deep Learning on Graphs: Methods and Applications, 2021.
Vijay Prakash Dwivedi, Ladislav Rampášek, Mikhail Galkin, Ali Parviz, Guy Wolf, Anh Tuan Luu,
  and Dominique Beaini. Long range graph benchmark. In NeurIPS Datasets and Benchmarks,
  2022.
Federico Errica, Marco Podda, Davide Bacciu, and Alessio Micheli. A fair comparison of graph
  neural networks for graph classification. In ICLR, 2020.
Lukas Faber and Roger Wattenhofer. Asynchronous neural networks for learning in graphs. In arXiv,
  2022.
Matthias Fey and Jan E. Lenssen. Fast graph representation learning with PyTorch Geometric. In
 ICLR Representation Learning on Graphs and Manifolds, 2019.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Justin Gilmer, Samuel S. Schoenholz, Patrick F. Riley, Oriol Vinyals, and George E. Dahl. Neural
  message passing for quantum chemistry. In ICML, 2017.
Marco Gori, Gabriele Monfardini, and Franco Scarselli. A new model for learning in graph domains.
 In IJCNN, 2005.
Benjamin Gutteridge, Xiaowen Dong, Michael M Bronstein, and Francesco Di Giovanni. DRew:
  Dynamically rewired message passing with delay. In ICML, 2023.
Will Hamilton, Zhitao Ying, and Jure Leskovec. Inductive representation learning on large graphs. In
 NeurIPS, 2017.
William L Hamilton. Graph representation learning. In Synthesis Lectures on Artifical Intelligence
 and Machine Learning, 2020.
Xiaoxin He, Bryan Hooi, Thomas Laurent, Adam Perold, Yann Lecun, and Xavier Bresson. A
  generalization of ViT/MLP-mixer to graphs. In ICML, 2023.
Kurt Hornik. Approximation capabilities of multilayer feedforward networks. In Neural Networks,
 1991.
Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. Categorical reparameterization with gumbel-softmax. In
  ICLR, 2017.
Kedar Karhadkar, Pradeep Kr. Banerjee, and Guido Montufar. FoSR: First-order spectral rewiring for
  addressing oversquashing in GNNs. In ICLR, 2023.
Nicolas Keriven and Gabriel Peyré. Universal invariant and equivariant graph neural networks. In
  NeurIPS, 2019.
Thomas Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional networks.
  In ICLR, 2017.
Johannes Klicpera, Stefan Weißenberger, and Stephan Günnemann. Diffusion improves graph
  learning. In NeurIPS, 2019.
Devin Kreuzer, Dominique Beaini, William L. Hamilton, Vincent Létourneau, and Prudencio Tossou.
  Rethinking graph transformers with spectral attention. In NeurIPS, 2021.
Kwei-Herng Lai, Daochen Zha, Kaixiong Zhou, and Xia Hu. Policy-GNN: Aggregation optimization
 for graph neural networks. In KDD, 2020.
Qimai Li, Zhichao Han, and Xiao-Ming Wu. Deeper insights into graph convolutional networks for
  semi-supervised learning. In AAAI, 2018.
Yujia Li, Daniel Tarlow, Marc Brockschmidt, and Richard Zemel. Gated graph sequence neural
  networks. In ICLR, 2016.
Andreas Loukas. What graph neural networks cannot learn: depth vs width. In ICLR, 2020.
Liheng Ma, Chen Lin, Derek Lim, Adriana Romero-Soriano, K. Dokania, Mark Coates, Philip
  H.S. Torr, and Ser-Nam Lim. Graph Inductive Biases in Transformers without Message Passing.
  In ICML, 2023.
Chris J. Maddison, Andriy Mnih, and Yee Whye Teh. The concrete distribution: A continuous
  relaxation of discrete random variables. In ICLR, 2017.
Haggai Maron, Heli Ben-Hamu, Hadar Serviansky, and Yaron Lipman. Provably powerful graph
  networks. In NeurIPS, 2019.
Christopher Morris, Martin Ritzert, Matthias Fey, William L. Hamilton, Jan Eric Lenssen, Gaurav
  Rattan, and Martin Grohe. Weisfeiler and Leman go neural: Higher-order graph neural networks.
  In AAAI, 2019.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Christopher Morris, Nils M. Kriege, Franka Bause, Kristian Kersting, Petra Mutzel, and Marion
  Neumann. Tudataset: A collection of benchmark datasets for learning with graphs. In ICML
 Workshop on Graph Representation Learning and Beyond, 2020.
Pál András Papp, Karolis Martinkus, Lukas Faber, and Roger Wattenhofer. Dropgnn: Random
   dropouts increase the expressiveness of graph neural networks. In NeurIPS, 2021.
Hongbin Pei, Bingzhe Wei, Kevin Chen-Chuan Chang, Yu Lei, and Bo Yang. Geom-GCN: Geometric
  graph convolutional networks. In ICLR, 2020.
Oleg Platonov, Denis Kuznedelev, Michael Diskin, Artem Babenko, and Liudmila Prokhorenkova.
  A critical look at the evaluation of GNNs under heterophily: Are we really making progress? In
  ICLR, 2023.
T Konstantin Rusch, Benjamin Paul Chamberlain, Michael W Mahoney, Michael M Bronstein, and
  Siddhartha Mishra. Gradient gating for deep multi-rate learning on graphs. In ICLR, 2022.
Ryoma Sato, Makoto Yamada, and Hisashi Kashima. Random features strengthen graph neural
  networks. In SDM, 2021.
Franco Scarselli, Marco Gori, Ah Chung Tsoi, Markus Hagenbuchner, and Gabriele Monfardini. The
  graph neural network model. In IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 2009.
Yunsheng Shi, Zhengjie Huang, Shikun Feng, Hui Zhong, Wenjing Wang, and Yu Sun. Masked label
  prediction: Unified message passing model for semi-supervised classification. In IJCAI, 2021.
Hamed Shirzad, Ameya Velingker, B. Venkatachalam, Danica J. Sutherland, and Ali Kemal Sinop.
  Exphormer: Sparse transformers for graphs. In ICML, 2023.
Jonathan Shlomi, Peter Battaglia, and Jean-Roch Vlimant. Graph neural networks in particle physics.
  In MLST, 2021.
Martin Simonovsky and Nikos Komodakis. Dynamic edge-conditioned filters in convolutional neural
 networks on graphs. In CVPR, 2017.
Erik H. Thiede, Wenda Zhou, and Risi Kondor. Autobahn: Automorphism-based graph neural nets.
  In NeurIPS, 2021.
Jan Tönshoff, Martin Ritzert, Hinrikus Wolf, and Martin Grohe. Walking out of the weisfeiler leman
  hierarchy: Graph learning beyond message passing. In TMLR, 2023.
Jake Topping, Francesco Di Giovanni, Benjamin Paul Chamberlain, Xiaowen Dong, and Michael M.
  Bronstein. Understanding over-squashing and bottlenecks on graphs via curvature. In ICLR, 2022.
Jan Tönshoff, Martin Ritzert, Eran Rosenbluth, and Martin Grohe. Where did the gap go? reassessing
  the long-range graph benchmark. In arXiv, 2023.
Petar Veličković, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro Liò, and Yoshua
  Bengio. Graph attention networks. In ICLR, 2018.
Yue Wang, Yongbin Sun, Ziwei Liu, Sanjay E. Sarma, Michael M. Bronstein, and Justin M. Solomon.
  Dynamic graph CNN for learning on point clouds. In TOG, 2019.
Zonghan Wu, Shirui Pan, Fengwen Chen, Guodong Long, Chengqi Zhang, and Philip S. Yu. A
  comprehensive survey on graph neural networks. In IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and
  Learning Systems, 2019.
Keyulu Xu, Weihua Hu, Jure Leskovec, and Stefanie Jegelka. How powerful are graph neural
  networks? In ICLR, 2019.
Zhilin Yang, William W. Cohen, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Revisiting semi-supervised learning with
  graph embeddings. In ICML, 2016.
Chengxuan Ying, Tianle Cai, Shengjie Luo, Shuxin Zheng, Guolin Ke, Di He, Yanming Shen, and
  Tie-Yan Liu. Do transformers really perform badly for graph representation? In NeurIPS, 2021.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Zhitao Ying, Jiaxuan You, Christopher Morris, Xiang Ren, William L. Hamilton, and Jure Leskovec.
  Hierarchical graph representation learning with differentiable pooling. In NeurIPS, 2018.
Jiaxuan You, Jonathan M. Gomes-Selman, Rex Ying, and Jure Leskovec. Identity-aware graph neural
   networks. In AAAI, 2021.
Seongjun Yun, Minbyul Jeong, Raehyun Kim, Jaewoo Kang, and Hyunwoo J. Kim. Graph transformer
  networks. In NeurIPS, 2019.
Marinka Zitnik, Monica Agrawal, and Jure Leskovec. Modeling polypharmacy side effects with
 graph convolutional networks. In Bioinformatics, 2018.


                                              13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     P ROOFS OF TECHNICAL RESULTS
A.1    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 5.1

In order to prove Proposition 5.1, we first prove the following lemma, which shows that all non-
isolated nodes of an input graph can be individualized by C O -GNNs:
Lemma A.1. Let G = (V, E, X) be a graph with node features. For every pair of non-isolated
nodes u, v ∈ V and for all δ > 0, there exists a C O -GNN architecture with sufficiently many layers
                     (L)     (L)
L which satisfies P(hu ̸= hv ) ≥ 1 − δ.

Proof. We consider an L-layer C O -GNN(η, π) architecture satisfying the following:

      (i) the environment network η is composed of L injective layers,
      (ii) the action network π is composed of a single layer, and it is shared across C O -GNN layers.

Item (i) can be satisfied by a large class of GNN architectures, including S UM GNN (Morris et al.,
                                                            (0)     (0)
2019) and GIN (Xu et al., 2019). We start by assuming hu = hv . These representations can be
differentiated if the model can jointly realize the following actions at some layer ℓ using the action
network π:
           (ℓ)
       1. au = L ∨ S,
           (ℓ)
       2. av = I ∨ B, and
                                          (ℓ)
       3. ∃ a neighbor w of u s.t. aw = S ∨ B.

The key point is to ensure an update for the state of u via an aggregated message from its neighbors
(at least one), while isolating v. In what follows, we assume the worst-case for the degree of u and
consider a node w to be the only neighbor of u. Let us denote the joint probability of realizing these
actions 1-3 for the nodes u, v, w at layer ℓ as:

                  p(ℓ)           (ℓ)               (ℓ)              (ℓ)
                    u,v = P (au = L ∨ S) ∧ (av = I ∨ B) ∧ (aw = S ∨ B) .

The probability of taking each action is non-zero (since it is a result of applying softmax) and u has
                                                 (ℓ)
at least one neighbor (non-isolated), therefore pu,v > 0. For example, if we assume a constant action
network that outputs a uniform distribution over the possible actions (each action probability 0.25)
       (ℓ)
then pu,v = 0.125.
This means that the environment network η applies the following updates to the states of u and v with
             (ℓ)
probability pu,v > 0:

                      h(ℓ+1)
                        u    = η (ℓ) h(ℓ)         (ℓ)        (ℓ)
                                        u , {{hw | w ∈ Nu , aw = S ∨ B}} ,

                      h(ℓ+1)
                        v    = η (ℓ)
                                       h(ℓ)
                                        v   , {
                                              {}}   .

The inputs to the environment network layer η (ℓ) for these updates are clearly different, and since the
                                                   (ℓ+1)      (ℓ+1)
environment layer is injective, we conclude that hu       ̸= hv     .
Thus, the probability of having different final representations for the nodes u and v is lower bounded
by the probability of the events 1-3 jointly occurring at least once in one of the C O -GNN layers,
which, by applying the union bound, yields:
                                                Lu,v
                                                Y                               Lu,v
            P(h(L
               u
                  u,v )
                        ̸= h(L
                            v
                               u,v )
                                     )≥1−             1 − p(ℓ)
                                                           u,v ≥ 1 − (1 − γu,v )     ≥1−δ
                                                ℓ=0

                                (ℓ)
where γu,v = maxℓ∈[Lu,v ] pu,v and Lu,v = log1−γu,v (δ).


                                                         14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We repeat this process for all pairs of non-isolated nodes u, v ∈ V . Due to the injectivity of η (ℓ)
for all ℓ ∈ [L], once the nodes are distinguished, they cannot remain so in deeper layers of the
                                                                                           (ℓ)    (ℓ)
architecture, which ensures that all nodes u, v ∈ V differ in their final representations hu ̸= hv
after this process completes. The number of layers required for this construction is then given by:
                                                      X
                         L = |V \ I| log1−α (δ) ≥            log1−γu,v (δ) ,
                                                           u,v∈V \I

where I is the set of all isolated nodes in V and

                           α = max (γu,v ) = max                     max            p(ℓ)
                                                                                     u,v        .
                              u,v∈V \I               u,v∈V \I       ℓ∈[Lu,v ]

Having shown a C O -GNN construction with the number of layers bounded as above, we conclude
the proof.
Proposition 5.1. Let G1 = (V1 , E1 , X1 ) and G2 = (V2 , E2 , X2 ) be two non-isomorphic graphs.
Then, for any threshold 0 < δ < 1, there exists a parametrization of a C O -GNN architecture using
                                          (L)     (L)
sufficiently many layers L, satisfying P(zG1 ̸= zG2 ) ≥ 1 − δ.

Proof. Let δ > 0 be any value and consider the graph G = (V, E, X) which has G1 and G2 as its
components:
                            V = V1 ∪ V2 , E = E1 ∪ E2 , X = X1 ||X2 ,
where || is the matrix horizontal concatenation. By Lemma A.1, for every pair of non-isolated nodes
u, v ∈ V and for all δ > 0, there exists a C O -GNN architecture with sufficiently many layers
L = |V \ I| log1−α (δ) which satisfies:

                    (Lu,v )     (Lu,v )                                      (ℓ)
                P(hu        ̸= hv       ) ≥ 1 − δ, with α = max     max pu,v        ,
                                                                u,v∈V \I            ℓ∈[Lu,v ]

       (ℓ)
where pu,v represents a lower bound on the probability for the representations of nodes u, v ∈ V at
layer ℓ being different.
We use the same C O -GNN construction given in Lemma A.1 on G, which ensures that all non-
isolated nodes have different representations in G. When applying this C O -GNN to G1 and G2
separately, we get that every non-isolated node from either graph has a different representation with
probability 1 − δ as a result. Hence, the multiset M1 of node features for G1 and the multiset M2
of node features of G2 must differ. Assuming an injective pooling function from these multisets to
graph-level representations, we get:
                                               (L)     (L)
                                         P(zG1 ̸= zG2 ) ≥ 1 − δ
for L = |V \ I| log1−α (δ).

A.2    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5.2

Theorem 5.2. Let G = (V, E, X) be a connected graph with node features. For some k > 0, for
any target node v ∈ V , for any k source nodes u1 , . . . , uk ∈ V , and for any compact, differentiable
                (0)            (0)
function f : Rd × . . . × Rd → Rd , there exists an L-layer C O -GNN computing final node
                                                               (L)
representations such that for any ϵ, δ > 0 it holds that P(|hv − f (xu1 , . . . xuk )| < ϵ) ≥ 1 − δ.

                                                                                                    (0)            (0)
Proof. For arbitrary ϵ, δ > 0, we start by constructing a feature encoder ENC : Rd                        → R2(k+1)d
                                                     (0)
which encodes the initial representations xw ∈ Rd of each node w as follows:
                                                                  ⊤ ⊤
                                 ENC(xw ) = x̃⊤

                                                    w ⊕ . . . ⊕ x̃w   ,
                                                  |      {z       }
                                                             k+1

where x̃w = [ReLU(x⊤                   ⊤ ⊤
                       w ) ⊕ ReLU(−xw )] . Observe that this encoder can be parametrized using a
2-layer MLP, and that x̃w can be decoded using a single linear layer to get back to the initial features:

                                                                  ⊤ ⊤
                   DEC(x̃w ) = DEC             ReLU(x⊤
                                                     w ) ⊕ ReLU(−xw )    = xw


                                                      15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Individualizing the graph. Importantly, we encode the features using 2(k + 1)d(0) dimensions in
order to be able to preserve the original node features. Using the construction from Lemma A.1, we
can ensure that every pair of nodes in the connected graph have different features with probability
1 − δ1 . However, if we do this naı̈vely, then the node features will be changed before we can transmit
them to the target node. We therefore make sure that the width of the C O -GNN architecture from
Lemma A.1 is increased to 2(k + 1)d(0) dimensions such that it applies the identity mapping on
all features beyond the first 2d(0) components. This way we make sure that all feature components
beyond the first 2d(0) components are preserved. The existence of such a C O -GNN is straightforward
since we can always do an identity mapping using base environment models such S UM GNNs. We
use L1 C O -GNN layers for this part of the construction.
In order for our architecture to retain a positive representation for all nodes, we now construct 2
                                                     (L)            (0)
additional layers which encode the representation hw ∈ R2(k+1)d of each node w as follows:
                                   ⊤            ⊤
                            [ReLU(qw ) ⊕ ReLU(−qw ) ⊕ x̃⊤             ⊤ ⊤
                                                        w ⊕ . . . ⊕ x̃w ]
                 (0)                                                      (L )
where qw ∈ R2d         denotes a vector of the first 2d(0) entries of hw 1 .
Transmitting information. Consider a shortest path u1 = w0 → w1 → · · · → wr → wr+1 = v of
length r1 from node u1 to node v. We use exactly r1 C O -GNN layers in this part of the construction.
For the first these layers, the action network assigns the following actions to these nodes:

      • w0 performs the action B ROADCAST,
      • w1 performs the action L ISTEN, and
      • all other nodes are perform the action I SOLATE.

This is then repeated in the remaining layers, for all consecutive pairs wi , wi+1 , 0 ≤ i ≤ r until the
whole path is traversed. That is, at every layer, all graph edges are removed except the one between
wi and wi+1 , for each 0 ≤ i ≤ r. By construction each element in the node representations is positive
and so we can ignore the ReLU.
We apply the former construction such that it acts on entries 2d(0) to 3d(0) of the node representations,
resulting in the following representation for node v:
                                 ⊤            ⊤
                          [ReLU(qw ) ⊕ ReLU(−qw ) ⊕ x̃u1 ⊕ x̃v ⊕ . . . ⊕ x̃v ]
                 (0)                                                      (L )
where qw ∈ R2d         denotes a vector of the first 2d(0) entries of hw 1 .
We denote the probability in which node y does not follow the construction at stage 1 ≤ t ≤ r by
  (t)
βy such that the probability that all graph edges are removed except the one between wi and wi+1
                                        |V |
at stage t is lower bounded by (1 − β) , where β = maxy∈V (βy ). Thus, the probability that the
                                           |V |r
construction holds is bounded by (1 − β) 1 .
The same process is then repeated for nodes ui , 2 ≤ i ≤ k, acting on the entries (k + 1)d(0) to
(k + 2)d(0) of the node representations and resulting in the following representation for node v:
                                ⊤            ⊤
                         [ReLU(qw ) ⊕ ReLU(−qw ) ⊕ x̃u1 ⊕ x̃u2 ⊕ . . . ⊕ x̃uk ]

                                                                                                  (0)
In order to decode the positive features, we construct the feature decoder DEC′ : R2(k+2)d →
        (0)
R(k+1)d , that for 1 ≤ i ≤ k applies DEC to entries 2(i + 1)d(0) to (i + 2)d(0) of its input as
follows:
                      [DEC(x̃u1 ) ⊕ . . . ⊕ DEC(x̃uk )] = [xu1 ⊕ . . . ⊕ xuk ]

Given ϵ, δ, we set:
                                                      1−δ
                                δ2 = 1 −                           Pk+1      > 0.
                                                            |V |    i=1 ri
                                           (1 − δ1 ) (1 − β)

                                                     16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Having transmitted and decoded all the required features into x = [x1 ⊕ . . . ⊕ xk ], where xi denotes
                                                                                             (0)
the vector of entries id(0) to (i + 1)d(0) for 0 ≤ i ≤ k, we can now use an MLP : R(k+1)d → Rd
                                                                                         (L)
and the universal approximation property to map this vector to the final representation hv such that:
                                                                            Pk+1
                                                                     |V |          r
             P(|h(L)
                  v − f (xu1 , . . . xuk )| < ϵ) ≥ (1 − δ1 ) (1 − β)
                                                                     i=1 i
                                                                           (1 − δ2 )
                                                 ≥ 1 − δ.
                                                  Pk
The construction hence requires L = L1 + 2 + i=0 ri C O -GNN layers.


B    A NALYZING THE ACTIONS
The action mechanism used by C O -GNNs is a key component in the new message-passing paradigm.
However, as the action distribution, sampling, and aggregation are performed in a black-box manner
(no access to them from outside of the architecture), it is hard to understand the correlation between
them and C O -GNNs favorable empirical results. The purpose of this section is to open this black box
and to provide additional insights regarding the actions being learned by C O -GNNs.
An obvious idea would be to inspect the learned action distributions on different datasets, but the
action distributions alone may not provide a clear picture of the topological structure of the graph.
For example, two connected nodes that choose to I SOLATE achieve the same topology as nodes that
choose both to B ROADCAST or L ISTEN. This is a simple consequence of the immense number of
action configurations and their rich set of interactions.
In an effort to better understand the learned graph topology, we can instead inspect directly the
induced directed graphs at every layer. To quantify the evolution of the graphs across layers, we
present the ratio of the directed edges that are kept across the different layers in Figure 7. We record
the directed edge ratio over the 10 different layers of our best, fully trained 10 C O -GNN(µ, µ) model
on the roman-empire (Platonov et al., 2023) and cora datasets (Pei et al., 2020). We follow the 10
data splits and the methodology of Platonov et al. (2023) and Yang et al. (2016), respectively.


                    (a) cora                                           (b) roman-empire

Figure 7: The ratio of directed edges that are kept on (a) cora (as a homophilic dataset) and on (b)
roman-empire (as a heterophilic dataset) for each layer 0 ≤ ℓ < 10.

Dataset and task-specific: We argued that C O -GNNs are adaptive to different tasks and datasets
while discussing their properties in Section 5. This experiment serves as a strong evidence for this
statement. Indeed, by inspecting Figure 7, we observe completely opposite trends between the two
datasets in terms of the evolution of the ratio of edges that are kept across layers:

 • On the homophilic dataset cora, the ratio of edges that are kept gradually decreases as we go to
   the deeper layers. In fact, 100% of the edges are kept at layer ℓ = 0 while all edges are dropped
   at layer ℓ = 9. This is very insightful because homophilic datasets are known to not benefit from
   using many layers, and the trained C O -GNN model recognizes this by eventually isolating all
   the nodes. This is particularly the case for cora, where classical MPNNs typically achieve their
   best performance with 1-3 layers.
 • On the heterophilic dataset roman-empire, the ratio of edges that are kept gradually increases
   after ℓ = 1 as we go to the deeper layers. Initially, ∼ 42% of the edges are kept at layer ℓ = 0


                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    while eventually this reaches 99% at layer ℓ = 9. This is interesting, since in heterophilic graphs,
    edges tend to connect nodes of different classes and so classical MPNNS, which aggregate
    information based on the homophily assumption perform poorly. Although, C O -GNN model
    uses these classical models it compensates by intricately controlling information flow. It seems
    that C O -GNN model manages to capture the heterophilous aspect of the dataset by restricting
    the flow of information in the early layer and slowly enabling it the deeper the layer (the further
    away the nodes), which might be a great benefit to its success over heterophilic benchmarks.

C    RUNTIME ANALYSIS


Figure 8: Empirical runtimes: C O -GNN(∗, ∗) forward pass duration as a function of GCN forward
pass duration on 4 datasets.

Consider a GCN model with L layers and a hidden dimension of d on an input graph G = (V, E, X).
Wu et al. (2019) has shown the time complexity of this model to be O(Ld(|E|d + |V |)). To extend
this analysis to C O -GNNs, let us consider a C O -GNN(∗, ∗) architecture composed of:

      • a GCN environment network η with Lη layers and hidden dimension of dη , and
      • a GCN action network π with Lπ layers and hidden dimension of dπ .

A single C O -GNN layer first computes the actions for each node by feeding node represen-
tations through the action network π, which is then used in the aggregation performed by
the environment layer. This means that the time complexity of a single C O -GNN layer is


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


O(Lπ dπ (|E|dπ + |V |) + dη (|E|dη + |V |)). The time complexity of the whole C O -GNN architecture
is then O(Lη Lπ dπ (|E|dπ + |V |) + Lη dη (|E|dη + |V |)).
Typically, the hidden dimensions of the environment network and action network match. In all of
our experiments, the depth of the action network Lπ is much smaller (typically ≤ 3) than that of
the environment network Lη . Therefore, assuming Lπ << Lη we get that a runtime complexity of
O(Lη dη (|E|dη + |V |)), matching the runtime of a GCN model.
To empirically confirm the efficiency of C O -GNNs, we report in Figure 8 the duration of a forward
pass of a C O -GNN(∗, ∗) and GCN with matching hyperparameters across multiple datasets. From
Figure 8, it is evident that the increase in runtime is linearly related to its corresponding base model
with R2 values higher or equal to 0.98 across 4 datasets from different domains. Note that, for the
datasets IMDB-B and PROTEINS, we report the average forward duration for a single graph in a
batch.

D     A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS

D.1    E XPRESSIVITY EXPERIMENT

In Proposition 5.1 we state that C O -GNNs can distinguish between pairs of graphs which are 1-WL
indistinguishable. We validate this with a simple synthetic dataset: C YCLES. Similar to the pair of
graphs presented in Figure 5, C YCLES consists of 7 pairs of undirected graphs, where the first graph
is a k-cycle for k ∈ [6, 12] and the second graph is a disjoint union of a (k−3)-cycle and a triangle.
The task is to correctly identify the cycle graphs. As the pairs are 1-WL indistinguishable, solving
this task implies a strictly higher expressive power than 1-WL. C O -GNN(Σ, Σ) and C O -GNN(µ, µ)
achieve 100% training accuracy, perfectly classifying the cycles, whereas their corresponding classical
MPNNs S UM GNN and M EAN GNN achieve a random guess accuracy of 50%. These results imply
that C O -GNN can increase the expressive power of their classical counterparts.

D.2    L ONG - RANGE INTERACTIONS

To validate the performance of C O -GNNs on long-
range tasks, we experiment with the recent LRGB Table 4: Results on LRGB. Top three mod-
benchmark (Dwivedi et al., 2022).                         els are colored by First, Second, Third.
Setup. We train C O -GNN(∗, ∗) and C O -GNN(ϵ, ϵ)
C O -GNN(ϵ, ϵ) on LRGB and report the unweighted                                   Peptides-func
mean Average Precision (AP) for Peptides-func. All             GCN                0.6860 ± 0.0050
experiments are run 4 times with 4 different seeds and         GINE               0.6621 ± 0.0067
follow the data splits provided by Dwivedi et al. (2022).      GatedGCN           0.6765 ± 0.0047
Following the methodology in Tönshoff et al. (2023),          CRaWl              0.7074 ± 0.0032
we used AdamW as optimizer and cosine-with-warmup              DRew               0.7150 ± 0.0044
scheduler. We also use the provided results for GCN            Exphormer          0.6527 ± 0.0043
(Kipf & Welling, 2017), GCNII (Chen et al., 2020),             GRIT               0.6988 ± 0.0082
GINE (Xu et al., 2019), GatedGCN (Bresson & Lau-               Graph-ViT          0.6942 ± 0.0075
rent, 2018), CRaWl (Tönshoff et al., 2023), DRew (Gut-        G-MLPMixer         0.6921 ± 0.0054
teridge et al., 2023), Exphormer (Shirzad et al., 2023),
GRIT (Ma et al., 2023), Graph-ViT / G-MLPMixer (He             C O -GNN(∗, ∗) 0.6990 ± 0.0093
et al., 2023).                                                 C O -GNN(ϵ, ϵ) 0.6963 ± 0.0076
Results. We follow Tönshoff et al. (2023) who iden-
tified that the previously reported large performance
gaps between classical MPNNs and transformer-based models can be closed by a more extensive
tuning of MPNNs. In light of this, we note that the performance gap between different models is
not large. Classical MPNNs such as GCN, GINE, and GatedGCN surpass some transformer-based
approaches such as Exphormer. C O -GNN(∗, ∗) further improves on the competitive GCN and is
the third best performing model after DRew and CRaWl. Similarly, C O -GNN(ϵ, ϵ) closely matches
C O -GNN(∗, ∗) and is substantially better than its base architecture GIN. This experiment further sug-
gests that exploring different classes of C O -GNNs is a promising direction, as C O -GNNs typically
boost the performance of their underlying base architecture.


                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E     F URTHER DETAILS OF THE EXPERIMENTS REPORTED IN THE PAPER
In this section, we present the Gumbel distribution and the Gumbel-softmax temperature, the data
generation for ROOT N EIGHBORS, dataset statistics, and the hyperparameters.

E.1   T HE G UMBEL DISTRIBUTION AND THE G UMBEL - SOFTMAX TEMPERATURE

The Gumbel distribution is used to model
the distribution of the maximum (or the
minimum) of a set of random variables.
Its probability density function has a
distinctive, skewed shape, with heavy
tails, making it a valuable tool for an-
alyzing and quantifying the likelihood
of rare and extreme occurrences. By
applying the Gumbel distribution to the
logits or scores associated with discrete
choices, the Gumbel-Softmax estimator
transforms them into a probability dis-
tribution over the discrete options. The
probability density function of a variable
that follows X ∼ Gumbel(0, 1) is the
following:
                            −x
            f (x) = e−x+e
                                                                                 −x
We also visualize the probability density      Figure 9: The pdf f (x) = e−x+e        of Gumbel(0, 1).
function of Gumbel(0, 1) in Figure 9.
The Straight-through Gumbel-softmax estimator is known to benefit from learning an inverse-
temperature before sampling an action, which we use in our experimental setup. For a given graph
G = (V, E, X) the inverse-temperature of node v ∈ V is estimated by applying a bias-free linear
layer L : Rd → R to the intermediate representation h ∈ Rd . To ensure the temperature is positive,
an approximation of the ReLU function with a bias hyperparameter τ ∈ R is subsequently applied:
                                1
                                     = log 1 + exp ω T h + τ0

                              τ (h)
where τ0 controls the maximum possible value for the temperature.

E.2   ROOT N EIGHBORS : DATASET GENERATION

In Section 6.1, we compare C O -GNNs to a class of MPNNs on a dedicated synthetic dataset ROOT-
N EIGHBORS in order to assess the model’s ability to redirect the information flow. ROOT N EIGHBORS
consists of 3000 trees of depth 2 with random node features of dimension d = 5 which is generated
as follows:
  • Features: Each feature is independently sampled from a uniform distribution U [−2, 2]s.
  • Level-1 nodes: The number of nodes in the first level of each tree in the train, validation, and test
    set is sampled from a uniform distribution U [3, 10], U [5, 12], and U [5, 12] respectively. Then,
    the degrees of the level-1 nodes are sampled as follows:
       • The number of level-1 nodes with a degree of 6 is sampled independently from a uniform
          distribution U [1, 3], U [3, 5], U [3, 5] for the train, validation, and test set, respectively.
       • The degree of the remaining level-1 nodes are sampled from the uniform distribution U [2, 3].
We use a train, validation, and test split of equal size.

E.3   DATASET STATISTICS

The statistics of the real-world long-range, node-based, and graph-based benchmarks used can be
found in Tables 5 to 7.


                                                    20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 Table 5: Statistics of the long-range graph benchmarks (LRGB).

                                                        Peptides-func
                                 # graphs                  15535
                                 # average nodes           150.94
                                 # average edges           307.30
                                 # classes                   10
                                 metrics                    AP

                    Table 6: Statistics of the node classification benchmarks.

                        roman-empire amazon-ratings minesweeper               tolokers   questions
      # nodes              22662               24492         10000         11758    48921
      # edges              32927               93050         39402         519000  153540
      # node features       300                 300            7             10      301
      # classes              18                   5             2             2        2
      edge homophily        0.05                0.38          0.68          0.59     0.84
      metrics              ACC                 ACC          AUC-ROC       AUC-ROC AUC-ROC

                    Table 7: Statistics of the graph classification benchmarks.

                        IMDB-B     IMDB-M        REDDIT-B       NCI1     PROTEINS        ENZYMES
  # graphs               1000          1500         2000        4110          1113           600
  # average nodes        19.77         13.00       429.63       29.87         39.06         32.63
  # average edges        96.53         65.94       497.75       32.30         72.82         64.14
  # classes                2             3            2           2             2             6
  metrics                ACC           ACC          ACC         ACC           ACC           ACC


E.4    H YPERPARAMETERS

In Tables 8 to 11, we report the hyper-parameters used in our synthetic experiments and real-world
long-range, node-based and graph-based benchmarks.

               Table 8: Hyper-parameters used for ROOT N EIGHBORS and C YCLES.

                                          ROOT N EIGHBORS           C YCLES
                          η # layers               1             10, 20, 30
                          η dim                  16, 32         8, 16, 32, 64
                          π # layers              1, 2               1, 2
                          π dim                  8, 16               16
                          learned temp             ✓                  -
                          temp                     -                  1
                          τ0                      0.1                 -
                          # epochs               10000              1000
                          dropout                   0               0
                          learn rate              10−3          10−3 , 10−4
                          batch size                -              14


                                                   21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         Table 9: Hyper-parameters used for the long-range graph benchmarks (LRGB).

                                                        Peptides-func
                                 η # layers                   5-9
                                 η dim                      200,300
                                 π # layers                   1-3
                                 π dim                      8,16,32
                                 learned temp                  ✓
                                 τ0                           0.5
                                 # epochs                     500
                                 dropout                    0
                                 learn rate          3 · 10−4 , 10−3
                                 # decoder layer           2,3
                                 # warmup epochs            5
                                 positional encoding LapPE, RWSE
                                 batch norm                ✓
                                 skip connections          ✓



            Table 10: Hyper-parameters used for the node classification benchmarks.

                        roman-empire        amazon-ratings      minesweeper     tolokers    questions
 η # layers                5-12                   5-10               8-15         5-10       5-9
 η dim                  128,256,512              128,256          32,64,128       16,32     32,64
 π # layers                 1-3                    1-6                1-3          1-3       1-3
 π dim                    4,8,16                4,8,16,32        4,8,16,32,64   4,8,16,32 4,8,16,32
 learned temp                ✓                      ✓                 ✓             ✓         ✓
 τ0                        0,0.1                  0,0.1              0,0.1        0,0.1     0,0.1
 # epochs                  3000                   3000               3000         3000      3000
 dropout                    0.2                 0.2                 0.2             0.2      0.2
 learn rate          3 · 10−3 , 3 · 10−5 3 · 10−4 , 3 · 10−5 3 · 10−3 , 3 · 10−5 3 · 10−3 10−3 , 10−2
 activation function       GeLU                GeLU                GeLU           GeLU      GeLU
 skip connections            ✓                   ✓                   ✓               ✓        ✓
 layer normalization         ✓                   ✓                   ✓               ✓        ✓



           Table 11: Hyper-parameters used for social networks and proteins datasets.

                        IMDB-B IMDB-M REDDIT-B                  NCI1      PROTEINS ENZYMES
  η # layers               1           1           3,6           2,5         3,5         1,2
  η dim                  32,64      64,256       128,256     64,128,256      64        128,256
  π # layers               2           3           1,2            2          1,2          1
  π dim                  16,32        16          16,32         8, 16         8           8
  learned temp.           ✓           ✓            ✓             ✓           ✓           ✓
  τ0                      0.1         0.1          0.1           0.5         0.5         0.5
  # epochs               5000        5000         5000          3000        3000        3000
  dropout                 0.5         0.5           0.5          0            0              0
  learn rate             10−4        10−3          10−3      10−3 ,10−2     10−3           10−3
  pooling                mean        mean          mean        mean         mean           mean
  batch size              32          32            32          32           32             32
  scheduler step size     50          50            50          50           50             50
  scheduler gamma         0.5         0.5           0.5         0.5          0.5            0.5



                                                   22
