Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L EARNING I DENTIFIABLE C AUSAL S TRUCTURES WITH
PAIRWISE R EPRESENTATION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Supervised Causal Learning (SCL) aims to obtain causal relations from observa-
         tional data, leveraging the model learned from prior datasets with ground truth
         causal relations. Deep Neural Network (DNN) based SCL, which learns DNNs as
         causal models, has gained significant attention with its numerous advantages. A
         recently proposed transformer-based architecture employs sample-wise and node-
         wise attention mechanisms to capture representations of individual variables. In
         the inference stage, the trained model takes the test data as input and outputs a
         Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) represented as a weighted adjacency matrix.
         However, this paper identifies two limitations of these approaches. First, using the
         adjacency matrix as a learning target can yield inconsistent results, w.r.t. structure
         identifiability if Bernoulli sampling is further adopted to generate the DAG. Sec-
         ond, current network architecture does not adequately encode the essential causal
         information for learning causal structures. To address these issues, we propose a
         novel DNN-based SCL approach, PAIRE, which incorporates a unique pairwise
         encoder module with a unidirectional attention layer. By taking both node fea-
         tures and pairwise features as layer input, it can model the internal and external
         relationships of variable pairs. In addition, we use a skeleton matrix along with
         a v-tensor, a third-order tensor representing v-structures, as our output, so as to
         represent the Markov Equivalence Class (MEC), which resolves identifiability in-
         consistency. Empirical evidence indicates PAIRE significantly outperforms other
         DNN-based SCL approaches.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Supervised Causal Learning (SCL) (Dai et al., 2023; Ke et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2022) is an emerging
paradigm in the field of causal discovery that seeks to learn causal relations from observational data
in the following supervised setting: It has the training stage and the inference stage. In the training
stage, the datasets associated with ground truth causal relations are used to learn a model to map
data to the causal structure. The required training data, which comprises pairs of data and DAG,
can be readily obtained via synthetic generation, or from a simulator if it is available (Lorch et al.,
2022). During the inference stage, the causal structure is identified by simply applying the learned
model to the target data. Typically, the causal structure is represented by a Directed Acyclic Graph
(DAG) (Glymour et al., 2019).
Compared to traditional causal learning methods which treat observational data separately without
supervision, the potential of SCL has been demonstrated through its strong empirical performance
(Dai et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2022), as well as its robustness against sample size and distribution
shift (Ke et al., 2023; Lorch et al., 2022). Notably, the deep neural network (DNN) based SCL
(i.e., using DNNs to learn the mapping from data to DAG) is garnering attention due to its several
advantages. These include its end-to-end training framework, which eliminates the needs of manual
feature engineering, its capability to effectively handle both continuous and discrete data types, and
the ability to learn latent representations.
The recent approaches CSIvA (Ke et al., 2023) and AVICI (Lorch et al., 2022) on DNN-based SCL
propose a novel architecture based on transformers. This architecture incorporates sample-wise and
node-wise attention mechanisms to capture the representations of individual variables, ensuring per-
mutation invariance across samples and permutation equivariance across variables. The inference


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


model returns a weighted adjacency matrix A ∈ R , where Aij ∈ [0, 1] is the probability that
                                                         d×d

i → j (indicates that i is a direct cause of j). The final DAG G is obtained as a Bernoulli sample of
A, where each entry Gij is sampled from Aij independently. We term such approach as “Bernoulli-
sampling adjacency matrix approach”. Despite the encouraging results achieved thus far, we have
identified two limitations in these approaches. First, the Bernoulli-sampling adjacency matrix ap-
proach can yield inconsistent results with respect to structure identifiability (identifiability for short).
Second, although current attention mechanisms successfully capture sample-wise or node-wise in-
variance or equivariance, they do not adequately encode the essential causal information for learning
causal structure. Below are the detailed elaborations:

Risk of Bernoulli-sampling adjacency matrix approach. One inherent characteristic of causal
learning is that a DAG is only identifiable up to its Markov equivalence class (MEC) (Andersson
et al., 1997; Verma & Pearl, 1990), rendering it impossible to distinguish between two DAGs within
the same MEC based on available data. Considering a simulator that generates DAGs G1 ∶ X →
T → Y and G2 ∶ X ← T ← Y where X, T, Y are discrete random variables. As both G1 and G2
are within an MEC (Meek, 1995b), each observational data D can be associated with either label
G1 or G2 . Even with sufficient training data generated by the simulator, if the Bernoulli-sampling
adjacency matrix approach is adopted, an optimal SCL learner will learn that 0 < PXT < 1 and
0 < PT Y < 1 for a test case D (generated by the simulator). Consequently, there exists a non-
zero probability of PXT (1 − PT Y ) resulting in the output of a v-structure X → T ← Y , which
contradicts the observed data. A concrete case study is elaborated in Sec. 4.3.

Essential causal information. Causal learning encompasses two fundamental tasks: the deter-
mination of the adjacency relationship between each pair of variables (skeleton learning) and the
identification of the causal directions (orientation) between adjacent variables (Yu et al., 2016). The
essential information required for skeleton learning is termed persistent dependency, indicating that
a pair of variables are adjacent in the DAG if and only if they remain dependent regardless of condi-
tioning on any subset of other variables. For orientation, an example of the essential information is
termed orientation asymmetry. After obtaining the skeleton from the first task, we proceed to orient
each unshielded triple X − T − Y into a v-structure by identifying a set of variables S, satisfying
X ⊥ Y ∣ S and T ∉ S. This process necessitates distinct information for the pair ⟨X, Y ⟩ compared
to the information required for the variable T . This asymmetry poses a challenge in encoding poten-
tial conditional dependencies of the ⟨X, Y ⟩, which is also relevant to their persistent dependency.
These essential pieces of information are not adequately encoded by current model architectures.
To address these limitations, in this paper, we propose a novel DNN-based SCL approach called
PAIRE. PAIRE is equipped with a specially designed pairwise encoder module with a unidirectional
attention layer. With both node features and pairwise features as the layer input, it can model both
internal and external relationships of pairs of nodes. We design our learning target as a skeleton ma-
trix together with v-tensor, a third-order tensor representing the v-structures (notably, the previously
utilized adjacency matrix is a second-order tensor in comparison). These represent the MEC, which
resolves the inconsistency, w.r.t. identifiability. Our contributions can be summarized as follows:

• We propose a DNN-based supervised approach, PAIRE, for causal discovery from observational
  data. It can learn identifiable causal structures on general discrete data and continuous data.
• We design pairwise representations modeled by a unidirectional attention layer to capture essential
  causal information including persistent dependency and orientation asymmetry.
• We propose to use a skeleton matrix together with a v-tensor as the model output, forming a direct
  representation of MEC. It resolves the inconsistency w.r.t. identifiability.
• Extensive experimental results show that PAIRE significantly outperforms other DNN-based SCL
  approaches. Our codes will be released for further research purposes.


2    R ELATED W ORK

The traditional methods of causal learning mostly fall into four categories: constraint-based, score-
based, continuous optimization, and functional causal models. Constraint-based methods aim to


                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                  𝐷                           0     0   1    1       Identifiable Causal Structures
                                     Random Sampling
                     Graph                               𝐴                                    0     0   1    0
                                                                          𝐵                                                 𝐷-𝐴-𝐶       0
                  Distribution                                                                1     1   0    0
                     𝑃(𝐺)                                                                                                   𝐴-𝐶-𝐵       1
                                                                  C                           1     0   0    0
                                 Forward             Random Graph 𝐺                                                         V-structures
                                                                                                  Skeleton
                                 Sampling
                                                                                    Training data


                 𝐴 𝐵 𝐶 𝐷                                              𝐹𝐸                                     𝐹𝐸
                                            Training Data
                                                                                   Training                             Training
                                                                      𝑆𝑃            Label                    𝑉𝑃          Label
      Training   Synthetic Data                             Skeleton Predictor                      V-structure Predictor



                  𝐴 𝐵 𝐶 𝐷
                                                              0       0    1   1
                                                                                                                                      Post-            𝐷
                                                              0       0    1   0              𝐷-𝐴-𝐶              0                 processing     𝐴        𝐵
                                             Test Data        1       1    0   0              𝐴-𝐶-𝐵              1
                                                              1       0    0   0                                                                      𝐶
                                                                                          Predicted V-structures
                   Real Data                             Predicted Skeleton                                                                     Predicted CPDAG
      Testing                                                                            Test Data


Figure 1: The whole workflow of PAIRE. During the training stage, predictors are trained to predict
skeletons and v-structures with training data from sampling. During the testing stage, the predicted
skeleton and v-structures are combined together to yield the final predicted CPDAG.


identify the DAG that is consistent with inter-variable conditional independence. The learning pro-
cedure of constraint-based methods first identifies the corresponding skeleton and then conducts
orientation based on v-structure identification (Yu et al., 2016). The output is a CPDAG which
represents the MEC. Notable algorithms in this category include PC (Spirtes et al., 2000), along
with variations such as Conservative-PC (Ramsey et al., 2012), PC-stable (Colombo et al., 2014),
and Parallel-PC (Le et al., 2016) designed to enhance robustness and efficiency. Score-based meth-
ods aim to find an optimal DAG according to a predefined score function, subject to combinatorial
constraints. These methods employ specific optimization procedures such as forward-backward
search GES (Chickering, 2002), hill-climbing (Koller & Friedman, 2009), and integer programming
(Cussens, 2011). Continuous optimization methods transform the discrete search procedure into a
continuous equality constraint: NOTEARS (Zheng et al., 2018) formulates the acyclic constraint as
a continuous equality constraint and is further extended by DAG-GNN (Yu et al., 2019) to support
non-linear causal relations. RL-BIC (Zhu et al., 2020) utilizes Reinforcement Learning to search for
the optimal DAG. Recently, ENCO (Lippe et al., 2022) proposes a continuous optimization method
to learn causal structure from interventional data wherein the edge existence (i.e., skeleton) and
edge orientation are modeled as separate parameters. This approach aligns with the principles of
our learning target design. These methods can be viewed as unsupervised since they do not access
additional datasets associated with ground truth causal relations. We refer to Glymour et al. (2019);
Vowels et al. (2022) for a thorough exploration of this literature.
Supervised causal learning begins from orienting edges in the context of continuous, non-linear bi-
variate cases under the functional causal model formalism. The task is to predict the causal direction
(i.e., whether X → Y or X ← Y ) given a set of cause-effect samples (dataset with binary labels).
Supervised methods such as RCC (Lopez-Paz et al., 2015) and NCC (Lopez-Paz et al., 2017) have
outperformed unsupervised approaches like ANM (Hoyer et al., 2008) or IGCI (Janzing et al., 2012)
in predicting pairwise causal relations. For multivariate causal learning, ML4S (Ma et al., 2022)
proposes a supervised approach specifically for skeleton learning. It employs an order-based cas-
cade learning procedure and generates training data from vicinal graphs. Complementary to ML4S,
ML4C (Dai et al., 2023) takes both data and skeleton as input and utilizes machine learning tech-
niques to classify unshielded triples as either v-structures or non-v-structures. Although ML4S and
ML4C have demonstrated impressive empirical performance, it should be noted that both methods
require manual feature engineering and are only applicable to discrete data.
DNN-based SCL has emerged as a prominent approach for enabling end-to-end causal learning. Our
research is primarily related to two other notable approaches, namely CSIvA (Ke et al., 2023) and
AVICI (Lorch et al., 2022). They introduce novel transformer architectures that incorporate sample-


                                                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


wise and node-wise attention mechanisms, enabling both permutation invariance across samples
and permutation equivariance across variables. Building upon this, our approach extends the ex-
isting framework by incorporating pairwise attention to capture essential causal information more
effectively, such as persistent dependency and orientation asymmetry. We further propose to use
a combination of a skeleton and a set of v-structures as the learning target to address the issue of
inconsistency w.r.t identifiability.


3     BACKGROUND

3.1    C AUSAL G RAPHICAL M ODEL

A Causal Graphical Model is defined by a joint probability distribution P over multiple random
variables and a DAG G. Each node Xi in G represents a variable, and a directed edge Xi →
Xj represents a causal relation from Xi to Xj . The distribution P is Markovian w.r.t. G, i.e.,
                         d
P (X1 , X2 , ⋯, Xd ) = ∏i=1 P (Xi ∣ pai ), where pai is the parent set of Xi in G. In this work,
                                           G             G

we assume causal sufficiency, i.e., there are no latent common causes of any variables in the graph.


3.2   I DENTIFIABILITY

A causal DAG is in general only identifiable up to its Markov equivalence class (MEC) from obser-
vational data. The study of identifiability is well established in literature (Frydenberg, 1990; Verma
& Pearl, 1990). Below we present the concepts that are relevant to the concept of identifiability. A
skeleton is defined as follows:
Definition 3.1 (Skeleton). A skeleton E defined over the data distribution P is an undirected graph
where an edge exists between Xi and Xj if and only if Xi and Xj are always dependent in P , i.e.,
∀Z ⊆ {X1 , X2 , ⋯, Xd } \ {Xi , Xj }, we have Xi ⊥̸ Xj ∣Z.

In this paper, we further assume P is Markovian and faithful to a DAG G (See details in Appendix
Sec. A1.1). Therefore, the skeleton is the same as the corresponding undirected graph of the DAG
G (Spirtes et al., 2000). Unshielded Triples and v-structures are defined as follows:
Definition 3.2 (Unshielded Triples (UTs) and v-structures). A triple of variables X, T, Y is an
Unshield Triple (UT) denoted as ⟨X, T, Y ⟩, if X and Y are both adjacent to T but not adjacent
to each other in the DAG G or the corresponding skeleton. It becomes a v-structure denoted as
X → T ← Y , if the directions of the edges are from X and Y to T in G.

Formally, the Markov equivalence class is defined as follows:
Definition 3.3 (Markov Equivalence). Two graphs are Markov equivalent if and only if they have
the same skeleton and v-structures. A Markov equivalence class (MEC) can be represented by a
Completed Partially Directed Acyclic Graph (CPDAG) consisting of both directed and undirected
edges. We use CP DAG(G) to denote the CPDAG derived from G.

According to the theorem of Markov completeness (Meek, 1995b), we can only identify a causal
graph up to its MEC, i.e., the CPDAG, for discrete data or linear Gaussian data.
Definition 3.4 (Identifiability). Assuming P is Markovian and faithful w.r.t. DAG G and causal suf-
ficiency, then each (un)directed edge in CP DAG(G) indicates a (non)identifiable causal relation.

Remark: The definitions of both skeleton and CPDAG are applicable for general data types, and
not necessarily restricted to linear Gaussian or discrete data. So it is a clear target we can pursue.
Regarding orientation, Markov completeness theorem states that for discrete or linear Gaussian data,
we can only identify a causal graph up to its CPDAG; for continuous data with linear non-Gaussian
mechanisms or additive noise assumptions, we can orient more causal directions (Peters et al., 2014;
Shimizu et al., 2011), which is not our focus.


                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                     Raw Pairwise
                                                       Pairwise                      Features     ① Pairwise Feature
                                                       Concatenation                                Initialization
                                                       & MLP
               Input Node Features

                                          Value        Key               Query
                                                                                                                MLP
                                         Linear          Linear            Linear
                                       Linear          Linear            Linear
                                     Linear          Linear            Linear
                                                                                    Add & Norm              Add & Norm

                                          Scaled Dot Product Attention                     ③ Final Processing
                                        Scaled Dot Product Attention
            ② Unidirectional          Scaled Dot Product Attention
           Multi Head Attention                                                           Output Pairwise
                                                                                                 Features
                                          Concatenate & Linear



Figure 2: Illustration of the pairwise encoder module. In Part ①, it initializes raw pairwise features.
In Part ②, a unidirectional attention is applied to utilized information from node features and pair-
wise features. In Part ③, an MLP and residual connection is used to yield final pairwise features.


4     M ETHODOLOGY
4.1   OVERALL W ORKFLOW

The overall workflow of our PAIRE is shown in Figure 1. Each training graph G is randomly
sampled from a pre-defined graph meta-distribution P (G), and the corresponding dataset matrix
           is derived from a standard forward sampling P (D∣G), i.e., generating observations by
       n×d
D∈R
sampling from the distribution defined by G. In our setting, we use this way to synthetically generate
numerous ⟨D , G ⟩ pairs for training.
             i   i


Due to the significance of the pairwise relationship between vertices, we propose a pairwise encoder
module to model the pairwise representations. Based on it, we build two neural networks whose
learning targets are predicting the skeleton and the set of v-structures respectively, forming the iden-
tifiable causal structures in G. During inference, the skeleton and v-structure predicted by the two
networks are combined together to output the final predicted CPDAG results.

4.2   PAIRWISE E NCODER M ODULE

In this section, we present the pairwise encoder module. Given a set of d nodes, h-dimensional
                                                                                                     2
node features, the goal of the pairwise encoder is to encapsulate their pairwise relationships by d
h-dimensional pairwise features. As shown in Sec. 1, both the internal information (i.e., the pair-
wise relationship) and the external information (e.g., the context of the conditional separation set)
of a pair of nodes are necessary to acquire persistent dependency and orientation asymmetry. Our
pairwise encoder module models the internal relationship via node feature concatenation and the
non-linear mapping with MLP. Moreover, context information, including persistent dependency and
orientation asymmetry, plays a crucial role in causal learning. To effectively capture such contextual
relationships, the attention operation has been widely recognized as a popular approach. Therefore,
we employ the attention operation within the pairwise encoder to capture these external relation-
ships. As demonstrated in Figure 2, the pairwise encoder module consists of the following parts:


1. Pairwise Feature Initialization. The initial step is to concatenate the node features from a
   previous node feature encoder module for every pair of nodes. Subsequently, we employ a three-
   layer MLP to convert each 2h-dimensional concatenated vector to an h-dimensional raw pairwise
   feature, thereby capturing the intricate relations that exist inside the pairs of nodes.
2. Unidirectional Multi Head Attention. In order to model the external information, we employ
                                                                                        2
   an attention mechanism in which the query is composed of the aforementioned d h-dimensional
   raw pairwise features, while the keys and values consist of h-dimensional features of d individual
   nodes. Note that, the attention operation in our paper is unidirectional. That is, we only calculate
   cross attention from raw pairwise features to individual node features. We make such a design


                                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   because both the pairwise and node information are critical to model the essential information as
   discussed in Sec. 1, while also maintaining a reasonable computational cost.
3. Final Processing. Following the widely-adopted transformer architecture, we incorporate a
   residual structure and dropout layer following the pairwise attention layer. Finally, we intro-
   duce a three-layer MLP to further capture intricate patterns and non-linear relationships between
   the input embeddings, as well as to more effectively process the information obtained from the
   attention mechanism. This approach allows for a comprehensive understanding of the complex
   relationships and leading to more robust and accurate modeling of causal structures.

Now we introduce the whole architecture of feature extractor F E. It consists of an input processing
module, a node feature encoder module, and a pairwise encoder module sequentially. The input pro-
cessing module contains a linear layer for continuous input data or an embedding layer for discrete
input data. Similar to previous papers (Ke et al., 2023; Lorch et al., 2022), the node feature encoder
is a transformer-like network comprising attention layers over either the observation dimension or
the node dimension alternately. It naturally maintains permutation equivariance across both the vari-
able dimension and the data dimension because of the intrinsic symmetry of attention operations.
Subsequently, the pairwise encoder module is applied to obtain the pairwise features.

4.3     L EARNING TARGETS

4.3.1    C ASE S TUDY OF L IMITATION OF B ERNOULLI - SAMPLING ADJACENCY MATRIX
         APPROACH

In previous work, the Bernoulli-sampling adjacency matrix approach is adopted to generate the
output DAG G (Ke et al., 2023; Lorch et al., 2022). In this approach, each entry Gij in the DAG is
independently sampled from Aij , an entry in the adjacency matrix A. This entry Aij represents the
probability that i directly causes j. We introduce a simple yet effective example setting with only
three variables X, Y , and T to reveal its limitation.
Considering a simulator that generates DAGs with equal probability from two DAGs: G1 ∶ X →
T → Y and G2 ∶ X ← T ← Y . In G1 , the parametrized forms are X ∼ N (0, 1), T = X +N (0, 1),
and Y = T + N (0, 1). In G2 , the parametrized forms are Y = N (0, 3), T = 32 Y + N (0, 23 ), and
X = 0.5T + N (0, 0.5). The observational datasets coming from dags G1 and G2 follow the same
joint distribution, which makes them inherently indistinguishable.
When using the adjacency matrix of DAG as the learning target, an optimal neural network trained
with binary cross-entropy loss will predict 0.5 probabilities on the directions of the two edges. As
the prediction is regarded as a Bernoulli distribution, with 0.25 probability the sampling result is
X → T ← Y . It is incompatible with the observational data, resulting in a contradictory causal
structure. More details are illustrated in Figure A4 in the Appendix.
Remark: We clarify that our critique is specifically aimed at the limitations of the Bernoulli-
sampling adjacency matrix approach, not the use of an adjacency matrix as a learning target. When
the final prediction is up to an MEC rather than a fully identifiable DAG, the Bernoulli-sampling
adjacency matrix approach results in inconsistency for UTs formed by non-identifiable edges. For
instance, our case study shows that the entries in the adjacency matrix are not independent in de-
termining the causal relations, thus the use of independent Bernoulli sampling over the adjacency
matrix falls short of adequately representing causal relations.

4.3.2    L EARNING I DENTIFIABLE C AUSAL S TRUCTURES
To address the issue, we propose to allow the network model to learn solely the identifiable causal
structures in G, i.e., its MEC. As shown in Sec. 3, an MEC can be represented by a combination of
the skeleton and the set of v-structures, which are our learning targets.

Skeleton Prediction. As the persistent dependency between pairs of nodes determines the exis-
tence of edges in the skeleton, each pairwise feature corresponds to an edge in the skeleton naturally.
Therefore, for the skeleton learning task, we initially employ a max-pooling layer over the obser-
vation dimension to obtain an h-dimensional vector for each pair of nodes. Then, a linear layer
is applied to map the pairwise features to the final prediction of edges. Our learning label, the


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Skeleton prediction results on linear Gaussian and general nonlinear continuous data. “*”
indicates the case is considered failed as the algorithm takes more than 24 hours per graph.

                                       Linear Gaussian                       General nonlinear
Graph Type       Method
                                     F1              Acc.                   F1               Acc.
                 PC                0.304               0.656              0.361               0.699
                 GES                 *                   *                0.417               0.666
               NOTEARS             0.333               0.651              0.376               0.646
    WS
               DAG-GNN             0.355               0.554              0.323               0.644
                AVICI          0.446 ± 0.013       0.734 ± 0.003     0.536 ± 0.008        0.728 ± 0.002
                PAIRE         0.479 ± 0.015       0.750 ± 0.003       0.500 ± 0.037      0.771 ± 0.004
                 PC                0.588               0.900              0.575               0.893
                 GES               0.708               0.894              0.565               0.849
               NOTEARS             0.801               0.945              0.556               0.861
    SBM
               DAG-GNN             0.662               0.874              0.471               0.821
                AVICI          0.836 ± 0.004       0.959 ± 0.001      0.739 ± 0.000       0.937 ± 0.001
                PAIRE         0.853 ± 0.007       0.962 ± 0.003      0.809 ± 0.004       0.954 ± 0.001


undirected graph representing the skeleton, can be easily calculated by summing the adjacency of
the DAG and its transpose. Denoting the combination of max-pooling and linear layer as a skele-
ton prediction module SP , our learning target for the skeleton prediction task can be formulated
as minθ,ξ L(SPθ (F Eξ (D))), G + G ), where L is the popularly used binary cross-entropy loss
                                        T

function, F E is the feature extractor mentioned above, and D denotes the input data.

V-structure Prediction. A UT ⟨X, T, Y ⟩ is a v-structure when ∃S, such that T ∉ S and
X ⊥ Y ∣S. Therefore, we concatenate the corresponding pairwise features of the pair ⟨X, Y ⟩
with the node features of T as the feature for each UT ⟨X, T, Y ⟩. After that, we use a three-layer
MLP to predict the existence of v-structures among all UTs. For the given dataset with d nodes,
                                            d×d×d
it outputs a third-order tensor of shape R        , namely v-tensor, corresponding to the predictions
of the existence of v-structures. The v-tensor label can be obtained by Vijk = Gji Gki (1 − Gjk ),
where Vijk indicates the existence of v-structure Xj → Xi ← Xk . Denoting the v-structure pre-
diction module as V P , the learning target for the v-structure prediction task can be formulated as
minϕ,ξ LU T (V Pϕ (F Eξ (D))), V ), where LU T means the binary cross-entropy loss is masked by
UTs, i.e., we only calculate such loss on the valid UTs. Note that the parameters ξ of F E are ini-
tialized from the skeleton prediction task, as the UTs to be classified are obtained from the predicted
skeleton and the skeleton prediction can be seen as a general pre-trained task.
It is noteworthy that neural network models have a theoretical guarantee of the asymptotic correct-
ness with respect to the sample size on predicting skeleton and v-structures. Formally, we have
Theorem 4.1. Under canonical assumption (Definition A1.2) and the assumption that neural net-
work can be used as a universal approximator (Assumption A1.4), there exists neural network mod-
els that always predict the correct skeleton and v-structures with sufficient samples in D.

The proof and relevant discussions are provided in Appendix Sec. A1.

5   E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we report on a series of experimental results. Our evaluation part is mostly about
OOD setting, i.e., the distribution of test set is OOD w.r.t. the distribution of training set. Specifi-
cally, our distribution of training set is generated by Erdos-Rényi (ER) and Scale-Free (SF) mech-
anisms, but we test our model on Watts-Strogatz (WS), Stochastic Block Model (SBM), and one
real-world dataset Sachs (Sachs et al., 2005), which are with significantly different generating mech-
anisms. F1-scores, accuracy and SHD are general metrics for traditional methods and DNN-based
methods. However, for DNN-based SCL method, AUC and AUPRC are more reasonable metrics
because they avoid the influence of threshold selection. More detailed experimental settings are
provided in Appendix A3. Extra experimental results are included in Appendix A4.


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Table 2: CPDAG prediction results on linear Gaussian data. “*” indicates the case is con-
      sidered as failed as the algorithm takes more than 24 hours per graph.

      Graph Type      Method       V-structure F1       Identifiable edges F1        SHD
                       PC              0.156                  0.160                  170.36
                      GES                *                      *                       *
                    NOTEARS            0.279                  0.315                  159.82
         WS
                    DAG-GNN            0.322                  0.327                  193.7
                     AVICI             0.277                  0.356                  117.62
                     PAIRE         0.298 ± 0.076          0.370 ± 0.062         116.797 ± 7.253
                       PC              0.349                  0.359                   56.44
                      GES              0.539                  0.550                   60.30
                    NOTEARS            0.762                  0.778                   26.70
         SBM
                    DAG-GNN            0.603                  0.625                   61.04
                     AVICI             0.792                  0.818                   17.48
                     PAIRE        0.805 ± 0.016           0.826 ± 0.029         17.147 ± 1.573


5.1    G ENERAL P ERFORMANCE

Skeleton Prediction. We conduct a comprehensive comparison of PAIRE with various baseline
algorithms in the skeleton prediction task. We perform experiments in Table 1 and Appendix Ta-
ble A7 on both linear Gaussian and general nonlinear datasets to evaluate the performance of the
competing methods. Our findings reveal that DNN-based SCL methods, i.e., AVICI and PAIRE,
demonstrate a marked advantage over traditional approaches in the skeleton prediction task. Among
all the methods evaluated, our proposed PAIRE emerges as the top performer, further substantiating
its superiority in addressing the causal learning problem.

CPDAG Prediction. Table 2 and Appendix Table A8 present the
evaluation outcomes of various methods applied to the CPDAG pre-          Table 3: AUC and AUPRC
diction task. We present our result of CPDAG prediction on the            of skeleton prediction re-
linear Gaussian data, as CPDAG reflects the maximum number of             sults on Sachs dataset.
causal directions that can be oriented in this setting (Meek, 1995b).
A key observation from the results is that DNN-based SCL ap-              Method    AUC     AUPRC
proaches still exhibit superior performance compared to classical al-
gorithms across all types of graphs. Our proposed PAIRE method            AVICI     0.563    0.405
outperforms all other methods, further validating the effectiveness       PAIRE     0.631    0.468
of our proposals and the inherent advantages of PAIRE.

5.2    P ERFORMANCE ON R EAL DATASET

To assess the practical applicability of PAIRE, we con-
duct a comprehensive comparison using a real-world Table 4: CPDAG prediction results on
dataset presented by Sachs et al. (2005) and available in Sachs dataset.
the Bnlearn repository (Scutari, 2010). It comprises dis-
cretized measurements of 11 proteins involved in human       Method       SHD Num. v-struc.
immune system cells, providing a valuable benchmark
for evaluating the performance of our approach. The            PC          19           19
DNN-based methods are trained on random SF graphs,             GES         19           11
making this an out-of-distribution prediction task.        DAG-GNN         13            0
                                                              AVICI        13            3
Interestingly, the DAG label of the Sachs dataset does       PAIRE         10            0
contains no v-structure, implying a low number of pre-
dicted v-structures is desirable. As shown in the skele-
ton prediction results given in Table 3, PAIRE performs best under the comparisons using AUC
and AUPRC. Moreover, on the final CPDAG prediction tasks shown in Table 4, PAIRE predicts no
v-structures, which still surpasses other methods. This finding further substantiates the efficacy of
PAIRE and emphasizes the importance of respecting identifiability.


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              1.00                                                                           1.00
                       AVICI                                                                        AVICI
              0.95     PAIRE                                                                 0.95   PAIRE

              0.90                                                                           0.90

              0.85                                                                           0.85
Performance


                                                                               Performance
              0.80                                                                           0.80

              0.75                                                                           0.75

              0.70                                                                           0.70

              0.65                                                                           0.65

              0.60                                                                           0.60
                          F1         AUC     AUPRC     Acc.                                         F1          AUC     AUPRC         Acc.

                               (a) Linear Gaussian                                                       (b) General Nonlinear

                           Figure 3: Comparison between AVICI and PAIRE on skeleton prediction task.

                      Table 5: Comparison of CPDAG results from models with different learning targets.

      Graph Type                     Learning Target          V-structure F1   Identifiable edges F1                            SHD
                                    Adjacency Matrix              0.257                          0.338                    117.65
                     WS
                                   Skeleton + V-tensor        0.298 ± 0.076                  0.370 ± 0.062             116.80 ± 7.25
                                    Adjacency Matrix              0.778                          0.806                     18.31
                 SBM
                                   Skeleton + V-tensor        0.805 ± 0.016                  0.826 ± 0.021             17.15 ± 1.57


5.3                  E FFECTIVENESS OF PAIRWISE R EPRESENTATION

To assess the efficacy of our pairwise encoder module, we compare PAIRE and AVICI on a skeleton
prediction task. Note that, to eliminate any potential bias arising from differences in model size
and further demonstrate our superior performance, we employ a 6-layer node feature encoder within
the PAIRE framework in all experiments. Consequently, the PAIRE model comprises 2.8 million
trainable parameters, while the AVICI model contains 3.2 million parameters. The experimental
results on SBM random graphs are presented in Figure 3 and others are provided in Appendix.
Our findings reveal that the PAIRE method consistently outperforms the AVICI approach across
all datasets, despite having a smaller model size, which validates the effectiveness of the proposed
pairwise encoder module.

5.4                  E FFECTIVENESS OF L EARNING I DENTIFIABLE S TRUCTURES

As discussed in Section 4.3, PAIRE focuses on learning identifiable causal structures rather than
directly learning the adjacency matrix. Experimental results in Table 5 provide empirical support
for its superiority. We compare two models with identical network structures but different learning
targets: one model predicts the adjacency matrix, while the other predicts the skeleton and v-tensor
together. Consistently, the models that predict the skeleton and v-tensor demonstrate higher accu-
racy in their predictions compared to the alternative model. This observation further strengthens our
argument regarding the necessity and benefits of learning identifiable causal structures to improve
overall performance. It is important to note that this comparison serves as an ablation study, high-
lighting the necessity of learning identifiable causal structures. PAIRE is specifically designed to
excel at predicting the skeleton and v-structure due to its ability to capture pairwise representations.

6                C ONCLUSION
We propose PAIRE, a novel DNN-based SCL approach. It incorporates a unique pairwise encoder
module with a unidirectional attention layer designed to encode essential causal information. We uti-
lize a skeleton matrix and a v-tensor as outputs, representing the Markov Equivalence Class (MEC)
to address inconsistencies related to identifiability. Through extensive experiments conducted on
both synthetic and real-world datasets, we demonstrate the superiority of our PAIRE framework
over other DNN-based SCL methods.


                                                                      9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Steen A Andersson, David Madigan, and Michael D Perlman. A Characterization of Markov Equiv-
  alence Classes for Acyclic Digraphs. The Annals of Statistics, 25(2):505–541, 1997.
David Maxwell Chickering. Optimal Structure Identification with Greedy Search. Journal of Ma-
  chine Learning Research, 3(3):507–554, 2002.
Diego Colombo, Marloes H Maathuis, et al. Order-Independent Constraint-Based Causal Structure
  Learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 15(1):3741–3782, 2014.
James Cussens. Bayesian Network Learning With Cutting Planes. In UAI, 2011.
Haoyue Dai, Rui Ding, Yuanyuan Jiang, Shi Han, and Dongmei Zhang. ML4C: Seeing Causality
  through Latent Vicinity. In SDM, 2023.
Rui Ding, Yanzhi Liu, Jingjing Tian, Zhouyu Fu, Shi Han, and Dongmei Zhang. Reliable and
  Efficient Anytime Skeleton Learning. In AAAI, 2020.
Morten Frydenberg. The Chain Graph Markov Property. Scandinavian Journal of Statistics, 17(4):
 333–353, 1990.
Clark Glymour, Kun Zhang, and Peter Spirtes. Review of Causal Discovery Methods Based on
  Graphical Models. Frontiers in Genetics, 10:524, 2019.
Patrik Hoyer, Dominik Janzing, Joris M Mooij, Jonas Peters, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Nonlinear
  Causal Discovery with Additive Noise Models. In NeurIPS, 2008.
Dominik Janzing, Joris Mooij, Kun Zhang, Jan Lemeire, Jakob Zscheischler, Povilas Daniušis, Bas-
  tian Steudel, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Information-Geometric Approach to Inferring Causal Di-
  rections. Artificial Intelligence, 182:1–31, 2012.
Nan Rosemary Ke, Silvia Chiappa, Jane X Wang, Jorg Bornschein, Anirudh Goyal, Melanie Rey,
  Theophane Weber, Matthew Botvinick, Michael Curtis Mozer, and Danilo Jimenez Rezende.
  Learning to Induce Causal Structure. In ICLR, 2023.
Daphne Koller and Nir Friedman. Probabilistic Graphical Models: Principles and Techniques. MIT
  press, 2009.
Sébastien Lachapelle, Philippe Brouillard, Tristan Deleu, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. Gradient-
   Based Neural DAG Learning. In ICLR, 2020.
Steffen L Lauritzen. Graphical Models, volume 17. Clarendon Press, 1996.
Thuc Duy Le, Tao Hoang, Jiuyong Li, Lin Liu, Huawen Liu, and Shu Hu. A Fast PC Algorithm for
  High Dimensional Causal Discovery With Multi-Core PCs. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Compu-
  tational Biology and Bioinformatics, 16(5):1483–1495, 2016.
Phillip Lippe, Taco Cohen, and Efstratios Gavves. Efficient neural causal discovery without acyclic-
  ity constraints. In ICLR, 2022.
David Lopez-Paz, Krikamol Muandet, and Benjamin Recht. The Randomized Causation Coefficient.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 16(90):2901–2907, 2015.
David Lopez-Paz, Robert Nishihara, Soumith Chintala, Bernhard Scholkopf, and Léon Bottou. Dis-
  covering Causal Signals in Images. In CVPR, 2017.
Lars Lorch, Scott Sussex, Jonas Rothfuss, Andreas Krause, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Amortized
  Inference for Causal Structure Learning. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Pingchuan Ma, Rui Ding, Haoyue Dai, Yuanyuan Jiang, Shuai Wang, Shi Han, and Dongmei Zhang.
  ML4S: Learning Causal Skeleton from Vicinal Graphs. In KDD, 2022.
Christopher Meek. Causal Inference and Causal Explanation with Background Knowledge. In UAI,
  pp. 403–410, 1995a.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Christopher. Meek. Strong Completeness and Faithfulness in Bayesian Networks. In UAI, 1995b.
Ignavier Ng, AmirEmad Ghassami, and Kun Zhang. On the Role of Sparsity and DAG Constraints
  for Learning Linear DAGs. In NeurIPS, pp. 17943–17954, 2020.
Jonas Peters, Joris M Mooij, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Causal Discovery With
  Continuous Additive Noise Models. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 15(1):2009–2053,
  2014.
Joseph Ramsey, Jiji Zhang, and Peter L Spirtes. Adjacency-Faithfulness and Conservative Causal
  Inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:1206.6843, 2012.
Karen Sachs, Omar Perez, Dana Pe’er, Douglas A Lauffenburger, and Garry P Nolan. Causal
  Protein-Signaling Networks Derived From Multiparameter Single-Cell Data. Science, 308(5721):
  523–529, 2005.
Marco Scutari. Learning Bayesian Networks with the bnlearn R Package. Journal of Statistical
 Software, 35(3):1–22, 2010. doi: 10.18637/jss.v035.i03.
Shohei Shimizu, Takanori Inazumi, Yasuhiro Sogawa, Aapo Hyvarinen, Yoshinobu Kawahara,
  Takashi Washio, Patrik O Hoyer, Kenneth Bollen, and Patrik Hoyer. DirectLiNGAM: A Di-
  rect Method for Learning a Linear Non-Gaussian Structural Equation Model. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 12(33):1225–1248, 2011.
Peter Spirtes, Clark N Glymour, Richard Scheines, and David Heckerman. Causation, prediction,
  and search. MIT press, 2000.
Michail Tsagris. Bayesian Network Learning with the PC Algorithm: An Improved and Correct
 Variation. Applied Artificial Intelligence, 33(2):101–123, 2019.
Thomas Verma and Judea Pearl. Equivalence and Synthesis of Causal Models. In UAI, 1990.
Matthew J Vowels, Necati Cihan Camgoz, and Richard Bowden. D’Ya Like Dags? A Survey on
 Structure Learning and Causal Discovery. ACM Computing Surveys, 55(4):1–36, 2022.
Kui Yu, Jiuyong Li, and Lin Liu. A Review on Algorithms for Constraint-based Causal Discovery.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.03977, 2016.
Yue Yu, Jie Chen, Tian Gao, and Mo Yu. DAG-GNN: DAG Structure Learning with Graph Neural
  Networks. In ICML, 2019.
Keli Zhang, Shengyu Zhu, Marcus Kalander, Ignavier Ng, Junjian Ye, Zhitang Chen, and Lujia Pan.
  gCastle: A Python Toolbox for Causal Discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.15155, 2021.
Xun Zheng, Bryon Aragam, Pradeep K Ravikumar, and Eric P Xing. Dags With No Tears: Contin-
  uous Optimization for Structure Learning. In NeurIPS, 2018.
Shengyu Zhu, Ignavier Ng, and Zhitang Chen. Causal Discovery with Reinforcement Learning. In
  ICLR, 2020.


                                              11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A1     T HEORETICAL G UARANTEE
In this section, we delve into the theoretical analysis concerning the asymptotic correctness of our
proposed model with respect to the sample size. Sec. A1.1 lays out the essential definitions and
assumptions pertinent to the problem under study. Following this, from Sec. A1.2 to A1.3, we
rigorously demonstrate the asymptotic correctness of the neural network model. Finally, in Sec.
A1.4, we engage in a detailed discussion about the practical advantages and superiority of neural
network models.

A1.1    D EFINITIONS AND A SSUMPTIONS

As outlined in Sec. 3, a Causal Graphical Model is defined by a joint probability distribution P over
d random variables X1 , X2 , ⋯, Xd , and a DAG G with d vertices representing the d variables. An
observational dataset D consists of n records and d columns, which represents n instances drawn
i.i.d. from P . In this work, we assume causal sufficiency:
Assumption A1.1 (Causal Sufficiency). There are no latent common causes of any of the variables
in the graph.

Moreover, we assume the data distribution P is Markovian to the DAG G:
Assumption A1.2 (Markov Factorization Property). Given a joint probability distribution P and a
DAG G, P is said to satisfy Markov factorization property w.r.t. G if P ∶= P (X1 , X2 , ⋯, Xd ) =
  d
∏i=1 P (Xi ∣ pai ), where pai is the parent set of Xi in G.
                G            G


It is noteworthy that the Markov factorization property is equivalent to the Global Markov Property
(GMP) (Lauritzen, 1996), which is
Definition A1.1 (Global Markov Property (GMP)). P is said to satisfy GMP (or Markovian) w.r.t.
a DAG G if X ⊥G Y ∣Z ⇒ X ⊥ Y ∣Z. Here ⊥G denotes d-separation, and ⊥ denotes statistical
independence.

GMP indicates that any d-separation in graph G implies conditional independence in distribution P .
We further assume that P is faithful to G by
Assumption A1.3 (Faithfulness). Distribution P is faithful w.r.t.         a DAG G if X ⊥
Y ∣Z ⇒ X ⊥G Y ∣ Z.
Definition A1.2 (Canonical Assumption). We say our settings satisfy the canonical assumption if
the Assumptions A1.1 - A1.3 are all satisfied.

We restate the definitions of skeletons, Unshielded Triples (UTs) and v-strucutres as follows.
Definition A1.3 (Skeleton). A skeleton E defined over the data distribution P is an undirected
graph where an edge exists between Xi and Xj if and only if Xi and Xj are always dependent in
P , i.e., ∀Z ⊆ {X1 , X2 , ⋯, Xd } \ {Xi , Xj }, we have Xi ⊥̸ Xj ∣Z.

Under our assumptions, the skeleton is the same as the corresponding undirected graph of G Spirtes
et al. (2000).
Definition A1.4 (Unshielded Triples (UTs) and V-structures). A triple of variables X, T, Y is an
Unshield Triple (UT) denoted as ⟨X, T, Y ⟩, if X and Y are both adjacent to T but not adjacent
to each other in the DAG G or the corresponding skeleton. It becomes a v-structure denoted as
X → T ← Y , if the directions of the edges are from X and Y to T in G.

We introduce the definition of separation set as:
Definition A1.5 (Separation Set). For a node pair Xi and Xj , a vertex set Z is a separation set if
Xi ⊥ Xj ∣Z. Under faithfulness assumption, a separation set Z is a subset of variables within the
vicinity that d-separates Xi and Xj .

Finally, we assume a neural network can be used as a universal approximator in our settings.
Assumption A1.4 (Universal Approximation Capability). A neural network model can be trained
to approximate a function under our settings with arbitary accuracy.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A1.2    S KELETON L EARNING

In this section, we prove the asymptotic correctness of neural networks on the skeleton prediction
task by constructing a perfect model and then approximating it with neural networks. For the sake
of convenience and brevity in description, we define the skeleton predictor as follows.
Definition A1.6 (Skeleton Predictor). Given observational data D, a skeleton predictor is a pred-
icate function with domain as observational data D and predicts the adjacency between each pair
of the vertices.

Now we restate the Remark from Ma et al. (2022) as the following proposition. It proves the ex-
istence of a perfect skeleton predictor by viewing the skeleton prediction step of PC (Spirtes et al.,
2000) as a skeleton predictor, which is proved to be sound and complete.
Proposition A1.1 (Existence of a Perfect Skeleton Predictor). There exists a skeleton predictor that
always yields the correct skeleton with sufficient samples in D.

Proof. We construct a skeleton predictor SP consisting of two parts by viewing PC (Spirtes et al.,
2000) as a skeleton predictor. In the first part, it extracts a pairwise feature xij for each pair of nodes
Xi and Xj :

                                  xij =       min          {Xi ∼ Xj ∣ Z} ,                             (1)
                                          Z⊆V \{Xi ,Xj }

where {Xi ∼ Xj ∣ Z} ∈ [0, 1] is a scalar value that measures the conditional dependency between
Xi and Xj given a vertex subset Z. Consequently, xij > 0 indicates the persistent dependency
between the two nodes.
In the second part, it predicts the adjacency based on xij :

                                                1 (adjacent)         xij ≠ 0
                               (Xi , Xj ) = {                                                          (2)
                                                0 (non-adjacent)     xij = 0

Now we prove that SP always yields the correct skeleton by proving the absence of false positive
predictions and false negative predictions. Here, false positive prediction denotes SP predicts a
non-adjacent node pair as adjacent and false negative predictions denote SP predicts an adjacent
node pair as non-adjacent.

• False Positive. Suppose Xi , Xj are non-adjacent. Under the Markovian assumption, there exists
  a set of nodes Z such that {Xi ∼ Xj ∣ Z} = 0 and hence xij = 0. According to Equation (2), SP
  will always predicts them as non-adjacent.
• False Negative. Suppose Xi , Xj are adjacent. Under the faithfulness assumption, for any Z ∈
  V \ {Xi , Xj } , {Xi ∼ Xj ∣ Z} > 0, which implies xij > 0. Therefore, SP always predicts them
  as adjacent.

Therefore, SP never yields any false positive predictions or false negative predictions under the
Markovian assumption and faithfulness assumption, i.e., it always yields the correct skeleton.

With the existence of a perfect skeleton predictor, we prove the correctness of neural network models
with sufficient samples under our assumptions.
Theorem A1.1. Under the canonical assumption and the assumption that neural network can be
used as a universal approximator (Assumption A1.4), there exists a neural network model that al-
ways predicts the correct skeleton with sufficient samples in D.

Proof. From Proposition A1.1, there exists a perfect skeleton predictor that predicts the correct
skeleton. Thus, according to the Assumption A1.4, a neural network model can be trained to ap-
proximate the perfect skeleton prediction hence predicts the correct skeleton.


                                                     13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A1.3    O RIENTATION L EARNING

Similarly to the overall thought process in Sec. A1.2, in this section we prove the asymptotic cor-
rectness of neural networks on the v-structure prediction task by constructing a perfect model and
then approximating it with neural networks.
Definition A1.7 (V-structure Predictor). Given observational data D with sufficient samples from a
BN with vertices V = {X1 , . . . , Xp }, a v-structure predictor is a predicate function with domain
as observational data D and predicts existence of the v-structure for each unshielded triple.

The following proposition proves the existence of a perfect v-structure predictor by viewing the
orientation step of PC (Spirtes et al., 2000) as a v-structure predictor.
Proposition A1.2 (Existence of a Perfect V-structure Predictor). Under the Markov assumption and
faithfulness assumption, there exists skeleton predictor that always yields the correct skeleton.

Proof. We construct a v-structure predictor V P consisting of two parts by viewing PC (Spirtes et al.,
2000) as a v-structure predictor. In the first part, it extracts a feature zijk for each UT ⟨Xi , Xk , Xj ⟩:

                                  ∣{(Xk , Z)∣{Xi ∼ Xj ∣Z} = 0 ∧ Xk ∈ Z}∣
                         zijk =                                                   ,                     (3)
                                           ∣{Z∣{Xi ∼ Xj ∣Z} = 0}∣



where {Xi ∼ Xj ∣ Z} ∈ [0, 1] is a scalar value that measures the conditional dependency between
Xi and Xj given a vertex subset Z, and ∣ ⋅ ∣ represents the cardinality of a set. Note that the
denominator is always positive because the separation set of a UT always exists (See Lemma 4.1 in
Dai et al. (2023)). Intuitively, zijk represents the proportion of supsets of Xi and Xj that include
Xk .
In the second part, it predicts the v-structures based on zijk :

                                                 0 (not v-structure)   zijk ≠ 0
                           ⟨Xi , Xk , Xj ⟩ = {                                                          (4)
                                                 1 (v-structure)       zijk = 0

Now we prove that V P always yields the correct predictions of v-structures. According to The-
orem 5.1 on p.410 of Spirtes et al. (2000), assuming faithfulness and sufficient samples, if a UT
⟨Xi , Xk , Xj ⟩ is a v-structure, then Xk does not belong to any separation sets of (Xi , Xj ); if a UT
⟨Xi , Xk , Xj ⟩ is not a v-structure, then Xk belongs to every separation sets of (Xi , Xj ). Therefore,
we have zijk = 0 if and only if Xk is not in any separation set of Xi and Xj , i.e., ⟨Xi , Xk , Xj ⟩ is a
v-structure.
With the existence of a perfect v-structure predictor, we prove the correctness of neural network
models with sufficient samples under our assumptions.
Theorem A1.2. Under the canonical assumption and the assumption that neural network can be
used as a universal approximator (Assumption A1.4), there exists a neural network model that al-
ways predicts the correct v-structures with sufficient samples in D.

Proof. From Proposition A1.1, there exists a perfect skeleton predictor that predicts the correct
v-structures. Thus, according to the Assumption A1.4, a neural network model can be trained to
approximate the perfect v-structure predictions hence predicts the correct v-structures.

A1.4    D ISCUSSION

In the sections above, we prove the asymptotic correctness of neural network models by constructing
theoretically perfect predictors. These predictors both consist of two parts: feature extractors pro-
viding features xij and zijk , and final predictors of adjacency and v-structures. Even though they
have a theoretical guarantee of the correctness with sufficient samples, it is noteworthy that they are
hard to be applied practically. For example, to obtain xij in Equation (1), we need to calculate the
conditional dependency between Xi and Xj given every vertex subset Z ⊆ V \ {Xi , Xj }. Leaving


                                                     14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


aside the fact that the number of Zs itself presents factorial complexity, the main issue is that when
Z is relatively large, due to the curse of dimensionality, it becomes challenging to find sufficient
samples to calculate the conditional dependency. This difficulty significantly hampers the ability to
apply the constructed prefect predictors in practical scenarios.
Some existing methods can be interpreted as constructing more practical predictors. Majority-PC
(MPC) (Colombo et al., 2014) achieves better performance on finite samples by modifying Equation
4 as:
                                                    0 (not v-structure)   zijk > 0.5
                          ⟨Xi , Xk , Xj ⟩ = {                                                                        (5)
                                                    1(v-structure)        zijk ≤ 0.5
Due to its more complex classification mechanism, it achieves better performance empirically. How-
ever, from the machine learning perspective, features from both the PC and MPC predictors are
relatively simple. As supervised causal learning methods, ML4S (Ma et al., 2022) and ML4C (Dai
et al., 2023) provide more systematic featurizations by manual feature engineering and utilization of
powerful machine learning models for classification. While these methods show enhanced practical
efficacy, their manual feature engineering processes are complex. In our paper, we utilize neural
networks as universal approximators for learning the prediction of identifiable causal structures. It
not only simplifies the procedure but also potentially uncovers more nuanced and complex patterns
within the data that manual methods might overlook. It is noteworthy that the benefits of supervised
causal learning using neural networks are also discussed elsewhere, as mentioned in CSIvA (Ke
et al., 2023).

A2     I LLUSTRATION OF THE C ASE S TUDY IN S EC . 4.3
Figure A4 presents an illustration for the case study of the Bernoulli-sampling adjacency matrix
approach in Sec. 4.3. It clearly shows that observational data with the two different parametrized
forms follow the same joint distribution:
                                              ⎛          ⎡
                                                         ⎢ 1 1 1 ⎤   ⎥
                                                         ⎢           ⎥⎞
                          P ([X, Y, T ]) = N ⎜[0, 0, 0], ⎢
                                                         ⎢
                                                         ⎢ 1 3 2 ⎥   ⎥
                                                                     ⎥⎟.                       (6)
                                              ⎝          ⎢
                                                         ⎢           ⎥
                                                                     ⎥⎠
                                                         ⎣ 1  2   2  ⎦
Therefore, the observational datasets coming from the two DAGs are inherently indistinguishable.

                        𝑋 ~ 𝑁(0, 1)
                                          𝑌 = 𝑇 + 𝑁(0, 1)
          0 0 1               𝑋                 𝑌
                                                                          𝑃([𝑋, 𝑌, 𝑇])
          0 0 0                                                                          1 1 1
                                                                          = 𝑁([0, 0, 0], 1 3 2 )
          0 1 0                       𝑇                                                  1 2 2
           DAG Labels        𝑇 = 𝑋 + 𝑁(0, 1)
                              Causal Structures
                                                                                 Observational Data
                        𝑋 = 0.5𝑇 + 𝑁(0, 0.5)
                                         𝑌 = 𝑁(0, 3)
                                      𝑋                                   0      0    1
          0 0 0                                     𝑌
                                                                          0      0    1
          0 0 1                                                                                   𝑋-𝑇-𝑌          0
                                                                          1      1    0
          1 0 0                   2
                                            𝑇  2
           DAG Labels        𝑇 = 𝑌 + 𝑁(0, )                                   Skeleton            v-structures
                                  3            3
                             Causal Structures                                Identifiable Causal Structures


Figure A4: The problem setting to emphasize the limitations of the Bernoulli-sampling adjacency
matrix approach. Best viewed in color.


A3     E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS
Metrics. In all tables, ± indicates that the mean value and maximum deviation of three runs with
different random seeds are reported. In the field of skeleton prediction tasks, the F1 score has


                                                         15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


emerged as a widely adopted metric due to its ability to effectively balance precision and recall
(Ding et al., 2020; Ma et al., 2022). This metric provides a comprehensive evaluation of the model’s
performance, particularly in cases where the data distribution is imbalanced. Accuracy, another
commonly used metric, offers a direct measure of the proportion of misclassified edges within the
graph. It can also be interpreted as a normalized version of the Structural Hamming Distance (SHD),
which has gained popularity in recent years (Ma et al., 2022; Lorch et al., 2022; Ke et al., 2023).
Considering that deep learning models typically output probabilities rather than discrete labels, the
Area Under the Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve (AUC) and the Area Under the Precision-
Recall Curve (AUPRC) are also employed as more robust metrics. These metrics take into account
all possible decision thresholds, providing a comprehensive evaluation of the model’s performance
across various operating points.
For the CPDAG prediction task, accuracy is used as a comparison metric, which measures the ratio of
misclassified edges in the predicted CPDAG. Following the previous paper (Dai et al., 2023), the F1-
scores calculated for identifiable edges and v-structures are also provided for a more comprehensive
comparison.

Baselines. To demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of the proposed framework, several
strong baselines representing multiple categories are selected for comparison. These baselines in-
clude:

      1. PC: A classic constraint-based causal discovery algorithm based on conditional indepen-
         dence tests. The version with parallelized optimization is selected (Le et al., 2016).
      2. GES: A classic score-based greedy equivalence search algorithm (Chickering, 2002).
      3. NOTEARS: A gradient-based algorithm for linear data models (Zheng et al., 2018).
      4. DAG-GNN: A continuous optimization algorithm based on graph neural networks (Yu
         et al., 2019).
      5. AVICI: A powerful deep learning-based supervised causal learning method (Lorch et al.,
         2022).
      6. NOTEARS-MLP: A gradient-based algorithm for non-linear data models (Zheng et al.,
         2018).
      7. GOLEM: A more efficient version of NOTEARS (Ng et al., 2020).
      8. GraNDAG: A gradient-based algorithm using neural network modeling for non-linear ad-
         ditive noise data (Lachapelle et al., 2020).

The implementation from gCastle (Zhang et al., 2021) is utilized for the first four baselines. Note
that the CSIvA model (Ke et al., 2023) is also a closely related method, but it is not compared
due to the unavailability of its relevant codes and its requirement for interventional data as input.
The original AVICI model (Lorch et al., 2022) does not support discrete data. Therefore, we use
an embedding layer to replace its first linear layer when using AVICI on discrete data. All classic
algorithms are run on an AMD EPYC 7V13 CPU, and DNN-based methods are run on an Nvidia
A100 GPU. Our codes can be accessed at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/paire-C05D.

Synthetic Data.         We randomly generate random graphs from multiple random graph models.
For continuous data, following previous work (Lorch et al., 2022), Erdős-Rényi (ER) and Scale-
free (SF) are utilized as the training graph distribution p(G). The degree of training graphs in our
experiments varies randomly among 1, 2, and 3. For testing graph distributions, Watts-Strogatz
(WS) and Stochastic Block Model (SBM) are used, with parameters consistent with those in the
previous paper (Lorch et al., 2022). All synthetic graphs for continuous data contain 30 nodes.
The lattice dimension of Watts-Strogatz (WS) graphs is sampled from {2, 3}, yielding an average
degree of about 4.92. The average degrees of Stochastic Block Model (SBM) graphs are set at 2,
following the settings in the aforementioned paper. For discrete data, 11-node graphs are used. SF
is utilized as the training graph distribution p(G) and ER is used for testing. The synthetic training
data is generated in real-time, and the training process does not use the same data repeatedly. All
synthetic test datasets contain 100 graphs, and the average values of the metrics on the 100 graphs
are reported to comprehensively reflect the performance.


                                                 16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     AVICI                                                         0.8   AVICI
              0.7    PAIRE                                                               PAIRE
                                                                                   0.7
              0.6
                                                                                   0.6
              0.5
                                                                                   0.5
Performance


                                                                     Performance
              0.4                                                                  0.4
              0.3                                                                  0.3
              0.2                                                                  0.2
              0.1                                                                  0.1

              0.0                                                                  0.0
                     F1           AUC      AUPRC    Acc.                                 F1            AUC      AUPRC    Acc.

                             (a) Linear Gaussian                                                 (b) General Nonlinear

       Figure A5: Compairson between AVICI and PAIRE of Skeleton prediction task on WS Graphs.


For the forward sampling process from graph to continuous data, both the linear Gaussian mech-
anism and general nonlinear mechanism are applied. Concretely, the Random Fourier Function
mechanism is used for the general nonlinear data following the previous paper (Lorch et al., 2022).
In synthesizing discrete datasets, the Bernoulli distribution is used following previous papers (Dai
et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2022).
Post-processing. Although our method theoretically guarantees asymptotic correctness, in prac-
tice, conflicts in predicted v-structures might occasionally occur in practice. Therefore, in the
post-processing stage, we apply a straightforward heuristic to resolve the potential conflicts among
predicted v-structures following previous work (Dai et al., 2023). After that, we use an improved
version of Meek rules (Meek, 1995a; Tsagris, 2019) to obtain other identifiable edges without intro-
ducing extra cycles. Combining the skeleton from the skeleton predictor model with all identifiable
edge directions, we get the final output of the CPDAG.


A4                  E XTRA E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

                                        Table A6: Comparison of skeleton prediction task
                                        on ER random graphs of discrete data.

                                        Method      F1     AUC      AUPRC                  Accuracy
                                         AVICI     0.833   0.961     0.925                       0.914
                                         PAIRE     0.862   0.976     0.952                       0.921


More Comparisons on Continuous Data.             Table A7 - A8 presents additionally comparison
between PAIRE and more baseline methods on the WS dataset for both skeleton prediction task
and CPDAG prediction task. PAIRE consistently demonstrates superior performance in comparison
with these methods. Figure A5 presents an experimental comparison between AVICI and PAIRE
on WS random graphs for skeleton prediction. These results reinforce the analysis in Sec. 5.3 and
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed pairwise encoder module.
Figure A6 illustrates the test performance trends of the v-structure prediction model on SBM and
WS random graphs during the training process. In this model, the feature extractor F E is fine-tuned
from the skeleton prediction model. The performance increases rapidly and achieves a relatively
high level after just a few initial epochs. This suggests that the v-structure task is relatively straight-
forward, and the pre-trained pairwise features from the skeleton prediction model are both effective
and generalizable.

More Comparisons on Synthetic Discrete Data. Since neural network model outputs range from
0 to 1 as probabilities rather than single predictions, AUC and AUPRC are more appropriate metrics


                                                              17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   1.0
                                                                       1.0
   0.9
                                                                       0.9
   0.8
                                                                       0.8
   0.7
                                                                       0.7
   0.6
                                                                       0.6
   0.5
                                                                       0.5
   0.4
                                             F1                        0.4                                      F1
   0.3
                                             AUC                                                                AUC
                                             AUPRC                     0.3                                      AUPRC
   0.2                                       Accuracy                                                           Accuracy
                                                                       0.2
         0    20    40   60      80    100    120                            0     20   40   60      80   100    120
                         Epoch                                                               Epoch

(a) Variation trends of test performance on WS                    (b) Variation trends of test performance on SBM
graph.                                                            graph.

Figure A6: Variation trends of the test performance of v-structure prediction model on WS and SBM
random graphs during training.

Table A7: More comparison of skeleton prediction results on linear Gaussian data and WS graphs.

                                  Method                 Skeleton F1         Skeleton AUC
                             GRANDAG                        0.163                0.502
                            NOTEARS-MLP                     0.256                0.513
                              GOLEM                         0.293                0.539
                               PAIRE                    0.479 ± 0.015        0.750 ± 0.003


for comparing DNN-based SCL methods. The comparison between AVICI and PAIRE for the skele-
ton prediction task on discrete data is provided in Table A6. By adjusting the classification threshold
of DNN-based SCL methods, we can also compare them with traditional methods. These results are
presented in Table A9. It is evident that DNN-based SCL methods outperform their counterparts,
with PAIRE consistently achieving the best performance under these conditions.

More Results on Sachs. We present the comparison on
F1 score and accuracy on the Sachs dataset in Figure                             Table A9: Comparison of skele-
A7. The results demonstrate that DNN-based SCL meth-                             ton prediction task on ER random
ods consistently outperform classical approaches, thereby                        graphs of discrete data.
confirming their effectiveness and superiority in this con-
text.                                                          Method        F1    Accuracy
Training Data Diversity and Model Generalization. We             PC        0.822      0.830
present experimental evidence that highlights the signifi-       GES       0.821      0.818
cant contribution of training data diversity to the model’s  NOTEARS 0.164            0.747
generalization capabilities, even when applied to out-of-       AVICI      0.833      0.914
distribution (OOD) datasets. To illustrate this, we trained     PAIRE      0.862     0.921
one PAIRE model on a combined dataset of both SF and
ER, and another solely on the SF dataset. The comparative performance of these models is detailed
in Table A10. The model trained on the combined ER and SF datasets exhibited markedly better per-


Table A8: More comparison of CPDAG prediction results on linear Gaussian data and WS graphs.

                   Method             V-structure F1        Identfiable edges F1                SHD
              GRANDAG                     0.116                   0.115                       169.48
             NOTEARS-MLP                  0.128                   0.126                       192.59
               GOLEM                      0.158                   0.191                       172.63
                PAIRE                 0.298 ± 0.076           0.370 ± 0.062              116.797 ± 7.253


                                                            18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                   F1
                                                   Acc.
                                          0.8


                                          0.6


                            Performance
                                          0.4


                                          0.2


                                          0.0
                                                   PC         GES    DAG-GNN   AVICI    PAIRE


                    Figure A7: Skeleton prediction results on the Sachs dataset.

Table A10: Comparison of PAIRE models with different training data diversity on skeleton predic-
tion.

                                                (a) Model trained on both ER and SF
                      Test Dataset                    F1             AUC       AUPRC        Accuracy
                      WS                            0.3631          0.7056     0.6061        0.7329
                      SBM                           0.7811          0.9675     0.8809        0.9483
                      ER                            0.8069          0.9603     0.8918        0.9473
                      SF                            0.8473          0.9845     0.9355        0.9551
                                                          (b) Model trained on SF
                      Test Dataset                    F1             AUC       AUPRC        Accuracy
                      WS                            0.4011          0.6300     0.4609        0.6353
                      SBM                           0.6427          0.9165     0.7287        0.9087
                      ER                            0.6706          0.9042     0.7393        0.9080
                      SF                            0.8783          0.9886     0.9529        0.9611


formance, not only on the ER dataset but also on the other two OOD datasets, with only a marginal
decrease in performance on the SF dataset. These findings suggest that enhancing the diversity of
the training data correspondingly improves the model’s ability to generalize and maintain robust
performance across novel OOD datasets.
Varying Amount of Training Graphs. We present an analysis of how varying the amount of
the training graphs influences performance on the skeleton prediction task. The results, depicted in
Figure A8, illustrate a clear trend: model performance improves in tandem with the expansion of the
training dataset. This trend underscores the potential of our method to achieve even greater accuracy
given a more extensive dataset.

Varying Sample Size. We assessed PAIRE across various quantities of observational samples per
graph during testing (100, 200, ..., 1000). The outcomes for both the skeleton prediction task and
the CPDAG prediction task are depicted in Figure A9. It is evident that the model’s performance
enhances with the augmentation of sample size. These consistent upward trends suggest that PAIRE
exhibits stability and is not overly sensitive to changes in sample size.

Varying Edge Density. We evaluate PAIRE over a range of edge densities in the test graphs,
utilizing the SBM dataset, as it allows for the direct setting of average edge densities. The findings
are presented in Figure A10. It’s apparent that the task is becomes more difficult as edge densities
increase. However, the performance decline is not abrupt, indicating that PAIRE’s performance
remains relatively stable across various edge densities, thereby confirming its versatility.

Acyclicity. We provide an empirical evidence supporting of the rarity of cycles in the final pre-
dictions. The experimental data presented in Table A11 corroborates that cycles are infrequently
observed in the final predicted CPDAGs.


                                                                     19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                     1.0
                0.7
                                                                                                                                     0.9

                0.6                                                                                                                  0.8
 Metric Value


                                                                                                     Metric Value
                0.5                                                                                                                  0.7

                                                                                                                                     0.6
                0.4
                                                                      F1                                                             0.5                                                  F1
                0.3                                                   AUC                                                                                                                 AUC
                                                                      AUPRC                                                                                                               AUPRC
                                                                      Accuracy                                                       0.4                                                  Accuracy
                      104                      105                   106                                                                   104                       105                 106
                                       Number of Training Graphs                                                                                           Number of Training Graphs

                                        (a) WS dataset                                                                                                     (b) SBM dataset

                                   Figure A8: Model performance with varying amount of training graphs.


                                                                                                                              0.40
                0.7                                                                                                                                                                                   128
                                                                                       V-structure F1/Identifiable Edges F1


                                                                                                                              0.35
                0.6                                                                                                                                                                                   126
                                                                                                                              0.30
                0.5                                                                                                                                                                                   124
Metric Value


                                                                                                                              0.25


                                                                                                                                                                                                           SHD Value
                0.4
                                                                                                                              0.20                                                             SHD 122
                0.3                                                                                                                                                                                   120
                                                                                                                              0.15
                0.2                                                                                                                                                                                   118
                            F1                                                                                                0.10
                            AUC                                                                                                                                                                       116
                0.1         AUPRC                                                                                             0.05               V-structure F1
                            Accuracy                                                                                                             Identifiable Edges F1
                0.0                                                                                                           0.00                                                                    114
                            200          400         600       800         1000                                                                  200           400         600     800         1000
                                               Sample Size                                                                                                           Sample Size
(a) Variation trends of skeleton predicton task per-                                   (b) Variation trends of CPDAG predicton task per-
formance on WS graph with varying sample sizes.                                        formance on WS graph with varying sample sizes.

                                                                                                                                     0.8                                                              40
                                                                                                 V-struc. F1/Identifiable Edges F1


                                                                                                                                     0.7
                0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                      35
                                                                                                                                     0.6
Metric Value


                0.6                                                                                                                  0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                       SHD Value


                                                                                                                                                                                                      30
                                                                                                                                     0.4                                                       SHD
                0.4
                                                                                                                                     0.3                                                              25
                            F1                                                                                                       0.2
                0.2         AUC
                            AUPRC                                                                                                    0.1         V-structure F1                                       20
                            Accuracy                                                                                                             Identifiable Edges F1
                0.0                                                                                                                  0.0
                            200          400         600       800         1000                                                                  200           400         600     800         1000
                                               Sample Size                                                                                                           Sample Size
(c) Variation trends of skeleton predicton task per-                                   (d) Variation trends of CPDAG predicton task
formance on SBM graph with varying sample                                              performance on SBM graph with varying sample
sizes.                                                                                 sizes.

                                       Figure A9: Variation trends of performance with varying sample sizes.


                                                                                  20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                   40


                                                                                    V-structure F1/Identifiable Edges F1
                                                                                                                           0.8
               0.8                                                                                                                                                                 35
                                                                                                                                                                                   30
                                                                                                                           0.6
Metric Value

               0.6


                                                                                                                                                                                       SHD Value
                                                                                                                                     V-structure F1                                25
                                                                                                                                     Identifiable Edges F1                         20
               0.4                                                                                                         0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                   15
                         F1                                                                                                0.2                                                     10
               0.2       AUC
                         AUPRC                                                                                                                                                     5
                         Accuracy                                                                                                                                            SHD
               0.0                                                                                                         0.0
                     1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75 2.00 2.25 2.50 2.75 3.00                                                                1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75 2.00 2.25 2.50 2.75 3.00
                            Average Number of Edges per Vertex                                                                          Average Number of Edges per Vertex
(a) Variation trends of skeleton predicton task per-                               (b) Variation trends of CPDAG predicton task per-
formance on SBM graph with varying edge densi-                                     formance on SBM graph with varying edge densi-
ties.                                                                              ties.

                               Figure A10: Variation trends of performance with varying edge densities.

                                        Table A11: Count of cycles in the final CPDAG predictions.

                                                      Dataset                      WS                                                             SBM
                                       Rate of Graphs with Cycles            0.66 ± 0.66%                                                0.00 ± 0.00%


Generality on Testing Graph Sizes. We offer an analytical perspective on the performance of the
PAIRE model when applied to larger WS graphs. It is important to highlight that the models were
initially trained on graphs comprising 30 vertices, positioning this task within an out-of-distribution
setting in terms of graph size. To establish a point of reference, we have included results from the
PC algorithm as a baseline comparison. These findings can be examined in Table A12. Despite the
OOD conditions, PAIRE maintains robust performance, reinforcing its scalability and the model’s
general applicability across varying graph sizes.

                                    Table A12: Performance comparison with varying amounts of graph sizes.

    Metric                                     F1 Score                          V-structure-F1                                                               Identifiable-Edges F1
    Graph Size                         50         70              100      50          70       100                                                           50        70       100
    PC                              0.1767       0.1484          0.1060   0.0635         0.0504                                        0.0366                0.0699   0.0559       0.0403
    PAIRE                           0.4156       0.3738          0.2834   0.3494         0.3070                                        0.2261                0.3793   0.3369       0.2479


                                                                            21
