Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


MALCOM-PSGD: I NEXACT P ROXIMAL S TOCHAS -
TIC G RADIENT D ESCENT FOR C OMMUNICATION -
E FFICIENT D ECENTRALIZED M ACHINE L EARNING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         Recent research indicates that frequent model communication stands as a ma-
         jor bottleneck to the efficiency of decentralized machine learning (ML), partic-
         ularly for large-scale and over-parameterized neural networks (NNs). In this
         paper, we introduce M ALCOM -PSGD, a new decentralized ML algorithm that
         strategically integrates gradient compression techniques with model sparsifica-
         tion. M ALCOM -PSGD leverages proximal stochastic gradient descent to handle
         the non-smoothness resulting from the ℓ1 regularization in model sparsification.
         Furthermore, we adapt vector source coding and dithering-based quantization for
         compressed gradient communication of sparsified models. Our analysis shows
         that decentralized proximal stochastic gradient√descent
                                                                 with compressed commu-
         nication has a convergence rate of O ln(t)/ t assuming a diminishing learn-
         ing rate and where t denotes the number of iterations. Numerical results verify
         our theoretical findings and demonstrate that our method reduces communication
         costs by approximately 75% when compared to the state-of-the-art method.


1   I NTRODUCTION

With the growing prevalence of computationally capable edge devices, there is a necessity for ef-
ficient learning algorithms that preserve data locality and privacy. One popular approach is decen-
tralized ML. Under this regime, nodes within the network learn a global model by iterative model
communication, whilst preserving data locality (Lalitha et al., 2018). It has been shown that de-
centralized ML algorithms can achieve similar accuracy and convergence rates to their centralized
counterparts under certain network connectivity conditions (Nedic & Ozdaglar, 2009; Scaman et al.,
2017; Koloskova et al., 2019; Lian et al., 2017). While decentralized ML eliminates the need for
data uploading, (Bonawitz et al., 2019; Van Berkel, 2009; Li et al., 2020) observed that iterative
model communication over rate-constrained channels creates a bottleneck. Particularly, the perfor-
mance of decentralized training of large-scale deep neural network (DNN) models is substantially
limited by excessively high communication costs (Chilimbi et al., 2014; Seide et al., 2014; Ström,
2015). This emphasizes the importance of designing efficient protocols for the communication and
aggregation of high-dimensional local models.
Recent research has shown that efficiency of model communication can be enhanced by model
sparsification and gradient/model compression. Model sparsification involves reducing the dimen-
sionality of model parameters by exploiting their sparsity (Tan et al., 2011). On the other hand,
model and gradient compression for decentralized ML has been studied in Alistarh et al. (2017);
Koloskova et al. (2021; 2019); Han et al. (2015); Wen et al. (2017); Lin et al. (2018); Seide et al.
(2014). It typically leverages lossy compression methods, such as quantization and source coding, to
compress local model updates prior to communication. While this approach reduces communication
bandwidth, it inevitably introduces imprecision during model aggregation.
Related Work. Kempe et al. (2003); Xiao & Boyd (2004); Boyd et al. (2006); Dimakis et al. (2010)
proposed gossiping algorithms for consensus aggregation of local optimization results by leverag-
ing peer-to-peer or neighborhood communication. Recently, Koloskova et al. (2019); Zhang et al.
(2017); Scaman et al. (2017) adopted the gossiping algorithm for decentralized ML with convex and
smooth loss functions, where convergence is guaranteed with constant and diminishing step sizes.


                                                 1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Continuing this work, Koloskova et al. (2021); Lian et al. (2017); Nadiradze et al. (2021); Tang
et al. (2018) generalized the approach to smooth but non-convex loss functions and provided con-
vergence guarantees. Furthermore, (Koloskova et al., 2019) and (Tang et al., 2018) utilized gradient
compression by compressing the model updates before communication and aggregation. Notably,
Alistarh et al. (2017) proposed a dithering-based quantization scheme as well as a symbol-wise
source coding method for ML model compression. Meanwhile, Nadiradze et al. (2021) analyzed the
convergence of asynchronous decentralized optimization with model compression. While communi-
cation compression is advantageous in of itself, Alistarh et al. (2018); Stich et al. (2018) analytically
and numerically demonstrated the bandwidth gains from gradient sparsfication.
Fukushima & Mine (1981) proposed proximal gradient descent (PGD) for the optimization of non-
smooth functions with separable convex and smooth components. Subsequently, Beck & Teboulle
(2009) studied the convergence of PGD when the proximal optimization step can be executed via
a soft-thresholding operation. Continuing this work, Schmidt et al. (2011) generalized the method
for a convex objective with inexact gradient descent steps, while Sra (2012) established the conver-
gence rate of inexact PGD for non-convex objectives. Meanwhile, in the decentralized convex op-
timization setting, Chen (2012) proved the convergence of inexact PGD with sub-optimal proximal
optimization. Furthermore, Zeng & Yin (2018b) introduced general decentralized PGD algorithms
and established the convergence rates for both constant and decreasing step sizes. However, to the
best of our knowledge, the perturbations caused by data sub-sampling alongside stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) updates and the lossy gradient compression have been overlooked in the literature.
Our Contributions. In this work, we address the challenge of enhancing the communication ef-
ficiency in compressed decentralized ML with a non-convex loss. We introduce the Multi-Agent
Learning via Compressed updates for Proximal Stochastic Gradient Descent (M ALCOM -PSGD)
algorithm, which communicates compressed and coded model updates. Our algorithm leverages
model sparsification to reduce the model dimension by incorporating ℓ1 regularization during the
SGD update. However, this non-smooth regularization term complicates the direct use of existing
decentralized SGD algorithms in local training. In response, we introduce a strategy that combines
decentralized proximal SGD to solve the regularized decentralized optimization, alongside gradient
compression to alleviate the communication cost. Our contributions are summarized as follows.
• We introduce M ALCOM -PSGD which utilizes gradient compression, vector source encoding,
  strategic aggregation and model sparsification to reduce the communication costs for decentral-
  ized learning. Through analysis and numerical evaluation we show that the amalgamation of these
  techniques enhances communication efficiency beyond the sum of their individual contributions.
  Numerically, we demonstrate a 75% bit rate reduction when compare to the state of the art.
• We prove that M ALCOM -PSGD converges in the objective value for non-convex and smooth
  loss functions
             √ with a given compression error. M ALCOM -PSGD exhibits a convergence rate
  of O(ln t/ t) and a consensus rate of O(1/t) with diminishing learning rates and consensus
  stepsizes, where t represents the number of training rounds. Our aggregation scheme improves
  the accuracy but complicates the analysis because it does not preserve the average of the iterates.
  Combined with the non-smooth objective, we cannot directly use the proofs inKoloskova et al.
  (2021) and Zeng & Yin (2018b) to ensure convergece of M ALCOM -PSGD.
• We employ the vector source coding scheme from Woldemariam et al. (2023) to minimize commu-
  nication requirements, by encoding the support vector of entries that match a certain quantization
  level. Our use of compressed model updates and differential encoding allows us to reasonably
  assume we are creating a structure within our updates that this encoding scheme is most advanta-
  geous under. This allows us to benefit from the compression under this scheme.

2    D ECENTRALIZED L EARNING
We consider a decentralized learning system composed of n nodes, whose goal is to collaboratively
minimize an empirical loss function for a neural network model, as
                                 n                                 |Di |
                            1X                                1 X
                        min      Fi (x; Di ),      Fi (x) :=             fi (x; ξi,j ),                  (1)
                         x n
                             i=1
                                                             |Di | j=1
where x ∈ Rd represents the model parameters, Fi (·; Di ) is the local loss on node i with respect to
(w.r.t.) the local dataset Di , and fi (·; ξi,j ) represents the loss w.r.t. the data sample ξi,j . We assume


                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


that Fi is finite-sum, smooth, and non-convex, which represents a broad range of machine learning
applications, such as logistic regression, support vector machine, DNNs, etc.
Communication. At each iteration of the algorithm, nodes individually update local models using
the proximal gradient of the cost obtained with a mini-batch of their own data sets. Then, they com-
municate the update with their neighbors according to a network topology specified by an undirected
graph G({1, · · · , n}, E), where E denotes the edge set representing existing communication links
among the nodes. Let Ni := {j ∈ V : (i, j) ∈ E} denote the neighborhood of i. We define a
mixing matrix W ∈ Rn×n , with the (i, j)−th entry wij denoting the weight of the edge between i
and j. We make the following standard assumptions about W :
Assumption 1 (The mixing matrix). The mixing matrix W satisfies the following conditions:
  i. wij > 0 if and only if there exists an edge between nodes i and j.
 ii. The underlying graph is undirected, implying that W is symmetric.
iii. The rows and columns of W have a sum equal to one, i.e., it is doubly-stochastic.
 iv. G({1, · · · , n}, E) is strongly connected, implying that W is irreducible.

We align the eigenvalues of W in descending order of magnitude as |λ1 | = 1 > |λ2 | ≥ · · · ≥ |λn |.
In practice, the weights in W can be chosen by multiple metrics, such as node degrees, link dis-
tances, and communication channel conditions (Dimakis et al., 2010). This is the standard assump-
tion for the mixing/gossiping matrix and is consistent with Koloskova et al. (2021).
Model Sparsification. As shown in (Chilimbi et al., 2014; Seide et al., 2014; Ström, 2015), the
frequent model communication is regarded as the bottleneck in the decentralized optimization of (1),
especially when optimizing large-scale ML models, such as DNNs. To facilitate the compression
of the models updates, we promote model sparsity by adding ℓ1 regularization to the objective.
Specifically, we replace the original objective in (1) with the following problem:
                                 (               n
                                                                        )
                                              1X
                            min F(x) :=             Fi (x; Di ) + µ∥x∥1 ,                        (2)
                           x∈Rd               n i=1
where µ > 0 is a predefined penalty parameter. The ℓ1 regularization is an effective convex surrogate
for the ℓ0 -norm sparsity function, and thus is established as a computationally efficient approach for
promoting sparsity in the fields of compression and sparse coding (Donoho, 2006). However, we
note that adding ℓ1 regularization makes the objective in (2) non-smooth.1
Preliminaries on Decentralized Optimization. Decentralized optimization algorithms solve (2)
by an alternation of local optimization and consensus aggregation. Specifically, defining xi as the
local model parameters in node i for ∀1 ≤ i ≤ n, (2) can be recast as
                           n
                        1X
               min            (Fi (xi ; Di ) + µ∥xi ∥1 ) subject to xi = xj , ∀(i, j) ∈ E.      (3)
             xi ∈Rd ,∀i n
                          i=1


The nodes iteratively update the local solutions {xi } throughout T iterations. Denote the i-th local
                         (t)
model in iteration t as xi . In iteration t + 1, each node i first updates a local solution, denoted by
  (t+ 1 )                                                                                      (t)
xi 2 , by minimizing Fi (xi ) using the local dataset and the preceding solution xi . Once every
node completes its local update, they communicate with their neighbors and aggregate the local
models by the following scheme.
                           n                                                     n
    (t+1)     (t+1/2)                (t)    (t+1/2)               (t+1/2)                (t)
                           X                                                    X
  xi      = xi        + γt   wi,j yj − xi             = (1 − γt )xi       + γt      wij yj , (4)
                              j=1                                                          j∈Ni
                                                                           (t)
Here, γt is the consensus step size (i.e., consensus “learning rate”) and yj is the inexact reconstruc-
tion of xj using the compressed information node j shared with node i. This aggregation protocol
is non-standard and is thus one of our contributions. For comparison, using
                                                                           our notation,
                                                                                        Koloskova
                                        (t+1)     (t+1/2)     Pn            (t)   (t)
et al. (2021)’s aggregation scheme is xi      = xi        + γt j=1 wi,j yj − yi


   1
     Since our optimization design is specifically aimed at minimizing the regularized loss, F, our analysis will
predominantly concentrate on the convergence with respect to F, rather than the unregularized loss F .


                                                       3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 M ALCOM -PSGD
              (0)   (−1)
Initialize: xi , yi         = 0 ∈ Rd ,∀1 ≤ i ≤ n.
 1: for t ∈ [0, . . . , T − 1] do                                           ▷ All nodes i do in parallel
           (t+1/2)        (t)             (t) (t)
 2:      xi         = xi − ηt ∇Fi (xi , ξi )
           (t)          (t+1/2)    (t−1)
 3:      qi = Q(xi              − yi      )                            ▷ Residual quantization; see (6).
 4:      for j ∈ Ni do
                                    (t)
 5:           Encode and send qi            ▷ Residual communication with source encoding from Alg. 3.
                                        (t)
 6:           Receive and decode qj                                               ▷ Receiver decoding.
              (t)       (t)   (t−1)
 7:          yj = q j + yj

         (t+1)      (t+1/2)    P          (t)    (t+1/2)
 8:     zi       = xi     + γt j̸=i wi,j yj − xi             ▷ Consensus aggregation; cf. (4).

         (t+1)          (t+1)
 9:     xi     = Sηt µ zi                 ▷ Proximal optimization by soft-thresholding; see (7).



Objective of This Work. First, we seek an algorithm for optimizing (2) that also incorporates
quantized model updates. Second, we design a communication protocol that effectively compresses
model updates to minimize the number of bits needed for the gossiping aggregation in (4).


3     P ROPOSED A LGORITHM

M ALCOM -PSGD solves (2) using decentralized proximal SGD with five major steps: SGD, residual
compression, communication and encoding, consensus aggregation, and proximal optimization. We
refer to Algorithm 1 for the illustration of the steps. Unless it is stated otherwise, we consider a
synchronous decentralized learning framework over a static network for the sake of the analysis.
However, M ALCOM -PSGD can be readily extended to asynchronous and time-varying networks
while maintaining comparable performance, as demonstrated numerically in Section B.4. The steps
of M ALCOM -PSGD are detailed below.
SGD. At iteration t, each node i performs the mini-batch SGD update w.r.t. the gradient of the local
                                       (t)                                        (t+1/2)
empirical loss Fi (x; Di ) with input xi . The updated local model is denoted by xi       in Step 2
                   (t)
of Alg. 1, where ξi is the mini-batch data sampled from Di .
Residual Quantization. We directly utilize Assumption 1 from Koloskova et al. (2019) to define
our compression operator Q(x).
Assumption 2. For any input x, Q(x) : Rd → Rd satisfies that
                                                   1
                         E[∥Q(x) − x∥2 ] ≤ (1 − )∥x∥2 ,        Q(0) = 0,                            (5)
                                                   τ
where τ ∈ (0, 1) is a constant representing the expected compression error.

Assumption 2 models a broad range of popular gradient compression schemes including QSGD
(Alistarh et al., 2017), topk and randk (Stich et al., 2018), and rescaled unbiased estimators. While
any of the above compression schemes yield the same analytical results for consensus and conver-
gence (Theorem 1 and Theorem 2), we introduce the following compression scheme for bit rate
analysis and implementation. We integrate the uniform quantization scheme QSGD with uniform
dithering and adaptive normalization as follows.

                               1       xi − min(x)                           1
              Q(xi ) = 1          ζ                      ,Γ     , ζ(x, Γ) = ⌊xΓ + u⌋,             (6)
                        xi ̸=0 τ     max(x) − min(x)                         Γ
where τ = 1 + d/Γ2 , xi denotes the i-th entry of the input vector x, 1A is the indicator function,
ζ(x, Γ) is the uniform scalar quantizer with Γ quantization levels, and u is drawn from the uniform
distribution over [0, 1]. We show in Appendix A.1 that the quantizer in (6), combined with the
corresponding de-normalization process at the receiver, satisfies Assumption 2. We apply Q(·)
                                                   (t+ 1 )   (t−1)
element-wise to quantize the model differential xi 2 − yi          for each i in the network. Here, the
input values are adaptively normalized into the range [0, 1] by the extreme values of the input vector.


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We emphasize the importance of this adaptive normalization process in limiting the quantization
error during the training, particularly when dealing with small input values.
Source Coding. The proximal operation promotes sparsity in the local models, encouraging shrink-
age in the quantized model residuals, and thus motivating us to use fewer bits for fixed precision.
This is accomplished by encoding the frequencies and positions of non-zero values over the support
            (t)
of each qi by using a vector source encoder. We employ the source coding scheme proposed in
Woldemariam et al. (2023), where the details are discussed in Algorithm 3 of Appendix A.3. The
scheme is inspired by the notion of encoding the support of a sparse input. If the quantized coeffi-
cients that are non-zero tend to be concentrated around a limited number of modes, we can encode
the support of those coefficients for each level efficiently as we expect most quantization levels to
appear at a lower frequency. For notational simplicity, we omit the indices i and t from the quan-
                                (t)
tized encoding input vector qi , representing it as q in the sequel. The type vector t(q) storing the
frequency information of each level, denoted by χℓ , 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ Γ − 1, is first created, where the ℓ-th
                   Pd
type is tℓ (q) = j=1 δ(qj − χℓ ). Each entry of the type vector has an associated support vector sℓ
denoting the positions in q that are equal to sℓ , i.e., sℓ [j] = 1 if qj = χℓ and sℓ [j] = 0 otherwise.
            PΓ−1
Because ℓ=0 sℓ [j] = 1, ∀1 ≤ j ≤ d, for a support vector sℓ with sℓ [j] = 1, we know that all
subsequent support vectors for levels ℓ′ > ℓ have sℓ′ [j] = 0. Thus, these subsequent support vectors
do not need to encode positional information for the values Iℓ , the set of indices where sℓ [i] = 1.
Let sℓ [Iℓ ] denote the indices
                         S      within sℓ that are communicated. It follows from Woldemariam et al.
(2023) that Iℓ = I0 \ ℓ′ <ℓ Iℓ′ where I0 = {1, . . . , d}. The run-lengths within the support vectors
sℓ [Iℓ ] are then encoded with Golomb encoding. For further details see Appendix A.3.
Consensus Aggregation. Each node i aggregates the local models from its neighbors with its up-
                      (t+1/2)                                                                     (t+1)
dated local model xi          (Step 9 of Alg. 1), leading to the aggregated model denoted by zi         .
The proposed consensus process differs from Koloskova et al. (2019), since we employ the true local
        (t+1/2)                                       (t)
model xi        , rather than the reconstructed one yi , for aggregation. Even though it does not pre-
serve the average of the iterates and complicates the analysis, this aggregation scheme was chosen
because it reduces the error accumulation caused by Q(x). Furthermore, this approach allows us to
balance consensus and local training by adjusting the stepsize γt . In addition, it effectively reduces
the consensus error, as shown in Section 4.
Proximal Optimization. To tackle the non-smoothness of the objective function in (2), we adopt
the proximal SGD method, which decomposes (2) into a smooth component Fi (x) and a convex but
non-smooth component µ∥x∥1 . Then, x is updated by the SGD method as previously described and
is subsequently combined with neighboring estimates during the consensus step. Finally, the model
x(t+1) is computed by applying a proximal operation w.r.t. µ∥x∥1 . This operation is character-
ized by a closed-form update expression derived from the soft-thresholding function. Specifically,
let Sηt µ (x) = max {(|x| − µηt ), 0} sign(x) denote the soft-thresholding function. The proximal
update step is given by

                          (t+1)                  (t+1)             (t+1)
                        xi      = proxηt ,µ∥·∥ zi        = Sηt µ zi        ,                  (7)
                                                             2
where proxηt ,µ∥·∥ (z) = arg minu {µηt ∥u∥1 + ∥u − z∥ /2} is the proximal operator. The soft-
thresholding operation promotes model sparsity by truncating values with a magnitude less than
µηt . This step is important in accelerating convergence and conserving communication bandwidth.
                                                                 (t+1)
Remark. M ALCOM -PSGD aggregates the local models zi           , which are updated in the SGD
steps, before the proximal operation. This design allows us to model the compression error and
the SGD update variance as perturbations to the proximal step. We analyze the impact of these
perturbations on the convergence of M ALCOM -PSGD in Section 4.


4   C ONVERGENCE A NALYSIS

In this section, we analyze the convergence conditions of M ALCOM -PSGD in terms of 1) the con-
vergence of the consensus in model aggregation, and 2) the convergence of the optimization solution
                                                                       Pn      (t)
to (2). We denote the average of local models in round t by x̄(t) = n1 i=1 xi . For ease of no-
tation, we denote the model parameters in the matrix form by stacking the local models by column


                                                   5
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   (t)         (t)               (t)
 as X (t) := [x1 , · · · , xn ] and X := [x(t) , · · · , x(t) ]. We impose the following assumptions on
 the training loss function, which is standard in the stochastic optimization literature.
  Assumption 3. Each local empirical loss function, i.e., Fi in (1), satisfies the following conditions.
                                                                                      P
  i. Each xi 7→ Fi is Lipschitz smooth with constant Li . As a result, the sum i Fi is Lipschitz
     smooth with constant L = maxi Li .
 ii. Each Fi (xi ) + µ∥xi ∥1 is proper, lower semi-continuous, bounded below, and coercive2 .
                                                                                      (t)
iii. All the full batch gradient vectors are bounded above by G < ∞, i.e., ∥∇Fi (xi )∥2 ≤ G2 , ∀i, t,
     Moreover, the mini-batch stochastic gradient vectors are unbiased with bounded variance, i.e.,
                             (t)     (t)               (t)
                  E[∇Fi (xi ; ξi )] = ∇Fi (xi ),             E[∥∇Fi (x, ξi ) − ∇Fi (x)∥2 ] ≤ σi2 , ∀i, t.   (8)

 By the AM-GM inequality, (8) implies
   Xn                          n
                               X
       E[∥∇Fi (x, ξi )∥2 ] ≤ 2   E[∥∇Fi (x, ξi ) − ∇Fi (x)∥2 ] + ∥∇Fi (x)∥2 ≤ 2n(G2 + σ 2 ),

    i=1                                    i=1
                                                                                                            (9)
                       Pn
 where σ    2
                ≜ n1          2                                                     2
                         i=1 σi is the average gradient variance. In (9), the term σ measures the inexact-
 ness introduced to the mini-batch SGD step.
 In this section, we consider a diminishing sublinear learning rate as seen in (Zeng & Yin, 2018b):
                                                     1
                                           ηt =             ,                                    (10)
                                                 L(t + a)ϵ
 where a ≥ 1 and ϵ ∈ (0, 1] are predefined hyperparameters controlling the decaying rate. Further-
 more, we also choose a decreasing consensus stepsize surrogated by ηt , as
                                   1 − a−ϵ
                             γ0 ≤          ,      γt ≤ ηt , γt+1 ≤ γt , ∀t.                      (11)
                                   1 − λn
 We first show in the following that the consensus error converges to zero in M ALCOM -PSGD.
 Theorem 1. Suppose Assumptions 1-3 hold. Let ηt and γt be defined from 10 and 11 and define
                2
            2 |)
 ω = (1−|λ
         8τ       , where τ is from Assumption 2. Suppose the following conditions hold.
                                     1 − |λ2 |        8ϵ         (0)
                               γt ≤            ;  a≥ ;         xi = 0, ∀i.               (12)
                                        4τ            ω
 Then, for ∀t > 0, ∀ϵ ∈ (0, 1], and ∀Q(•) that satisfies Assumption 2 we have
                            n
                           X        (t)            C                 2
                                E∥xi − x(t) ∥2 ≤ 3 (2G2 + 2σ 2 + µ2 d)nηt2 ,             (13)
                           i=1
                                                  ω                  3
 where C < 116 is an independent constant. Furthermore, applying the value of ηt in (10), the
                Pn      (t)
 consensus error i=1 E∥xi − x(t) ∥2 converges to zero on the rate of O(1/t).

 For the proof of Theorem 1, we refer to Appendix A.4. Theorem 1 is applicable to a broad range
 of compression and coding schemes that satisfy Assumption 2. While the mini-batch sampling
 variance in the SGD step is characterized by σ, a more significant compression error leads to a
 larger τ , which in turn is manifested by a decreased ω in (13). Theorem 1 indicates a consensus
 rate of O(1/t) which asymptotically matches (Koloskova et al., 2021, Lemma A.2). However, we
 require a diminishing learning rate which is a stricter condition and is required because of the non-
 smoothness induced by the regularization term. Additionally, because our aggregation scheme does
 not preserve the average, the proof in Koloskova et al. (2021) does not hold for M ALCOM -PSGD.
                        Pn
 Define F(X) = 1/n i=1 (Fi (xi ) + µ ∥xi ∥1 ). Now we detail the final assumptions required for
 proving the convergence of M ALCOM -PSGD.
 Assumption 4. Let { X (t) F }∞  t=0 be the local models’ sequence obtained by Algorithm 1 within
 the training iterations. The corresponding objective values {F(X (t) )}∞t=0 are always finite. To-
 gether with the coercivity of F in Assumption 3(ii), it follows that the norms of {X (t) }∞
                                                                                           t=0 are
 bounded as X (t) F ≤ B, ∀t, for some constant B < ∞.
    2
        A function h(x) is coercive if ∥x∥ → ∞ implies h(x) → ∞.


                                                             6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Assumption 3(ii) is consistent with Zeng & Yin (2018b) and under this condition, Assumption 4
requires that the loss values produced in training iterations of our algorithm are finite. This assump-
tion can be reliably met with practical machine learning solvers. We note that Assumption 4 is not
required in Koloskova et al. (2021) and Zeng & Yin (2018b), but is critical for our analysis since
we need it to bound the optimality gap. Koloskova et al. (2021) is able to avoid this assumption by
assuming a smooth objective function while Zeng & Yin (2018b) avoids it by assuming loss-less
communication.
Theorem 2. Let the weighted average objective value be
                                      Pt              (k+1)
                                              ηk F(X        )
                                F t = k=0 P                   .                                   (14)
                                                 k ηk

Let F ∗ be the optimal objective value to F(X). With Assumptions 1-4 and (12), F t satisfies
                                                        Pt
                                                               η2

                                    ⋆             C2                   C3
                                                         Ptk=0 k + Pt

                       E F t − F ≤ C1 + √                                      .                  (15)
                                                    n      k=0 ηk      k=0 ηk
Here, C1 , C2 , and C3 ∼ O(1) are some constants independent to t and n on the order of such that
                                                           r
                      116        2      2    2
                                                       ⋆     116
                C1 ≤     3
                             2G + 2σ + µ d + ∥x ∥2                (2G2 + 2σ 2 + µ2 d),
                      2ω                                     2ω 3
                       r
                            116
                C2 ≤ B           (2G2 + 2σ 2 + µ2 d),
                            2ω 3
                            2
                C3 = ∥x∗ ∥2 /2,
where ω is defined in Theorem 1, and B is the constant defined in Assumption 4. Furthermore,  the
convergence rate in (15) can be determined by choice of ϵ in (10). In particular, when ϵ = 12 , E F t
converges to F ⋆ on the highest rate of

                                   ⋆
                                             ln t    ln t    1           ln t
                      E Ft − F = O           √    + √     + √     =O     √       .                (16)
                                               t       nt     t            t

The proof of Theorem 2 can be found in Appendix A.5. Theorems 1 and 2 show a trade-off between
consensus and convergence rates, depending on the value of ϵ, as both the consensus step size γt
and the learning rate ηt are influenced by ϵ. In particular, Theorem
                                                                √ 2 indicates that the optimal value
for ϵ is ϵ = 21 , leading to the convergence rate of O(ln(t)/ t). We note that M ALCOM -PSGD
exhibits the same convergence rate w.r.t. t as the error-free decentralized PGD approach in Zeng &
Yin (2018b). However, the quantization error in ω and the SGD variance σ 2 amplify the values of
the multiplicative terms in C1 and C2 , slowing down the convergence speed. For a decentralized
learning network exhibiting higher connectivity, the eigenvalue |λ2 | of the mixing matrix W is
generally smaller. This results in a larger ω as per Theorem 1, consequently leading to improved
consensus and convergence rates according to Theorems 1 and 2.
                                      √          √
The convergence order O (1 + 1/ n) ln t/ t stated in Theorem 2 indicates a diminishing
speedup with an increase in the number of devices n. This rate is notably slower than the rate
        1
of O( n√  t
            ) achieved by decentralized PSGD with a convex loss and error-free communication, as
demonstrated in (Zeng & Yin, 2018a, Theorem 4(e)). The slower rate is due to the non-convex na-
ture of the loss function in (1). Also, our analysis, focusing on the convergence of the non-smooth
objective value F to its minimum, does not exhibit a linear speedup in terms of n in Koloskova et al.
(2021), which examines the convergence of the gradient vector of a smooth loss.


5   C OMMUNICATION B IT R ATE A NALYSIS

As the training converges, we expect a diminishing residual to be quantized in Step 3 of Alg. 1,
resulting in a sparse quantized vector. Let f t (·) be the probability mass function (PMF) of the
                        (t)
quantization output qi at iteration t, and denote the corresponding (re-ordered) frequency of the
ℓ-th quantization level, 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ Γ − 1, where {fℓt }∀ℓ satisfies fℓt ≥ fℓ+1   t
                                                                                 , ∀ℓ. The quantization
mapping described in Section 3 scales an input vector according to its range, essentially shrinking
the support of f t (·) as t grows, given that the precision is fixed. In equation (11) of Woldemariam


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             90
                                                                  2.25
             80                                                                                                                Algorithms            Avg. (MB)   Std. Dev.
                                                                  2.00
             70                                                                                                                                          12.74    0.090
 Test Accuracy
                                                                  1.75
                                                                                                                               Maclcom
             60
                                                                  1.50                                                         Error-Free                241.1    0.000


                                                           Loss
             50
                                        Choco-SGD+QSGD            1.25
             40                                                                                                                Choco+QSGD                58.59    2.074
                                        Error-Free SGD            1.00
             30                         Malcom-PSGD               0.75
                                                                                                                               Choco+OurComp             14.85    0.066
             20                         Choco+MPSGDC
             10                         sign-SGD                  0.50                                                         signSGD                   16.74    0.000
                   50


                           0

                                   0

                                        0

                                                 0

                                                      0


                                                                         0


                                                                             0


                                                                                       0


                                                                                                   0


                                                                                                           0


                                                                                                                   0


                                                                                                                           0
                         10

                                   15

                                        20

                                                 25

                                                      30


                                                                             5


                                                                                    0


                                                                                               5


                                                                                                       0


                                                                                                                5


                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                   1


                                                                                               1


                                                                                                       2


                                                                                                               2


                                                                                                                       3
                          Number of Iterations                                   Number of Iterations


                  (a) Test accuracy per iterations.                 (b) Training loss over iterations.                             (c) Bits transmitted per iteration.
                  Figure 1: Synchronous FL with the MNIST dataset and a heterogeneous data distribution
                                                                                                               (t)
et al. (2023) , it is shown that the bit length of encoding qi is upper bounded by
                                                                                                               Γ−1                          ℓ−1
                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                               X                            X
                               d    H(f ) + 2.914(1 − f0t ) + f0t log2 f0t +
                                             t
                                                                                                                       fℓt log2 (1 −               t
                                                                                                                                                  fm )     ,             (17)
                                                                                                               ℓ=1                       m=0
where f0 is the PMF associated with the most frequent quantization level, H(f ) is the entropy of f t ,                                    t

and d is the size of the model. By computing the empirical PMF f t in each iteration, (17) provides a
formula for the required number of bits in each local model communication. As mentioned before, it
is expected that the types will vary greatly as large values will rarely occur, which has been exploited
to achieve compression gains in our compression scheme.
Analysis Under Laplace Residual Model. The computation of communication costs using (17) ne-
cessitates an understanding of the prior distribution of the quantization inputs, i.e.,, the local model
              (t+ 1 )   (t−1)
residuals {xi 2 − yi          }. The accurate joint distribution of these residuals is often unavailable
prior to the training process. However, considering that the ℓ1 -regularization in (2) promotes sparse
local models, we can effectively approximate the residual distribution using a suitable sparse dis-
tribution model. For clarity in our explanation, we assume that at each iteration t, all the residuals
follow an i.i.d. zero-mean Laplace distribution characterized by the time-varying Laplace diversity
parameter ρt , where a sparser model residual leads to a smaller ρt . With a large t, we prove in
Appendix A.3 that the communication bits for encoding each quantized model residual vector are
bounded by:
                                                   ln(d/ϵ)

                 (17) < d log2 (2eρt ) + 2.914e− Γ           = O d e−1/Γ − log t ,                  (18)
with probability at least 1 − ϵ for small ϵ ∈ [0, 1].
(18) highlights that the communication efficiency of our compression scheme improves with an
increased number of quantization levels Γ on the order of O(de−1/Γ ), which grows slower O(log Γ).
However, the advantage obtained from decreasing Γ must be balanced against the degradation in
convergence speed because a smaller Γ also results in higher quantization error and thus slower
convergence, as shown in (6) and Section 4. In summary, under the Laplace residual model, (18)
shows that the required communication bits of our compression scheme converges to O(de−1/Γ )
with a rate of O(−d log t). We refer to Appendix A.3 for the analysis and comparison with other
methods.

6                 N UMERICAL R ESULTS

In this section, we evaluate the performance of M ALCOM -PSGD through simulations of decen-
tralized learning tasks on image classification using the MNSIT (Deng, 2012) dataset distributed
in a heterogeneous fashion consistent with Konečný et al. (2016). We compare M ALCOM -PSGD
with C HOCO -SGD (Koloskova et al., 2021) paired with the compression scheme of QSGD given
in (Alistarh et al., 2017) and with C HOCO -SGD paired with the compression scheme utilized by
M ALCOM -PSGD. The details of the experimental set up can be found in Appendix B along with
additional experiments. For the results presented here, models were trained for a fixed number of it-
erations and evaluated on the testing set while the number of bits were empirically computing using
each Algorithm’s respective encoding scheme. Monte Carlo simulations were performed for each
experiment. Figure 1 showcases the testing accuracy, training loss, and number of bits per iteration
over a fully connected network for M ALCOM -PSGD, C HOCO -SGD+QSGD, C HOCO -SGD+Our


                                                                                           8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                90                                                  2.25
                80
                70
                                                                    2.00
                                                                                                                                                           Algorithms                    Avg. (MB)       Std.Dev.


    Test Accuracy
                                                                    1.75
                60                                                                                                                                         Maclcom                           4.54        0.202
                                                                    1.50
                50


                                                             Loss
                40
                                                                    1.25                                                                                   Error-Free                      80.36         0.000
                                        Choco-SGD+QSGD
                30                      D-SGD
                                                                    1.00
                                                                                                                                                           Choco+QSGD                      19.18          .620
                20                      Malcom-PSGD
                                                                    0.75


                10
                                                                                                                                                           Choco+OurComp                     4.88         .151
                                        Choco+MPSGDC
                                                                    0.50


                 0                                                  0.25
                       50


                              0

                                    0

                                            0

                                                 0

                                                        0


                                                                                0


                                                                                            0


                                                                                                         0


                                                                                                                     0


                                                                                                                                 0


                                                                                                                                         0
                            10

                                   15

                                         20

                                                25

                                                      30


                                                                               5


                                                                                         0


                                                                                                     5


                                                                                                                 0


                                                                                                                             5


                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                        1


                                                                                                     1


                                                                                                                 2


                                                                                                                             2


                                                                                                                                     3
                             Number of Iterations                                       Number of Iterations


                      (a) Accuracy per Iterations.                             (b) Loss over Iterations.                                                               (c) Bits transmitted per iteration.
                                                     Figure 2: “Ring like” Networking Topology


                                                                                                                                             Communication Cost (MB)
                90
                80
                                                                    2.25
                                                                                                                                                                   188         Choco-SGD+Our Comp.
                                                                    2.00
                70                                                                                                                                                 186
    Test Accuracy


                                                                    1.75

                60
                                            Choco+OurComp.          1.50
                                                                                                                                                                   184

                                                             Loss
                50                          0                       1.25

                40                          1e-07                   1.00
                                                                                                                                                                   182
                30                          1e-06
                                            1e-05                   0.75
                                                                                                                                                                   180
                20                          0.0001                  0.50

                10                                                  0.25
                                                                                                                                                                   178


                                                                                                                                                                         0



                                                                                                                                                                                  7



                                                                                                                                                                                          6



                                                                                                                                                                                                     5



                                                                                                                                                                                                             01
                                                                                                                                                                                 -0



                                                                                                                                                                                         -0



                                                                                                                                                                                                    -0


                                                                                                                                                                                                          00
                        0


                               0


                                        0


                                                0


                                                        0


                                                                           0


                                                                                    0


                                                                                                 0


                                                                                                             0


                                                                                                                         0


                                                                                                                                 0


                                                                                                                                         0


                                                                                                                                                                               1e



                                                                                                                                                                                        1e



                                                                                                                                                                                                    1e
                       10


                              15


                                     20


                                                25


                                                      30


                                                                                    5


                                                                                                0


                                                                                                         5


                                                                                                                     0


                                                                                                                                 5


                                                                                                                                     0


                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.
                                                                                             1


                                                                                                         1


                                                                                                                     2


                                                                                                                             2


                                                                                                                                     3
                             Number of Iterations                                       Number of Iterations                                                                        Threshold Value

                    (a) Test Accuracy per Iterations.                  (b) Train Loss over Iterations.                                                                 (c) Cumulative Transmitted bits
                                                Figure 3: Effect of sparsification on number of bits

Compression, signSGD (Bernstein et al., 2018), and the error free decentralized SGD. Since the
baseline algorithms optimize the unregularized loss, we evaluate the performance of all the algo-
rithms by the unregularized loss F for a uniform comparison. Similar to Figure 1, in Figure 2, we
consider a “ring like”3 network topology, and we compare the same algorithms, except for signSGD
since it is only adapted to the Federated Learning case.
Figure 3 showcases the effects of different thresholding parameters (µ). From Figure 1 and Fig-
ure 2, one can see that M ALCOM -PSGD achieves equivalent test accuracy and convergence rate as
C HOCO -SGD but we observe a 75% reduction in bits transmitted per iteration. When compared to
signSGD in the Federated Learning scheme we achieve a 19% reduction. Lastly, Figure 3 demon-
strates that the improvement in communication efficiency is the result of our aggregation technique,
sparsification, and efficient encoding scheme. In Figure 3c, the x-axis is different thresholding pa-
rameters while the green line represents C HOCO -SGD with Our Compression scheme. Notice that
when M ALCOM -PSGD does not utilize sparsification it still uses fewer bits than C HOCO -SGD.
This implies that our aggregation scheme, independent of sparsification, improves communication
efficiency. Furthermore, Figure 3c indicates that model sparsification provides an additional im-
provement in communication efficiency, demonstrating that M ALCOM -PSGD as a whole is more
communication efficient than the sum of its parts.


7                   C ONCLUSION

We introduced the M ALCOM -PSGD algorithm for decentralized learning with finite-sum, smooth,
and non-convex loss functions. Our approach sparsifies local models by non-smooth ℓ1 regulariza-
tion, rendering the implementation of the conventional SGD-based model updating challenging. To
address this challenge, we adopted the decentralized proximal SGD method to minimize the regu-
larized loss, where the residuals of local SGD updates are shared and aggregated prior to the local
proximal optimization. Furthermore, we employed dithering-based gradient quantization and vec-
tor source coding schemes to compress model communication and leverage the low entropy of the
updates to reduce the communication cost. By characterizing data sub-sampling and compression
errors as perturbations in the proximal operation, we quantified the impact of gradient compression
on training performance and established the convergence rate of M ALCOM -PSGD with diminish-
ing stepsizes. Moreover, we analyzed the communication cost in terms of the asymptotic code rate
for the proposed algorithm. Numerical results validate the theoretical findings and demonstrate the
improvement of our method in both learning performance and communication efficiency.
         3
              We formally describe this network topology in Appendix B.1.1 including a diagram and mixing matrix.


                                                                                                     9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Dan Alistarh, Demjan Grubic, Jerry Li, Ryota Tomioka, and Milan Vojnovic.           QSGD:
  Communication-efficient SGD via gradient quantization and encoding. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, volume 30, pp. 1709–1720, 2017.
Dan Alistarh, Torsten Hoefler, Mikael Johansson, Sarit Khirirat, Nikola Konstantinov, and Cédric
  Renggli. The convergence of sparsified gradient methods. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, pp. 5977–5987, 2018.
Amir Beck and Marc Teboulle. A fast iterative shrinkage-thresholding algorithm for linear inverse
 problems. SIAM Journal on Imaging Sciences, 2(1):183–202, 2009.
Jeremy Bernstein, Yu-Xiang Wang, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, and Animashree Anandkumar.
   SignSGD: Compressed optimisation for non-convex problems. In Proceedings of the 35th In-
   ternational Conference on Machine Learning, volume 80, pp. 560–569, July 2018.
Keith Bonawitz et al. Towards federated learning at scale: System design. Proceedings of Machine
  Learning and Systems, 1:374–388, 2019.
S. Boyd, A. Ghosh, B. Prabhakar, and D. Shah. Randomized gossip algorithms. IEEE Transactions
   on Information Theory, 52(6):2508–2530, 2006.
A. Chen. Fast Distributed First-Order Methods. Master’s thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Tech-
  nology, Cambridge, MA, 2012.
Trishul Chilimbi, Yutaka Suzue, Johnson Apacible, and Karthik Kalyanaraman. Project Adam:
  Building an efficient and scalable deep learning training system. In 11th USENIX Conference on
  Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI), pp. 571–582, 2014.
Li Deng. The MNIST database of handwritten digit images for machine learning research. IEEE
  Signal Processing Magazine, 29(6):141–142, 2012.
Alexandros G. Dimakis, Soummya Kar, José M. F. Moura, Michael G. Rabbat, and Anna Scaglione.
  Gossip algorithms for distributed signal processing. Proceedings of the IEEE, 98(11):1847–1864,
  2010.
David L Donoho. For most large underdetermined systems of linear equations the minimal ℓ1 -norm
  solution is also the sparsest solution. Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics, 59(6):
  797–829, 2006.
Peter Elias. Universal codeword sets and representations of the integers. IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory,
  21(2):194–203, Mar. 1975.
Masao Fukushima and Hisashi Mine. A generalized proximal point algorithm for certain non-convex
 minimization problems. International Journal of Systems Science, 12:989–1000, 1981.
Solomon Golomb. Run-length encodings (corresp.). IEEE transactions on information theory, 12
  (3):399–401, 1966.
Song Han, Huizi Mao, and William J Dally. Deep compression: Compressing deep neural networks
  with pruning, trained quantization and Huffman coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1510.00149, 2015.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.
D. Kempe, A. Dobra, and J. Gehrke. Gossip-based computation of aggregate information. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 44th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pp. 482–491,
  2003.
Anastasia Koloskova, Sebastian Stich, and Martin Jaggi. Decentralized stochastic optimization and
  gossip algorithms with compressed communication. In Proceedings of the 36th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97, pp. 3478–3487, 2019.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Anastasia Koloskova, Tao Lin, Sebastian U Stich, and Martin Jaggi. Decentralized deep learning
  with arbitrary communication compression. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, volume 130, pp. 2350–2358, 2021.
Jakub Konečný, H. Brendan McMahan, Felix X. Yu, Peter Richtarik, Ananda Theertha Suresh,
  and Dave Bacon. Federated learning: Strategies for improving communication efficiency. arXiv
  preprint arXiv: 1610.05492, 2016.
Anusha Lalitha, Shubhanshu Shekhar, Tara Javidi, and Farinaz Koushanfar. Fully decentralized
  federated learning. In Third Workshop on Bayesian Deep Learning, volume 2, pp. 1–9, 2018.
Tian Li, Anit Kumar Sahu, Ameet Talwalkar, and Virginia Smith. Federated learning: Challenges,
  methods, and future directions. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 37(3):50–60, 2020.
Xiangru Lian, Ce Zhang, Huan Zhang, Cho-Jui Hsieh, Wei Zhang, and Ji Liu. Can decentralized
  algorithms outperform centralized algorithms? a case study for decentralized parallel stochastic
  gradient descent. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30, pp. 5330–
  5340, 2017.
Yujun Lin, Song Han, Huizi Mao, Yu Wang, and Bill Dally. Deep gradient compression: Reducing
  the communication bandwidth for distributed training. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2018.
Giorgi Nadiradze, Amirmojtaba Sabour, Peter Davies, Shigang Li, and Dan Alistarh. Asynchronous
  decentralized SGD with quantized and local updates. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, volume 34, pp. 6829–6842, 2021.
Angelia Nedic and Asuman Ozdaglar. Distributed subgradient methods for multi-agent optimiza-
  tion. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 54(1):48–61, 2009.
Kevin Scaman, Francis Bach, Sébastien Bubeck, Yin Tat Lee, and Laurent Massoulié. Optimal
  algorithms for smooth and strongly convex distributed optimization in networks. In Proceedings
  of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 70, pp. 3027–3036, 2017.
Mark Schmidt, Nicolas Roux, and Francis Bach. Convergence rates of inexact proximal-gradient
 methods for convex optimization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol-
 ume 24, pp. 1458–1466, 2011.
Frank Seide, Hao Fu, Jasha Droppo, Gang Li, and Dong Yu. 1-bit stochastic gradient descent and its
  application to data-parallel distributed training of speech DNNs. In Fifteenth Annual Conference
  of the International Speech Communication Association, 2014.
Suvrit Sra. Scalable nonconvex inexact proximal splitting. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 25, pp. 530–538, 2012.
Sebastian U. Stich, Jean-Baptiste Cordonnier, and Martin Jaggi. Sparsified SGD with memory. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 4452–4463, 2018.
Nikko Ström. Scalable distributed DNN training using commodity GPU cloud computing. In Pro-
  ceedings of INTERSPEECH, pp. 1–5, 2015.
Xing Tan, William Roberts, Jian Li, and Petre Stoica. Sparse learning via iterative minimization with
  application to MIMO radar imaging. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 59(3):1088–1101,
  2011.
Hanlin Tang, Shaoduo Gan, Ce Zhang, Tong Zhang, and Ji Liu. Communication compression for
  decentralized training. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 31, pp.
  7652–7662, 2018.
CH Van Berkel. Multi-core for mobile phones. In Proceedings of the Conference on Design, Au-
 tomation and Test in Europe, pp. 1260–1265, 2009.
Wei Wen, Cong Xu, Feng Yan, Chunpeng Wu, Yandan Wang, Yiran Chen, and Hai Li. Terngrad:
 Ternary gradients to reduce communication in distributed deep learning. volume 30, pp. 1–13,
 2017.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Leah Woldemariam, Hang Liu, and Anna Scaglione. Low-complexity vector source coding for
  discrete long sequences with unknown distributions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.05633, 2023.

Lin Xiao and Stephen Boyd. Fast linear iterations for distributed averaging. Systems & Control
  Letters, 53(1):65–78, 2004.

Jinshan Zeng and Wotao Yin. On nonconvex decentralized gradient descent (extended). arXiv
   preprint arXiv:1608.05766, 2018a.

Jinshan Zeng and Wotao Yin. On nonconvex decentralized gradient descent. IEEE Transactions on
   Signal Processing, 66(11):2834–2848, 2018b.

Wenpeng Zhang, Peilin Zhao, Wenwu Zhu, Steven C. H. Hoi, and Tong Zhang. Projection-free
 distributed online learning in networks. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on
 Machine Learning, volume 70, pp. 4054–4062, 2017.


A     A PPENDIX

A.1     T HE Q UANTIZATION S CHEME IN (6) S ATISFIES A SSUMPTION 2

We denote the effective quantization scheme combining (6) and the de-normalization procedure at
the receiver end by Q̂(·). Specifically, for any input vector x ∈ Rd , the i-th entry of the output
                                                                                  xi − min(x)
is given by Q̂(xi ) = (max (x) − min (x))Q(xi ) + min (x). Let h(xi ) =                           ,
                                                                               max(x) − min(x)
r(x) = max(x) − min(x), and m = min(x). We have
                                           1
                               Q̂(xi ) = (ζ (h(xi )) r(x) + m) .
                                           τ
From (Alistarh et al., 2017, Lemma 3.1), the operator ζ(·) is unbiased, i.e., E[ζ(h(x))] = h(x),
where the expectation is taken w.r.t. the uniform dithering process. Moreover, let l be the quanti-
zation region of xi such that h(xi ) ∈ [l/Γ, (l + 1/Γ)]. Let pi denote the probability that h(xi ) is
mapped to (l + 1)/Γ, where we have pi = h(xi )Γ − l. In other words, we have ζ(h(xi ), Γ) equal to
(l + 1)/Γ with probability pi and equal to (l + 1)/Γ with probability 1 − pi . Therefore, we have
                                                                        p(1 − p)               1
  E[ζ(h(xi ), Γ)2 ] = E[ζ(h(xi ), Γ)]2 + Var(ζ(h(xi ), Γ)) = h2 (xi ) +     2
                                                                                 ≤ h2 (xi ) + 2 ,
                                                                           Γ                  4Γ
where Var(·) denotes the variance of the input random variable, and the last inequality follows from
p(1 − p) ≤ 1/4.
Note that
                        " d                          #
               2    1    X                         2
      E[∥Q̂(x)∥ ] = 2 E      (r(x)ζ(h(xi ), Γ) + m)
                   τ     i=1
                              d                         d                          d
                                                                                                      !
                     1        X                        X                           X
                                E r2 (x)ζ(h(xi ), Γ)2 +                              m2

                   = 2                                    E [2r(x)mζ(h(xi ), Γ)] +
                    τ         i=1                                 i=1                           i=1
                                     d                        d
                                                                                            !
                       1       2
                                    X
                                         2        1          X
                   ≤          r (x)     h (xi ) + 2 + 2r(x)m     h(xi ) + dm2                   .         (19)
                       τ2           i=1
                                                 4Γ          i=1
For h(·), we have
                            d                               d
                            X                    1         X
                                   h(xi ) =         (−dm +     xi ),                                      (20)
                             i=1
                                               r(x)        i=1
                        d                              d                d
                        X                         1 X 2          2m X             dm2
                                  h2 (xi ) =              x i −            x i +        .                 (21)
                            i=1
                                               r2 (x) i=1       r2 (x) i=1       r2 (x)


                                                           12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 2 The matrix form of M ALCOM -PSGD.
Initialize: X (0) , Y (−1) = 0.
 1: for t ∈ [0, . . . , T − 1] do                                        ▷ All nodes i do in parallel
            (t+1/2)        (t)           (t) (t)
 2:      X            = X − ηt ∇F X , ξ
 3:      Q(t) = Q(X (t+1/2) − Y (t−1) )                             ▷ Residual quantization; see (6).
 4:      for j ∈ Ni do
 5:           Encode and send Q(t) ▷ Residual communication with source encoding from Alg. 3.
 6:           Receive and decode Q(t)                                          ▷ Receiver decoding.
 7:           Y (t) = Q(t) + Y (t−1)
 8:      Z (t+1) = (1 − γt )X (t+1/2)        (t)
                                       + γt Y W                   ▷ Consensus aggregation; cf. (4).
            (t+1)              (t+1)
 9:      X         = Sηt µ Z                   ▷ Proximal optimization by soft-thresholding; see (7).


Substituting (20) and (21) into (19) we have:
                                                      (a)                             2
                             1                   d         1         d       (a) ∥x∥2
           E[∥Q̂(x)∥ ] = 2 ∥x∥2 + r (x) 2 ≤ 2 1 + 2 ∥x∥22 =
                      2              2    2
                                                                                        ,
                            τ                  4Γ         τ        Γ               τ
where (a) follows from r2 (x) ≤ 4∥x∥2∞ ≤ 4∥x∥22 and (b) follows from the definition of τ . Finally,
we have
                                     " d          #       " d           #    " d      #
               h               i       X                   X                  X
             E ∥Q̂(x) − x∥2 = E           Q̂(xi )2 − 2E        Q̂(xi )xi + E      x2i
                                          i=1                 i=1                         i=1

                                       1       2                             1
                                 ≤       ∥x∥2 − ∥x∥2 + ∥x∥2 =           1−           ∥x∥2 ,
                                       τ       τ                             τ
which completes the proof.

A.2    M ATRIX R EPRESENTATION OF M ALCOM -PSGD AND U SEFUL L EMMAS

To facilitate our proofs, we recast M ALCOM -PSGD into an equivalent matrix form. Specif-
                                  (t)        (t)                (t)        (t)               (t)      (t)
ically, we define Y (t) = [y1 , · · · , yn ], Z (t) = [z1 , · · · , zn ], Q(t) = [q1 , · · · , qn ],
          (t)          (t)                                     (t) (t)                 (t) (t)
ξ (t) = [ξ1 , · · · , ξn ]T , and ∇F (X (t) , ξ (t) ) = [∇Fi (x1 , ξ1 ), · · · , ∇Fn (xn , ξn )]. Together
                                (t)
with the matrices X (t) and X         defined in Section 4, we have the matrix form of Alg. 1, as shown
in Alg. 2.
We also provide two useful results for the proof.
Lemma 1. For any A, B with the same dimension, we have, for any α > 0:
                     ∥A + B∥2F ≤ (1 + α)∥A∥2F + (1 + α−1 )∥B∥2F ,                                    (22)
                     ∥AB∥F ≤ ∥A∥F ∥B∥2 .                                                             (23)
Lemma 2. For the mixing matrix W satisfying Assumption 1, we have, for any k > 0,
                                  1
                            W k − 11⊤ ≤ |λ2 |k = (1 − δ)k ,                                          (24)
                                  n        2
                                            2
                              ∥I − W ∥2 = λ2n ,                                                      (25)
where we define δ := 1 − |λ2 |.

Proof. See (Koloskova et al., 2019, Lemma 16).


A.3    F URTHER D ISCUSSIONS ON THE E NCODING A LGORITHM

Preliminaries on Source Encoding. Elias coding Elias (1975) is a universal encoding scheme for
unknown distributions that are assumed to generally have small integer values. Elias omega coding
recursively encodes a value in binary: the string that encodes a value has the binary encoding of the
value appended to itself, whose length becomes the subsequent value to be encoded in binary.


                                                    13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 3 The source encoding scheme.
 1: function E NCODE(q, Γ)
 2:    Compute t(q) and encode it with Elias omega encoding.
 3:    Initialize I = {1, . . . , N }.
 4:    for ℓ = 1, . . . , Γ − 1 do
 5:        I ′ = ∅, Rℓ = ∅.                P
 6:        Compute Mℓ = [(ln 2)(N − m≤ℓ tm (q))/tℓ (q)].
 7:        r = 0.
 8:        for j ∈ I do
 9:             if δ(qj − ℓ) = 0 then
10:                 Rℓ = Rℓ ∪ {r}.
11:                 if |Rℓ | < tℓ (q) then
12:                       Encode r by Golomb coding with parameter Mℓ .
13:                 r = 0.
14:                 I ′ = I ′ ∪ {n}.
15:             else
16:                 r = r + 1.
17:             I = I \ I ′.


Golomb coding Golomb (1966) an encoding scheme parameterized by an integer M that divides
the value to be encoded. The quotient and remainder are separately encoded in unary and binary,
respectively.
Algorithm Implementation. The following algorithm describes the encoding scheme proposed in
Woldemariam et al. (2023). In this scheme, the type vector is assumed to be in descending order,
while implementation allows for an unordered type vector. In Algorithm 3, the notation [x] denotes
the nearest integer of x. To decode, the first Γ strings encoded with Elias omega coding are decoded
with Elias decoding to retrieve the type vector. The run-lengths are then decoded with Golomb
decoding and used to iteratively reconstruct the support vectors. With the positional information
encoded through the support vectors, the decoder can fill in values of χℓ for all ℓ.
Bit Analysis Under Laplace Inputs. Calculating the number of communication bits using (??)
requires the knowledge of the distribution of the local model residuals. Tracking the exact joint
                                          (t+ 1 )   (t−1)
distribution of the local residuals xi 2 − yi               over iterations is generally challenging. As an
alternative, we can fit the prior distribution of the residuals under a specific statistical model. Given
that the ℓ1 -minimization in (2) encourages sparsity in local model updates, a sparse prior distribution
for the quantization input is a logical choice. For instance, we can assume the unquantized residuals
   (t+ 1 )     (t−1)
{xi 2 − yi           } follow a time-varying i.i.d. Laplace distribution denoted as pt . Specifically, each
entry of the vector, denoted by q̃jt , 1 ≤ j ≤ d, follows the distribution of
                                                               1 −|q̃jt |/ρt
                                   pt (q̃jt ) = Lap(0, ρt ) =      e         ,                         (26)
                                                              2ρt
where ρt is the Laplace diversity parameter at iteration t. A smaller ρt implies less variance in the
value of q̃jt and a sparser model residual for quantization.
Then, we bound the PMF ft of the quantized value Q(q̃jt ) by the entropy inequality H(f t ) ≤
h(pt ) = log2 (2ρt e), where h(pt ) represents the differential entropy of the distribution pt . Further-
more, we have
                              (a)

                                                            Υt           Υt
                          f0t ≥ Pr(Q(q̃jt ) = 0) = Pr −         ≤ q̃jt ≤
                                                            2Γ           2Γ

                           (b)                  Υt               Υ t
                           = 2 Pr 0 ≤ q̃jt ≤          = 1 − e− 2Γρt ,                                (27)
                                                2Γ
                     (t+ 1 )    (t−1)           (t+ 1 )    (t−1)
where Υt = max(xi 2 − yi           ) − min(xi 2 − yi         ) is the time-varying range of the model
residual vector used for adaptive normalization in (6), (a) follows from that f0t is the largest value
in the PMF f t , and (b) follows from the symmetry of the Laplace distribution around zero. The
next step is to bound the random variable Υt /ρt . Using the property for the Laplace distribution


                                                    14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              Compression method        # of bits per local communication
              Our scheme                (17) < d(H(f t ) + const) ≤ d(log Γ + const)
              QSGD                      d(log Γ + const)
              signSGD                   d

   Table 1: Comparison of communication complexity with a large t in the worst-case scenario.

Pr(max1≤j≤d |qjt | > ϑρt ) ≤ de−ϑ , ∀ϑ > 0, and let ϵ = de−ϑ , we have

                                          t
                             Pr max |qj | > (ln d − ln ϵ)ρt ≤ ϵ.                                         (28)
                                   1≤j≤d

Since qjt is an i.i.d. continuous variable and the Laplce distribution is symmetric, we have Υt =
2 max1≤j≤d |qjt |. Combining this result with (29), with probability at least 1 − ϵ for a small ϵ < 1,
we have
                                                      ln d−ln ϵ
                                          f0t ≥ 1 − e− Γ .                                        (29)
Substituting this into the bit bound in (17), we have
                                                                             Γ−1
                                                                             X                     ℓ−1
                                                                                                   X
# of bits per communication ≤ d H(f t ) + 2.914(1 − f0t ) + f0t log2 f0t +         fℓt log2 (1 −          t

                                                                                                         fm )
                                                                             ℓ=1                   m=0
                                                                             |             {z              }
                                                                                          <0
                                                          ln d−ln ϵ
                             < d(log2 (2eρt ) + 2.914e−       Γ       ).                                 (30)
Notably, our compression scheme achieves smaller communication cost with sparser inputs (i.e., a
smaller ρt ). By using the convergence result in Theorem 1, we can bound the value of ρt as follows.
Proposition 1 (Decrease of the residual variance). Suppose the conditions in Theorem 1 hold. For
any iteration t = 0, 1, · · · , we have
                          n                         2
                     1X             (t+ 1 )   (t−1)
            2dρ2t ≤            E[ xi 2 − yi           ]
                     n i=1
                                 r               !2
                                   C 1 − γt−1 λn                                  1
                  ≤2 1+                              (2G2 + 2σ 2 + µ2 d)ηt−1
                                                                         2
                                                                             = O 2ϵ ,       (31)
                                   ω        ω                                    t
where C < 116 is the constant defined in Theorem 1.


Proof. See Appendix A.6.1.


                                                                         1
It follows from Proposition 1 that ρt decreases with the order of O √dt    ϵ
                                                                               . Plugging this re-
sult into (31),  the number of communication bits for the Laplace distributed residuals decreases
to O de−1/Γ with the rate of O(−d log t) with high probability.
Comparision with other compression methods. ßwe compare the worst-case communication bit
rate of our compression scheme with the existing method QSGD (Alistarh et al., 2017) and signSGD
(Bernstein et al., 2018) in Table 1. Here, the worst-case communication complexity of QSGD fol-
                                                                                       (t)
lows from (Alistarh et al., 2017, Lemma A.4) by noting that every quantization output qi satisfies
   (t)
||qi ||0 ≤ d.
Table 1 shows that our method attains a smaller communication cost than QSGD. This result algins
with our numerical findings in Section 6, where our approach consistently outperforms QSGD in
communication efficiency. On the other hand, when comparing our method with signSGD, with
a small quantization precision Γ, our method exhibits comparable communication costs. Never-
theless, signSGD, limited to one-bit quantization only, incurs substantial quantization errors and
subsequently slower training convergence. As demonstrated in Section 6, our method not only main-
tains similar communication costs but also significantly enhances training performance compared to
signSGD.


                                                 15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.4   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

Before proving Theorem 1, we state the following two lemmas.
                          2|
Lemma 3. Suppose γt ≤ 1−|λ
                        4τ , then for any θ > 0 we have:

                     −1
                             (t+1)      (t+1) 2         (t+3/2)     (t+1)
                                                                          2
        EQt+1 1 + θ        Z        −Z           + X            −Y
                                              F                           F
                                                         2

                                                (t+1/2)                           2
                 −1                (t+1/2)                       (t+1/2)      (t)
         ≤ (1 + θ )(1 − ω) X               −X              + X           −Y
                                                                     F                 F
                                                                       2
              + (1 + θ)ηt2 ∇F X (t+1) , ξ (t+1) + Φ(t+1)                       ,                    (32)
                                                                           F
                   2
                2 |)
where ω = (1−|λ
             8τ      ≤ 18 .


Proof. See Appendix A.6.2.


Lemma 3 provides a useful bound on the aggregation error in terms of the model averaging error
and the quantization error.
Lemma 4. Consider a sequence {rt }t≥1 s.t.
                                                          2
                                   rt+1 ≤ (1 − c/2)rt + ηt2 A,                                      (33)
                                                          c
                                            b
for positive constants c and A; and ηt = (t+a)ϵ with a, b > 0 and ϵ ∈ (0, 1].


                         c                           Aη02 4(a+2ϵ)
Moreover, suppose ϵ < 4(2−c) a and r0 ≤               c ac+4(c−2)ϵ . We have
                                                   2
                                                  ηt A 4(a + 2ϵ)
                                           rt ≤                          , ∀t.                      (34)
                                                      c ac + 4(c − 2)ϵ


Proof. See Appendix A.6.3.


Equipped with the above results, we are ready to prove Theorem 1. Define the following auxiliary
functions:
                          n
                         X               γt        2                  γt       2
           Lηt ,γt (X) =      Fi (xi ) +      ∥xi ∥I−W = 1T F (X) +        ∥X∥I−W ,         (35)
                         i=1
                                         2η t                         2η t

           Mηt ,γt (X) = Lηt ,γt (X) + µ ∥X∥1,1 .                                                   (36)
Then, Step 9 of Alg. 2 can be represented as

X (t+1) = prox (1 − γt )X (t) + γt Y (t) W − ηt ∇F (X (t) , ξ (t) )
                                                            
                                                                                                       
                                    γt                    
= X (t) − ηt ∇F (X (t) , ξ (t) ) + X (t) (I − W ) +Φ(t+1)  − γt X (t) − Y (t−1) − Q(X (t) − Y (t−1) ) W ,
                                                                                                     
                                    ηt                            |               {z                }
              |                   {z             }
                                                                                   Quantization error ≜Et
                              ∇Lηt ,γt (X (t) ;ξt )
                                                                                                    (37)

for some subgradient Φ(t+1) ∈ ∂ µ X (t+1) 1,1 . We observe the following properties:

Observation 1. Every subgradient of the regularization function ϕ ∈ ∂(µ ∥x∥1 ) has a bounded
                  √                                                   2
norm as ∥ϕ∥2 ≤ µ d. Under Assumption 3, we have E[∥∇F (X; ξ) + Φ∥F ] ≤ 2n(2G2 + 2σ 2 +
 2
µ d) for any ϕi ∈ ∂(µ ∥xi ∥1 ), X, and ξ.
Observation 2. Under Assumption 3, Lηt ,γt (·) is Lipschitz smooth with constant L′ = (1 − γt )L +
γt ηt−1 (1 − λn ).


                                                           16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Define a sequence {rt }t such that

                                   (t) (t) 2     (t+1/2)    (t)
                                                                2
                       rt = E X − X          + X         −Y         .                                                  (38)
                                                                F                                F
At iteration t + 1, we have
           "
                                                                   11T           2#
                                  (t+1)
                                                                                                                       2
                    (t+1)                              (t+1)
rt+1 = E        Z           −Z            + ηt+1 Φ                        −I          +E         X (t+3/2) − Y (t+1)
                                        n         F                           F

                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                               11T

          −1   (t+1)    (t+1) 2      (t+1)    (t+1)
                                                    2
                                                                  2     (t+1)
                                                                              2
≤ E (1 + α ) Z       −Z         + ∇X       −Y           + (1 + α)ηt E Φ                                                            −I
                                                 F                                  F                                  F        n     2
(32),θ=α                                                   (t+1/2) 2                                         2
   ≤     (1 + α−1 )(1 − ω) X (t+1/2) − X          + (1 − ω) X (t+1/2) − Y (t)
                                               F                              F
                                                                  2
               2     2           2        (t+1) (t+1)       (t+1)
   + (1 + α)(ηt )2nµ d + (1 + α)ηt ∇F X        ,ξ        +Φ
                                                                                                 F
           −1               −1                  (t)        (t) 2                                             2
≤ (1 + α        )(1 + β          )(1 − ω) X           −X             + (1 + β)(1 − ω)ηt2         F (X (t+1) )
                                                                 F                                            F
                                                                          2                                                     2
   + (1 + α)(ηt2 )2nµ2 d + (1 − ω)              X     (t+1/2)
                                                                − Y (t)       + (1 + α)ηt2       ∇F X    (t+1) (t+1)
                                                                                                              ,ξ       + Φ(t+1)
                                                                          F                                                       F
β=6/(ω(1−ω))                 ω(1 − ω)                               6
     ≤      (1 + α−1 )(1 +            )(1 − ω)rt + (1 + α)(1 +            )(1 − ω)4nηt2 (2G2 + 2σ 2 + µ2 d)
                                 6                               ω(1 − ω)
α=ω/(3−ω)

                                   9
    ≤     (1 + ω/2)(1 − ω)rt +         4nηt2 (2G2 + 2σ 2 + µ2 d)
                                   ω
                 36
≤ (1 − ω/2)rt + nηt2 (2G2 + 2σ 2 + µ2 d).
                  ω
Combining the recursion of rt+1 and Lemma 4, we have (33) with A = 18n(2G2 + 2σ 2 + µ2 d).
                                       ω
Applying Lemma 4 and assuming ϵ < 4(2−ω)   a, we have
                                             56(a + 2ϵ)
                                 rt ≤                      nη 2 (2G2 + 2σ 2 + µ2 d).                                   (39)
                                          ω(aω + 4(ω − 2)ϵ) t

To prove (13), we first note that if a ≥ 8ϵ/ω,
                                         a    8 4(2 − ω)
                                           ≥ >           .
                                         ϵ    ω    ω
(39) follows from the assumption of x(0) = 0. Furthermore, define the function h(x) =
   1+2x
ω+4(ω−2)x . We have
                      ω + 4(ω − 2)x − 2(1 + 2x)(ω − 2)           8 − 2ω
           h′ (x) = 2 ·                       2
                                                        =                  > 0.
                               (ω + 4(ω − 2)x)            (ω + 4(ω − 2)x)2
For ϵ/a ≤ ω/8, we have
                                                2 + ω/2    33
                            h(ϵ/a) ≤ h(ω/8) =           ≤       ,                   (40)
                                                   ω2     16ω 2
where the last inequality follows from ω ≤ 1/8. Substituting (40) into (39) and applying
                t 2
E[ X t − X              ] ≤ rt , we have
                    F
                        (t) 2             56 2                              C
  E X (t) − X                   ≤ rt ≤      nηt (2G2 + 2σ 2 + µ2 d)h(ω/8) ≤ 3 nηt2 (2G2 + 2σ 2 + µ2 d),
                            F             ω                                ω
                                                                                                     (41)
where C < 116 is a constant.


A.5    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

Theorem 1 implies the following results that will be useful in the proof of Theorem 2.


                                                                 17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proposition 2. Under the conditions of Theorem 1, for any t = 0, 1, · · · , we have
           n                                  r              !2
        1X         (t+1)     (t)
                                 2               C 1 − γt λn
              E xi       − yi        ≤2 1+                        (2G2 + 2σ 2 + µ2 d)ηt2 ,                                                             (42)
        n i=1                                    ω      ω
where C < 116 is the constant defined in Theorem 1.

Proof. See Appendix A.6.4.

Proposition 3. Under the same conditions of Theorem 1, one has that
                                  n                                                                                        r                      !2
                      2      1X                    2                                                                            C
      (t+1)    (t)                    (t+1)    (t)
E x           −x           ≤       E xi     − xi     ≤ (2G2 + 2σ 2 + µ2 d) 1 + 6                                                     +1                    ηt2 ,
                             n i=1                                                                                             32ω 3
                                                                                                                                                       (43)
where C < 116 is the constant defined in Theorem 1.

Proof. Note that
                   (t+1)         (t) 2                                                  2                                          2
              X            −X              = (X (t+1) − X (t) )11T /n                       ≤ X (t+1) − X (t)                          .               (44)
                                      F                                                 F                                          F
Applying (22), for any α, β > 0,
                             2                                                  (t+1) 2
  E X (t+1) − X (t)              ≤ (1 + α−1 )E X (t+1) − X
                             F                                                          F
                                                                       (t) 2                                           (t+1)                   (t) 2
               + (1 + α)(1 + β −1 )E X (t) − X                                  + (1 + α)(1 + β)E X                            −X                      .
                                                                            F                                                                     F
                                                                                            (45)
The last term in (45) can be simplified as
                   (t) 2                                                            2
         (t+1)
                                                                                             2
  E X          −X         ≤ E ηt ∇F (X (t) , ξ (t) ) + Φ(t+1) − γt (X (t) − Y (t) )   11T /n 2
                             F                                                                                                 F
                                                                                        2                                                  2
                                 ≤ 2ηt2 E    ∇F (X      (t)
                                                              ,ξ   (t)
                                                                         )+Φ    (t+1)
                                                                                            + 2γt2 E       X     (t)
                                                                                                                       − Y (t)
                                                                                        F                                                  F
                                                                                                                  2
                                             2      2
                                 ≤ 4n(2G + 2σ           + µ d)ηt2 + 2γt2 E
                                                                   2
                                                                                            X   (t)
                                                                                                      −Y   (t)
                                                                                                                       .                               (46)
                                                                                                                  F
Combining (45), (46), and (38), for ∀α, β > 0,
                                      2
         E[ X (t+1) − X (t)               ] ≤(1 + α−1 )rt+1 + (1 + α)rt max{1 + β −1 , 2γt2 (1 + β)}
                                      F
                                             + (1 + α)(1 + β)4n(2G2 + 2σ 2 + µ2 d)ηt2 .                                                                (47)
In particular, setting β = 8, we have 1 + β −1 = 9/8 and 2γt2 (1 + β) = 18/γt2 ≤ 9/8. Applying
(41),

                         2                          9C
   E[ X (t+1) − X (t) ] ≤ 1 + α−1 + (1 + α)              + 36     n(2G2 + 2σ 2 + µ2 d)ηt2 . (48)
                         F                          8ω 3
By the inequality of arithmetic and geometric means, we have
                                                             r          !2
                          −1             9C                    9C
                    1 + α + (1 + α)           + 36 ≥ 1 +            + 36 ,                                                                             (49)
                                         8ω 3                  8ω 3
where the inequality holds if α−2 = 8ω
                                    9C
                                       3 + 36. Combining (48) and (49) completes the proof.


We prove the convergence of M ALCOM -PSGD by using Theorem 1, Proposition 2, and Proposition
                                                                               −ϵ
3 as follows. First, note that ηt ≤ a1ϵ ≤ 1−(1−λ  L
                                                      n )γt
                                                            , ∀t with γt ≤ 1−a                ′
                                                                           1−λn . Leveraging L =
         −1                                         ′        −1
L + γt ηt (1 − λn ) in Observation 2, we have L ≤ ηt . Following (Zeng & Yin, 2018a, Eqs.
(88)-(89) ), for any given U ∈ Rd×n that is independent to t,
                                   D                                         E L′                   2
Mηt ,γt (U ) − Mηt ,γt (X (t+1) ) ≥ ∇Lηt ,γt (X (t) ) + Φ(t+1) , U − X (t+1) −       X (t+1) − X (t) ,
                                                                                  2                 F


                                                                       18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where Φ(t+1) ∈ ∂(µ X (t+1) 1,1 ). Substituting Φ(t+1) in (37) and taking U to be an optimal
solution X ⋆ ∈ X ⋆ ,
E[Mηt ,γt (X (t+1) ) − Mηt ,γt (X ⋆ )]
           D                                                     E L′                  2
 ≤ −ηt−1 E X (t) − X (t+1) − γt (X (t) − Y (t) )W , X ⋆ − X (t+1) + E X (t+1) − X (t)
      D                                                               E 2              F
                       (t)                (t) t  ⋆            (t+1)
   − Et [∇Lηt ,γt (X ) − ∇Lηt ,γt (X ; ξ )], X − Et+1 [X            ]
      |                                {z                             }
                                                  =0
L′ ≤ηt−1 η −1                          D    2                                                  E
   ≤      t
                               − ηt−1 E X (t) − X (t+1) − γt (X (t) − Y (t) )W , X ⋆ − X (t+1)
                E X (t+1) − X (t)
        2                    F
   1                  2                    2            D                                   E
=     (E X (t) − X ⋆ − E X (t+1) − X ⋆ ) + γt ηt−1 E (X (t) − Y (t) )W , X ⋆ − X (t+1)
  2ηt                 F                    F

   1                    2                    2
             (t)    ⋆           (t+1)    ⋆                (t)       (t)            ⋆     (t+1)
≤       E X −X            −E X        −X       + 2γt Et X − Y             Et+1 X − X
  2ηt                   F                    F                          F                       F
                                                                                    

Pro. 2    1               2                 2                                 
 ≤           E X (t) − X ⋆ − E X (t+1) − X ⋆ + 2C0 γt ηt Et+1 X ⋆ − X (t+1)  ,
                                                                              
         2ηt              F                 F
                                                    |           {z          F
                                                                             }
                                                                                            ≜At+1
                                                                                                                     (50)
where C0 is a constant given by the square root of the r.h.s. of Theorem 1.
Taking the summation of (50) recursively w.r.t. k = 0, 1, ..., t and using X (0) = 0, we have
               t                                                             t
              X                                           1         2
                                                                            X
                  ηk (E[Mηk ,γk (X (k+1) )] − nF ⋆ )) ≤ ∥X ⋆ ∥F + C0            Ak+1 .                               (51)
                                                          2
                    k=0                                                                     k=0

On the other hand, note that
                          (k+1)                             (k+1)                 (k+1)             √                   (k+1)
 X (k+1)            ≥ X                  − X (k+1) − X                    ≥ X                   −       d X (k+1) − X               ;
              1,1                  1,1                              1,1                   1,1                                   F
                                                                                                                     (52)
and
                                         (k+1)                                                  (k+1)         L′             (k+1) 2
Lηk ,γk (X (k+1) ) ≥ Lηk ,γk (X                  )+ < ∇Lηk ,γk (X (k+1) ), X (k+1) − X                   >−      X (k+1) − X
                                                                                                              2                    F
                                         (k+1)                        (k+1)           L′             (k+1) 2
                     ≥ Lηk ,γk (X                ) − G X (k+1) − X                −      X (k+1) − X         .
                                                                              F       2                    F
                                                                                                             (53)
Combining (52) and (53) and noting that X is consensus by definition, we have
                          (k+1)            √                  (k+1)       L′              (k+1) 2
Mηk ,γk (X (k+1) ) ≥ nF(X       ) − (G + µ d) X (k+1) − X               −     X (k+1) − X         .
                                                                      F    2                    F
                                                                                           (54)

Combining (51) and (54) and applying L′ ≤ ηt−1 ,
     X              (k+1)          1       2
                                                    √ X                  (k+1)
   n     ηk (EF(X         )−F ⋆ ) ≤ ∥X ⋆ ∥F + (G + µ d) ηk E X (k+1) − X
                                   2                                           F
          k                                                                   k
                                                                                                t
                                                 1X               (k+1) 2      X
                                           +        E X (k+1) − X         + C0   Ak+1 .                              (55)
                                                 2                      F
                                                    k                                       k=0

                                                                                           (k+1)
Applying Theorem 1 and Proposition 3, we have E X (k+1) − X                                  = O(ηk ) and
                                                                                                        F
                     (k+1) 2
E X (k+1) − X                     = O(ηk2 ). Note that the left-hand side of (55) equals to n( k ηk )(F t −
                                                                                              P
                            F


                                                             19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F ⋆ ). Therefore,
                                    2          Pt               √        Pt
                         n
                               ∥x⋆ ∥2 + nC1′         2
                                                k=0 ηk +         nC2′     k=0 γk ηk E   X ⋆ − X (k+1) F
         EF t − F ⋆ ≤ 2                                          Pt
                                                            n(      k=0 ηk )
                                            Pt                      Pt
                         C3                          ηk2             k=0 γk ηk E   X ⋆ − X (k+1) F
                     = Pt               + C1′ Pk=0
                                               t           + C2′               √ Pt                ,      (56)
                               k=0 ηk           k=0 ηk                          n( k=0 ηk )
where
                                         C
                                  C1′ ≤ 3 2G2 + 2σ 2 + µ2 d ,

                                       r2ω
                                            C
                                  C2′ ≤         (2G2 + 2σ 2 + µ2 d),
                                           2ω 3
                                              2
                                  C3 = ∥x⋆ ∥ /2,
with C < 116 be the constant defined in Theorem 1. The final step to prove (15) is to compute the
last term in (56). Applying the triangle inequality,
         γk ηk E X ⋆ − X (k+1)          ≤ (∥X ⋆ ∥F + E X (k+1) )γk ηk ≤ (B + ∥X ⋆ ∥F )ηk2
                                        F                             F
                                                     √
                                        = Bηk2 + n ∥x⋆ ∥2 ηk2 ,                                          (57)
where B is defined in Assumption 4, and the last inequality follows from γt ≤ ηt . Plugging this
result into (56), we have
                                                                 Pt                   Pt
                         ⋆          C3            ′       ⋆    ′    k=0 ηk
                                                                          2
                                                                               C2′ B k=0 ηk2
               EF t − F ≤ Pt                + (C1 + ∥x ∥2 C2 ) Pt           + √ Pt             ,         (58)
                                   k=0 ηk                           k=0 ηk
                                                                                    n  k=0 ηk
which is identical to (15). Finally,
                              Pt         applying the result in (Chen, 2012, Sect. 3.2.4) to characterize
                                         2
                  1                    ηk
the order of P∞          and Pk=1  t       , the terms in (58) exhibit the order of
                 k=1 η k               η
                                   k=1 k
                                                                         
                              1
                      
                        O( t1−ϵ   )    if ϵ ∈ (0, 12 ),                  
                                                                           O( t1ϵ )    if ϵ ∈ (0, 21 ),
                                                               t
                         O( √1t )       if ϵ = 21 ,                η2       O( ln
                                                                                √t )    if ϵ = 12 ,
                                                           P             
             1                                                           
        Pt         =           1                  1
                                                         , Ptk=1 k =              1
                                                                                   t
                                                                                                 1
           k=1 ηk     O( t(1−ϵ) ) if ϵ ∈ ( 2 , 1),
                                                              k=1 ηk     O( t1−ϵ ) if ϵ ∈ ( 2 , 1),
                                                                          
                             1                                                   1
                                                                         
                         O( ln t )      if ϵ = 1.                           O( ln t )   if ϵ = 1.
                                                                         
This completes the proof.


A.6     L EMMA AND P ROPOSITION P ROOFS


A.6.1    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1



                     (t+ 1 )       (t−1)
When the entries xi 2 − yi            follow the i.i.d. Laplace distribution with the diversity parameter
ρt , the variance of each entry is given by 2ρ2t . Therefore, we have
                            n                           2

                                                                                       2

                    2    1X           (t+ 12 )    (t−1)              (t+ 21 )    (t−1)
                2dρt ≤         E[ xi           − yi       ]=E X               −Y           .         (59)
                         n i=1                                                         F


                                                           20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For ease of notation, we bound it with iteration t + 1. For any α > 0, we have
                                                                                               2
                          2
       (t+1+ 12 )     (t)                 (t+1)       (t)             (t+1)            (t+1)
E X               −Y          =E Z               − Y − ηt ∇F (X             ; ξt ) + Φ
                          F                                                                     F

                                                       2                                                     2
          −1 2                (t+1)             (t+1)                                 (t)      (t)     (t)
 ≤ (1 + α )ηt E ∇F (X               ; ξt ) + Φ              + (1 + α)E (1 − γt )X − Y + γt Y W
                                                       F                                                     F

                                                                                                           2
            −1      2       2    2         2                               (t)       (t)           (t)
 ≤ 2(1 + α )(2G + 2σ + µ d)nηt + (1 + α)E (I − γt W )(X − Y ) + γt X (I − W )
                                                                                                           F
 (a)
                                                                                               2

                                     2                                         (t)
                                                        2
 ≤ 2(1 + α) E X (t) − Y (t)               ∥I − γt W ∥2 + γt2 E (X (t) − X )(I − W )
                                          F                                                          F

  + 2(1 + α−1 )(2G2 + 2σ 2 + µ2 d)nηt2

                       2      (t)      (t)
                                           2
                                                  2          2   (t)  (t) 2
≤ 2(1 + α) (1 − γt λn ) E X − Y                + γt (1 − λn ) E X − X
                                                             F                                   F
                −1        2        2
   + 2(1 + α )(2G + 2σ                 + µ d)nηt2
                                          2

(b)

                               (t) 2            2
                      2   (t)
≤ 2(1 + α)(1 − γt λn ) E X − X          (t)
                                     + X −Y (t)
                                                    + 2(1 + α−1 )(2G2 + 2σ 2 + µ2 d)nηt2
                                                         F                 F
(c)
≤ 2(1 + α)(1 − γt λn )2 rt + 2(1 + α−1 )(2G2 + 2σ 2 + µ2 d)nηt2
                                          
(d)
            −1                        2     3
                                               (2G2 + 2σ 2 + µ2 d)nηt2 ,
                                            
 ≤ 2
    |1 + α    + (1 + α)(1 − γ t λ n )  C/ω                                                                   (60)
                       {z                   }
                               ≜h(α)
                                 (t)
where (a) follows from X (I − W ) = 0; (b) follows from γt (1 − λn ) ≤ 1 − γt λn ; (c) follows
from the definition in (38); and (d) follows from (41).
By the inequality of arithmetic and geometric means,
                   h(α) = 1 + (1 − γt λn )2 C/ω 3 + α−1 + α(1 − γt λn )2 C/ω 3
                                                                   p
                          ≥ 1 + (1 − γt λn )2 C/ω 3 + 2(1 − γt λn ) C/ω 3
                                             p
                          = (1 + (1 − γt λn ) C/ω 3 )2 ,                              (61)
                                    p
                                         3
where the inequality holds if α = ω /C/(1 − γt λn ). Combining (60) and (61) completes the
proof.


A.6.2       P ROOF OF L EMMA 3



For any α1 > 0, we have
                (t+1) 2
 Z (t+1) − Z
                        F
                                    (t+1/2)                                                                    (t+1/2)                            2
                     (t+1/2)
= (1 − γt )(X                  −X             ) + γt (Y (t) − X (t+1/2) )(W − 11T /n) +γt (X (t+1) − X                    )(W − 11T /n)
                                                                                                                                                  F
(22)                                    (t+1/2)                                     2                                                 2
 ≤ (1 + α1 ) (X (t+1/2) − X                       )((1 − γt )I + γt (W − 11T /n))       + (1 + α1−1 )γt2 λ22 Y (t) − X (t+1)
                                                                                    F                                                 F
(25),(23)                                     (t+1/2)                                    2                                                    2
      =     (1 + α1 ) (X      (t+1/2)
                                        −X                                      T
                                                        )((1 − γt )I + γt (W − 11 /n))       + (1 + α1−1 )γt2 λ22    Y   (t)
                                                                                                                               −X   (t+1/2)
                                                                                                                                                  .
                                                                                         F                                                    F
                                                                                                              (62)


                                                                 21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Applying Jensen’s inequality, we can bound the first term on the right-hand side above as
                                   (t+1/2)

                                                                        1 ⊤

                      (t+1/2)
                    X          −X             (1 − γt ) I + γt W − 11
                                                                        n          F
                  (24)                                  (t+1/2)                                                         (t)
                   ≤ (1 − γt ) X (t+1/2) − X                               + γt |λ2 | X (t+1/2) − X
                                                                     F                                                        F
                                                     (t+1/2)               (t+1/2)
                    ≤ (1 − γt (1 − |λ2 |)) X                     −X                             .                                             (63)
                                                                                            F
Denoting λ̃ = 1 − |λ2 | and substituting 63 into equation 62, we have
                          (t+1) 2                                           (t+1/2) 2
                                                          2
             Z (t+1) − Z           ≤ (1 + α1 ) 1 − γt λ̃      X (t+1/2) − X
                                F                                                   F
                                                               2                    2
                                      + 1 + α1−1 γt2 1 − λ̃        Y (t) − X (t+1/2) .

                                                                                                                                              (64)
                                                                                                                              F

On the other hand, for any α2 , θ > 0,

                            2                                                 2
         (t+3/2)     (t+1)               (t+3/2)      (t+3/2)    (t)      (t)
EQ X             −Y              = EQ X          −Q X         −Y       −Y
                                    F                                                                                             F
Lemma 2                                          2
   ≤  (1 − τ −1 ) X (t+3/2) − Y (t)
                                    F
                                                                                                2
        −1
= (1 − τ ) proxηt ,µ∥·∥1 (1 − γt )X (t+1/2) + γt Y (t) W − Y (t) − ηt+1 ∇F (X (t+1) , ζ (t+1) )
                                                                                                                                                     F
                                                                                                    2
            −1             −1                  (t+1/2)               (t)                    (t)
= (1 + θ         )(1 − τ        ) (1 − γt )X                + γt Y         W −Y                                                               (65)
                                                                                                    F
                                                                                        2
+ (1 + θ)(1 − τ −1 )ηt+1
                     2
                         ∇F (X (t+1) , ξ (t+1) ) + Φ(t+1)
                                                                                        F
τ ≥0                                                                                                    2                                                        2
             −1              −1                  (t+1/2)                 (t)
 ≤ (1 + θ         ) (1 − τ        ) (1 − γt )X                + γt Y           W − Y (t)                    +(1 + θ)ηt2 ∇F (X (t+1) , ξ (t+1) ) + Φ(t+1)             .
                                                                                                        F                                                        F
                    |                                  {z                                               }
                                                     ≜D
                                                                                                                                              (66)
                           (t+1)               (t+1)
Recall that where Φ                ∈ ∂(µ X              1,1
                                                              ) Here, the term D can be simplified as
                                                                                                            (t+1/2)                   2
D = (1 − τ −1 ) (X (t+1/2) − Y (t) )(I − γt W ) + γt (X (t+1/2) − X                                                   )(W − I)
                                                                                                                                      F
                                  2
                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                          −1                  2               (t+1/2) 2
≤ (1 − τ −1 )(1 + α2 ) ∥I − γt W ∥2             X (t+1/2) − Y (t)                       + (1 − τ −1 )γt2 1 + α2                    ∥I − W ∥2 X (t+1/2) − X

                                                                                   F                                                                                         F
                                                                               2
                                                                                                                         −1                                  (t+1/2) 2
≤ (1 − τ −1 )(1 + α2 )(1 − γt λn )2 X (t+1/2) − Y (t)                                  + (1 − τ −1 )γt2 1 + α2                    (1 − λn )2 X (t+1/2) − X

                                                                                                                                                                             .
                                                                               F                                                                                         F
                                                                                                                                              (67)
Combining (64) and (65),

                            (t+1) 2                        2
   E (1 + θ−1 ) Z (t+1) − Z          + X (t+1/2) − Y (t+1)
                                   F                       F

                                                   (t+1/2) 2                      2
   ≤ (1 + θ−1 ) max{A(γt ), B(γt )} X (t+1/2) − X             + X (t+1/2) − Y (t)
                                                                                                    F                                     F
                                                                           2
          + (1 + θ)ηt2 ∇F (X (t+1) , ξ (t+1) ) + Φ(t+1)                            ,                                                          (68)
                                                                           F
where
                                                2
                   A(γt ) = (1 + α1 ) 1 − γt λ̃ + (1 − τ −1 )γt2 1 + α2−1 (1 − λn )2 ,


                                                   2
                                                                                   2
                   B(γt ) = 1 + α1−1 γt2 1 − λ̃ + (1 − τ −1 )(1 + α2 ) (1 − γt λn ) .                                                         (69)
Comparing (68) with our goal in (32), it remains to show that max{A(γt ), B(γt )} ≤ 1 − ω. We
bound the terms A(γt ),B(γt ) as follows.



                                                                22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof for A(γt ) ≤ 1 − ω: Let α1 = γt λ̃/2 and α2 = 1/(2τ ). Following (Koloskova et al., 2019,
Eqs. (20)–(24)),
for any κ ∈ [0, 1], we have
                                                          λ̃2
                                  A(γt ) ≤ 1 − κ                       .                          (70)
                                                   8(1 − λn )2 τ + λ̃2
                      2    2                                      2
Setting κ = 8(1−λn8τ) τ +λ̃ in (70), we have A(γt ) ≤ 1 − λ̃8τ = 1 − ω, where the last equation
                    2
follows from ω = λ̃8τ .
Proof for B(γt ) ≤ 1 − ω: Leveraging the inequality (1 − x)(1 + x/2) ≤ 1 − x/2, ∀x > 0, we have

                         2       2        2               −1          1                2
             B(γt ) = γt (1 − λ̃) 1 +            + (1 − τ ) 1 +            (1 − γt λn )
                                        γt λ̃                        2τ
                                                          τ −1

                    γt ≤1                 2γt
                                 2                                            2
                      ≤ (1 − λ̃) γt +            + 1−             (1 − γt λn )
                                           λ̃               2
                                                          τ −1

                    γt ≤1               2
                      ≤ (1 − λ̃)2 1 +         γt + 1 −           (1 + γt λ2n − 2γt λn )
                                        λ̃                  2
                                                               τ −1

                    −1≤λn ≤1                   2
                        ≤    (1 − λ̃)2 1 +         γt + 1 −           (1 + 3γt )
                                              λ̃                 2
                                                         τ −1

                    τ >0               2
                     ≤ (1 − λ̃)2 1 +         γt + 1 −           1 + 3γt
                                       λ̃                  2
                                                         !
                           1     −1   2λ̃3 + 4 − 12λ̃
                    =1−        τ −                     γt .                                (71)
                           2                  λ̃
We consider the following two cases, depending on the value of λ̃ = 1 − |λ2 | ∈ [0, 1].

                  √
        • If λ̃ ≥ 41−5
                    4   ≈ 0.351, one can verify that the cubic function λ̃2 + 2λ̃3 + 4 − 12λ̃ ≤ 0.
                                                                                      1
          Consequently, the last term in (71) is non-positive, yielding B(γt ) ≤ 1 − 2τ . Meanwhile,
          we have λ̃ ≤ 1 since |λ2 | ≤ 1 and τ ≥ 1 from the definition in (6). This implies B(γt ) ≤
                           2
                1
          1 − 2τ  ≤ 1 − λ̃8τ = 1 − ω.


                 √
        • If λ̃ < 41−5
                     4   ≈ 0.351, we have λ̃2 + 2λ̃3 + 4 − 12λ̃ > 0. When γt ≤ τ (λ̃2 +2λ̃3λ̃+4−12λ̃) ,
          it follows from (71) that
                                                             λ̃2
                                   B(γt ) ≤ 1 −                             .                     (72)
                                                 2τ (λ̃2 + 2λ̃3 + 4 − 12λ̃)
          To prove B(γt ) ≤ 1 − ω, it remains to verify if the following inequality holds:
                                                   λ̃2              λ̃2
                                                                  ≥     .                         (73)
                                       2τ (λ̃2 + 2λ̃3 + 4 − 12λ̃)   8τ
          Note that we have λ̃2 + 2λ̃3 + 4 − 12λ̃ ≤ 4 − 3λ̃ ≤ 4 since 0 ≤ λ̃ ≤ 1. Therefore, (73)
          holds.



A.6.3    P ROOF OF L EMMA 4

         4c(a+2ϵ)                                                                η2 A
Let m = ac+4(c−2)ϵ . We will prove Lemma 4 by induction. Suppose rt ≤ m ct2 . For t + 1,
                                    η2 A 2        η2 A
                   rt+1 ≤ (1 − c/2)m t 2 + ηt2 A ≤ t 2 ((1 − c/2)m + 2c) .                        (74)
                                     c    c        c


                                                   23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


It is sufficient to prove
                            ((1 − c/2)m + 2c) ηt2 ≤ mηt+1
                                                      2

                        ⇔m(t + a)2ϵ − (t + a + 1)2ϵ ((1 − c/2)m + 2c) ≥ 0
                                    1 2ϵ
                        ⇔m − (1 +       ) ((1 − c/2)m + 2c) ≥ 0
                                  t+a
                                     2ϵ
                                1              c
                        ⇔ 1+              (1 − )m + 2c ≤ m
                               t+a             2

Define a function g(x) = (1 + x)2ϵ − 1 − 4ϵx for x ∈ [0, 1). Since 2ϵ − 1 ≤ 1,
                               g ′ (x) = 2ϵ(1 + x)2ϵ−1 − 4ϵ ≤ 0.                               (75)
                                                      2ϵ
                                                  1              4ϵ
Therefore, g(x) ≤ g(0) = 0, implying that 1 + t+a        ≤ 1 + t+a  . Therefore, it is sufficient to
prove

                4ϵ           c                            4ϵ           c
          1+            (1 −       m + 2c ≤ m ⇐ 1 +              (1 −     m + 2c ≤ m
              t+a            2                            a            2
                                                              4c(a+2ϵ)
A simple calculation shows that it is sufficient to have m ≥ ac+4(c−2)ϵ , which is true from the
definition of m.

A.6.4    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 2

The proof of Proposition 2 is similar to that in Appendix A.6.1. For any α > 0, we have
                                                                                2
                     2
E X (t+1) − Y (t)        = E Z (t+1) − Y (t) − ηt ∇F (X (t) ; ξt ) + Φ(t+1)
                     F                                                           F

                                                 2                                                  2
≤ (1 + α−1 )ηt2 E ∇F (X (t) ; ξt ) + Φ(t+1)          + (1 + α)E (1 − γt )X (t) − Y (t) + γt Y (t) W
                                                 F                                                  F

                                                                                                     2
≤ 2(1 + α−1 )(2G2 + 2σ 2 + µ2 d)nηt2 + (1 + α)E (I − γt W )(X (t) − Y (t) ) + γt X (t) (I − W )          .
                                                                                                       F
                                                                                               (76)
We see that the expression in (76) is identical to (60). Following the same steps in Appendix A.6.1,
we have Proposition 2.


B     E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

B.1     F EDERATED L EARNING OVER MNIST

We simulated 10 nodes within a fully connected network. This corresponds to the federated learn-
ing setup except we do not assume the existence of a central aggregator. The mixing matrix
W = 11T /n and γt = 1. The DNN we are training consists of three fully connected layers
with total d = 669, 706 parameters.The training data is distributed in a highly heterogeneous fash-
ion by following Konečný et al. (2016), where each node has data corresponding to exactly two
classes/labels with 60K/10K training/testing data in total. The consensus aggregation is performed
in a synchronous manner, i.e., at iteration t all the nodes simultaneously perform the aggregation
step by (4). Additionally, to validate the efficacy of M ALCOM -PSGD we use a constant learning
rate (ηt = .2) and consensus step size (γt = 1). For the error free baseline we use the standard
decentralized SGD algorithm. To generate Figure 1

B.1.1    R ING -L IKE T OPOLOGY

Simulation setup for the partially connected network. We assume a network topology as illus-
trated in Figure 4 and we have also included its corresponding mixing matrix. This network topology
is a neighborhood ring topology. That is, there are 4 neighborhoods connected together by nodes
0,2,4,6 and 8. Besides the change in network topology and mixing matrix we use the same data


                                                24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                       1              1           1                                                                 1        1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                           5           5           5
                                                                                                                                                         0                        0        0       0        0        5        5

                           9                             O                                     1                        15
                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                                                       5
                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                                   5
                                                                                                                                                         0                        0        0       0        0        0        0 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                        15            1
                                                                                                                                       5
                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                                   5
                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                          5
                                                                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                                                                  5
                                                                                                                                                                                           0       0        0        0        0
                                          8                              2                                             
                                                                                                                       0                          1      3                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                       0           5      5                       5
                                                                                                                                                                                           0       0        0        0        0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                       0              0           1      1                       1        1       1        0        0        0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                7                                                         3
                                                                                                                                                  5      5                       5        5       5
                                                                                                                                                                                  1        3       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                       0              0           0     0                        5        5       5
                                                                                                                                                                                                            0        0        0
                                                                                                                                                                                 1        1       1        1        1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                       0              0           0     0                                                                    0
                                          6                              4                                                                                                       5        5       5
                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                            5
                                                                                                                                                                                                            3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                       0              0           0     0                        0        0       5        5        5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                         5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                        15            0           0     0                        0        0       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                   5
                                                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                                                                                            5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5
                                                                                                                           1           0           0     0                        0        0       0        0        1        3
                                                                                                                           5                                                                                         5        5


Figure 4: Left: The Ring-Like network topology. Circles denote the devices and edges denote
connection links, where self-loops are omitted in the plot for brevity. Right: The corresponding
mixing matrix W.
              70                                                                                                                                                             4000


                                                                                                                                                       Communication Cost (MB)
                                                                        2.25                                   Choco-SGD
              60                                                        2.00                                   Decentralized-SGD                                             3500
                                                                        1.75                                   Malcom-PSGD                                                   3000
  Test Accuracy


              50
                                                                        1.50                                                                                                 2500                            Choco-SGD
                                                                Loss


              40                                                        1.25                                                                                                 2000                            Decentralized-SGD
                                                                                                                                                                             1500
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Malcom-PSGD
              30                          Choco-SGD                     1.00
                                          Decentralized-SGD             0.75                                                                                                 1000
              20
                                          Malcom-PSGD                   0.50                                                                                                  500
              10
                  0

                         10


                                 20


                                          30


                                                 40


                                                           50


                                                                          0


                                                                                          10


                                                                                                   20


                                                                                                                   30


                                                                                                                               40


                                                                                                                                           50


                                                                                                                                                                                  0


                                                                                                                                                                                           10


                                                                                                                                                                                                       20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                30


                                                                                                                                                                                                                         40


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   50
                              Number of Iterations                                             Number of Iterations                                                                             Number of Iterations

                      (a) Accuracy per Iterations.                                (b) Loss over Iterations.                                                                      (c) Bits transmitted per iteration.
   Figure 5: Synchronous FL with ResNet18 over CIFAR10, where local data is i.i.d. distributed.
              90
                                                                                                                                                       Communication Cost (MB)
              80                                                        2.0
                                                                                                                                                                            5
              70
                                                                                                                                                                            4
  Test Accuracy


              60                                                        1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Choco-SGD+QSGD
              50                                                                                                                                                            3                               Error-Free SGD
                                                                 Loss


              40                                                        1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Malcom-PSGD
              30                                                                                                                                                            2                               Choco+OurComp.
              20                                                        0.5
                                                                                                                                                                            1
              10
               0
                  0

                       0

                           0

                                 0
                                      00

                                            50

                                                 00

                                                      50

                                                           00


                                                                              0


                                                                                      0



                                                                                              0



                                                                                                       0


                                                                                                               0



                                                                                                                       0



                                                                                                                               0



                                                                                                                                       0



                                                                                                                                               0


                                                                                                                                                                                 0

                                                                                                                                                                                      0

                                                                                                                                                                                               0

                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                        00

                                                                                                                                                                                                                50

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         00

                                                                                                                                                                                                                              50

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      00
                      25

                           50

                                75


                                                                                  5



                                                                                              0



                                                                                                   5


                                                                                                               0



                                                                                                                       5



                                                                                                                               0



                                                                                                                                       5



                                                                                                                                               0


                                                                                                                                                                                      25

                                                                                                                                                                                           50

                                                                                                                                                                                                   75
                                     10

                                          12

                                               15

                                                    17

                                                         20


                                                                                  2



                                                                                          5



                                                                                                   7


                                                                                                           0



                                                                                                                   2



                                                                                                                           5



                                                                                                                                   7



                                                                                                                                           0


                                                                                                                                                                                                        10

                                                                                                                                                                                                                12

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          17

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20
                                                                                                           1



                                                                                                                   1



                                                                                                                           1



                                                                                                                                   1



                                                                                                                                           2


                            Number of Iterations                                              Number of Iterations                                                                             Number of Iterations

                   (a) Test accuracy per iterations.                      (b) Training loss over iterations.                                                                     (c) Bits transmitted per iteration.
                                              Figure 6: Asynchronous decentralized learning of MNIST.

distribution, DNNs, and training/testing split as B.1. We utilize a constant learning rate (ηt = .2)
and consensus step size (γt = 1).
For the sake of completeness we also have also plotted the number of total bits versus accuracy. See
Figure 10

B.2                E FFECTS OF S PARSIFICATION

The network and DNN setup is identical to B.1 accept we only consider M ALCOM -PSGD and
C HOCO -SGD+Our Compression Scheme. We vary the level of thresholding which corresponds to
µ in (7).

B.3                R ES N ET 18 OVER CIFAR10

We simulate an FL network with 10 nodes where each node uses the ResNet18 model He et al. (2016)
with an i.i.d. distribution of 50, 000 CIFAR10 training samples. Aggregation and communication
protocols are the same as those in the above experiments with the MNIST dataset. The results are
presented in Fig. 5. We observe similar results to that in Fig. 1, except that M ALCOM -PSGD
converges faster than C HOCO -SGD. Notably, M ALCOM -PSGD reduces communication costs from
the error-free baseline and C HOCO -SGD by 95% and 78%, respectively.


                                                                                                       25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                               90                                                                          2.25
                                               80                                                                                                                                        Choco-SGD
                                                                                                                           2.00
                                               70                                                                                                                                        Malcom-PSGD
                                                                                                                           1.75


                                   Test Accuracy
                                               60                                                                          1.50
                                               50


                                                                                                                   Loss
                                                                                                                           1.25
                                               40
                                                                                                                           1.00
                                               30
                                                                                                                           0.75
                                               20
                                                                                                                           0.50
                                               10
                                                                                                                           0.25
                                                0


                                                      0

                                                           0

                                                                   0
                                                                       00

                                                                            50

                                                                                       00

                                                                                             50

                                                                                                       00


                                                                                                                                   0

                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                               00
                                                                                                                                                                                   50
                                                                                                                                                                                            00
                                                                                                                                                                                                 50
                                                                                                                                                                                                      00
                                                     25

                                                          50

                                                               75


                                                                                                                                       25
                                                                                                                                               50
                                                                                                                                                       75
                                                                    10

                                                                         12

                                                                                  15

                                                                                           17

                                                                                                   20


                                                                                                                                                            10
                                                                                                                                                                          12
                                                                                                                                                                                         15
                                                                                                                                                                                                17
                                                                                                                                                                                                     20
                                                              Number of Iterations                                                                 Number of Iterations

                                                     (a) Accuracy per Iterations.                                                      (b) Loss over Iterations.
                                                                            Figure 7: No Quantization
              90


                                                                                                                                                               Communication Cost (MB)
                                                                                2.25

              80                                                                2.00                                                                                                 0.38
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Constant
              70                                                                1.75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Diminishing
  Test Accuracy


              60                                                                1.50
                                                                                                                                                                                     0.36
              50


                                                                         Loss
                                                                                1.25

              40                                                                                                                                                                     0.34
                                                                                1.00

              30                                                                0.75                                                                                                 0.32
              20                                                                0.50

              10                                                                0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                     0.30
               0
                    0

                        0

                             0
                                  00

                                            50

                                                    00

                                                          50

                                                               00


                                                                                       0


                                                                                               0



                                                                                                       0



                                                                                                               0


                                                                                                                       0



                                                                                                                               0



                                                                                                                                       0



                                                                                                                                               0



                                                                                                                                                        0


                                                                                                                                                                                            0

                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                               00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    00
                   25

                        50

                             75


                                                                                            5



                                                                                                   0



                                                                                                            5


                                                                                                                       0



                                                                                                                               5



                                                                                                                                       0



                                                                                                                                               5



                                                                                                                                                       0


                                                                                                                                                                                                25
                                                                                                                                                                                                     50
                                                                                                                                                                                                          75
                                  10

                                       12

                                                    15

                                                         17

                                                              20


                                                                                           2



                                                                                                   5



                                                                                                           7


                                                                                                                   0



                                                                                                                           2



                                                                                                                                   5



                                                                                                                                           7



                                                                                                                                                    0


                                                                                                                                                                                                               10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                   1



                                                                                                                           1



                                                                                                                                   1



                                                                                                                                           1



                                                                                                                                                   2
                         Number of Iterations                                                      Number of Iterations                                                                               Number of Iterations

                   (a) Accuracy per Iterations.                                            (b) Loss over Iterations.                                                                          (c) Loss over Iterations.
                                                                    Figure 8: Diminishing Learning rate

B.4                A SYNCHRONOUS D ECENTRALIZED L EARNING

This setup is identical to the FL setup above, except that we consider pairwise dynamic and asyn-
chronous networking. At each iteration, we randomly pick two nodes for model sharing and ag-
gregation over their communication link, resulting in a time-varying mixing matrix. The results are
presented in Fig. 6. Similar to the synchronous case, both C HOCO -SGD and M ALCOM -PSGD
eventually recover the accuracy and loss of the error-free algorithm, but it should be noted that
our algorithm converges at a slightly faster rate. This is because in the asynchronous setting er-
ror accumulation during aggregation is more significant due to the high data heterogeneity. Our
findings indicate that M ALCOM -PSGD reduces the communication cost by 94% compared to the
error-free baseline and by 74% relative to C HOCO -SGD. This result highlights the efficiency of
M ALCOM -PSGD in the practical asynchronous setting, which represents numerous real-world sit-
uations, including Internet-of-Things (IoT) and device-to-device (D2D) networks.

B.5                N O C OMPRESSION

We assume the same set up as the Asynchronous Decentralized Learning experiment as described in
B.4 but we apply no compression and encoding. The goal of this experiment is to show that adding
sparsity has a marginal effect on the test accuracy and training loss as illustrated in Figure 7.

B.6                D IMINISHING VS C ONSTANT L EARNING R ATE .

We assume the asynchronous set up as above but consider two different learning rates. For the
constant learning rate we have η = .2 where as for the diminishing learning rate we follow (10):
          1
ηt = L(t+a)  ϵ setting ϵ = 1/2, L = .2, and α = 200. The results are summarized in Figure 8 and

indicate that with properly chosen constants, a diminishing and constant learning rate can achieve
similar performance.

B.7                B IT C ONSTRAINED E XPERIMENTS

We simulate decentralized image classification over the MNIST dataset with the aforementioned
DNN. Local model residuals are communicated over rate-constrained channels with the channel
capacity of 39 MB/iteration and 1 MB/iteration for the synchronous and asynchronous systems,
respectively. Fig. 9 plots the test accuracy and training loss under the stringent communication rate
constraints. While C HOCO -SGD diverges due to excessive quantization error, M ALCOM -PSGD
capitalizes on more efficient communication and thus allows high-precision quantization.


                                                                                                               26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             90                                                         8                                                               90                                                      90
             80                                                         7                                                               80                                                      80
                                                                                                                                        70                                                      70


                                                                                                                            Test Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                    Test Accuracy
 Test Accuracy


             70
                                                               (~1e36)
                                                                        6                         Choco-SGD+QSGD
             60                                                         5                         D-SGD                                 60                                                      60
             50                                                                                                                         50                                                      50
                                                                        4                         Malcom-PSGD                           40                                                      40
             40                                                         3                         Choco+OurComp.                        30                                                      30
                                                                 Loss



             30                                                         2                         sign-SGD                              20                                                      20
             20                                                         1                                                               10                                                      10
             10                                                         0                                                                0                                                       0


                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                         00
                                                                                                                                                         50
                                                                                                                                                         00
                                                                                                                                                         50
                                                                                                                                                         00


                                                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                               00
                                                                                                                                                                                                               50
                                                                                                                                                                                                               00
                                                                                                                                                                                                               50
                                                                                                                                                                                                               00
                  50

                        0

                             0

                                   0

                                         0

                                                       0


                                                                            0


                                                                                     0


                                                                                              0


                                                                                                       0


                                                                                                               0


                                                                                                                       0


                                                                                                                                                 25
                                                                                                                                                   50
                                                                                                                                                       75


                                                                                                                                                                                                      25
                                                                                                                                                                                                            50
                                                                                                                                                                                                             75
                       10

                            15

                                 20

                                       25

                                                       30


                                                                            5


                                                                                  0


                                                                                           5


                                                                                                    0


                                                                                                               5


                                                                                                                    0


                                                                                                                                                      10
                                                                                                                                                      12
                                                                                                                                                      15
                                                                                                                                                      17
                                                                                                                                                      20


                                                                                                                                                                                                            10
                                                                                                                                                                                                            12
                                                                                                                                                                                                            15
                                                                                                                                                                                                            17
                                                                                                                                                                                                            20
                                                                                 1


                                                                                          1


                                                                                                   2


                                                                                                           2


                                                                                                                   3
                       Number of Iterations                                     Number of Iterations                                                  Number of Iterations                                  Number of Iterations

           (a) Sync: Acc. versus Iter.                              (b) Sync: Loss versus Iter.                                    (c) Async: Acc. versus Iter.                            (d) Async: Loss versus Iter.
Figure 9: Decentralized learning under the communication rate constraints. The loss values of (b)
and (d) are on the order of 1036 and 1024 respectively.


                                                   90
                                                                                                                                            80
                                                   80
                                                                                                                                            70
                                                                                                                             Test Accuracy


                                                   70
                                       Test Accuracy


                                                                                                                                            60
                                                   60
                                                                                                                                            50
                                                   50                                    Choco-SGD+QSGD                                                               Choco-SGD+QSGD
                                                                                         Error-Free SGD                                     40
                                                   40                                                                                                                 Error-Free SGD
                                                                                         Malcom-PSGD                                        30
                                                   30                                                                                                                 Malcom-PSGD
                                                   20
                                                                                         Choco+OurComp.                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                      Choco+OurComp.
                                                                                         sign-SGD                                           10
                                                   10
                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                         5
                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                  5
                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                           5
                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                   5
                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                             0.0
                                                                                                                                                      0.2
                                                                                                                                                          0.5
                                                                                                                                                               0.7
                                                                                                                                                                   1.0
                                                                                                                                                                        1.2
                                                                                                                                                                             1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                1.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                    2.0
                                                        0

                                                               1

                                                                            2

                                                                                  3

                                                                                              4

                                                                                                           5

                                                                                                                   6


                                                                Communication Cost (MB)                            1e10
                                                                                                                                                         Communication Cost (MB)                     1e10


                                                            (a) Accuracy per Total Bits.                                                          (b) Accuracy per Total Bits.
                          Figure 10: Bit Utilization vs Accuracy for Fully Connected and Ring Topology


                                                                                                                           27
