Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


U NTRAINED N ETWORKS ’ C LASS B IAS :
A T HEORETICAL I NVESTIGATION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         The initial state of neural networks plays a central role in conditioning the sub-
         sequent training dynamics. In the context of classification problems, we provide
         a theoretical analysis demonstrating that the structure of a neural network can
         condition the model to assign all predictions to the same class, even before the
         beginning of training, and in the absence of explicit biases. We show that the pres-
         ence of this phenomenon, which we call "Initial Guessing Bias" (IGB), depends on
         architectural choices such as activation functions, max-pooling layers, and network
         depth. Our analysis of IGB has practical consequences, in that it guides architecture
         selection and initialization. We also highlight theoretical consequences, such as
         the breakdown of node-permutation symmetry, the violation of self-averaging, the
         validity of some mean-field approximations, and the non-trivial differences arising
         with depth.


1    I NTRODUCTION
We study how untrained neural networks assign data points to different classes before they start
learning. In the absence of explicit bias weights, our intuition might suggest an even partitioning
between classes. Instead, we demonstrate that the network architecture can induce an imbalance
effect, resulting in a large fraction of data points being classified as a single class. We call this
phenomenon Initial Guessing Bias (IGB) which we illustrate in Fig. 1.
Importantly, the phenomenon we describe appears at initialization, which can have a significant
impact on the training process. Indeed, the initial distribution of the weights can, for example,
determine an amplification/decay of the signal coming from the input, or even limit the depth to
which signals can propagate through random neural networks (Schoenholz et al., 2016; Hanin &
Rolnick, 2018; Glorot & Bengio, 2010; Saxe et al., 2013). The influence of the initial weights
distribution is of even greater importance in over-parametrized networks, for which, weights trained
with gradient-based optimizers do not move far away from initialization (Jacot et al., 2018; Du et al.,
2019; 2018; Allen-Zhu et al., 2019; Chizat et al., 2019). While the study of the initial state of neural
networks has received increasing attention over the past few years, our study differs from past work
in some important key aspects which we detail next.

Sources of randomness A deep neural network (DNN) at initialization can be interpreted as a
random function parameterized by random weights, and whose inputs are sampled from an unknown
data distribution. There are thus two distinct and independent sources of randomness at initialization:
weights and data. Previous theoretical studies of DNNs typically consider, for a given input, the
whole ensemble of random initializations of the weights (Poole et al., 2016; Matthews et al., 2018;
Novak et al., 2018). In contrast, we fix the weight initialization and study the network’s behavior by
taking expectations over the data. Technically speaking, while previous work first averages over the
weights and then over the data, our averages are first over the data and then over the weights. Note
that this approach is closer to the natural order followed in practice, where data is classified by a
single neural network (and thus for a single weight realization).

Breaking of self-averageness The mentioned inversion might seem a technicality but it actually
constitutes a fundamental point in the study of IGB. The observable that characterizes the phenomenon
is the fraction of points classified as class c, and denoted by fc (W ), (this quantity will be formally
introduced shortly) in fact does not respect the self-averaging property (Mézard et al., 1987; Dotsenko,


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 Untrained

               neural network
   Output
                 with IGB
    Input


                 Untrained

               neural network
   Output
                without IGB


Figure 1: Initial Guessing Bias (IGB). Consider a task where we classify a binary dataset using
an untrained network. Does it assign half of the examples to each class, or does it privilege one
class? The answer depends on the architecture. In the bottom left, we classify a binary dataset
with an untrained network without IGB. This model will generally assign half of the examples to
each class (histogram on the bottom center). In the top left, we classify the same dataset using an
untrained network with IGB. In this case, most of the guesses will usually go to one of the two classes
(histogram on the top center). As an example, we take the dog/cat classes (label 0 / label 1) from
CIFAR10, and pass them through an untrained CNN with 2 layers, each followed by pooling. The
non-IGB model uses tanh activations and average pooling, the IGB model uses ReLU and Max
pooling. We show in the top-right the distribution over different initializations, PW (f0 ), of the
fraction f0 of times that each model guessed dog (equivalently, f1 = 1 − f0 indicates the fraction of
images guessed as cat). While for the non-IGB models, f0 is most often 50%, with IGB it most
often is either 0% or 100%.


1994).1 In other words, even in the infinite dataset/network size limit, the value of f0 (W ) obtained
on a given realization of the network initialization, W , differs from that computed from the average
over the ensemble of initializations. Self-averaging is often exploited (e.g. in dynamical mean
field theory (Sompolinsky et al., 1988), employed also in the context of mean-field theories of deep
learning (Schoenholz et al., 2016; Poole et al., 2016)), as it can lead to a simplification of the analysis.
For the phenomena related to IGB we cannot exploit self-averaging.

Nodes Symmetry Breaking When we think of an untrained multi-layer perceptron (MLP), we
are naturally inclined to assume a permutation symmetry among the various nodes of a given layer.
Instead, we will show that this symmetry can be broken, and indeed, this symmetry breaking (i.e.
difference in the distribution of nodes in a given layer) constitutes the foundation of the IGB. Nodes
Permutation Symmetry Breaking (PSB) was already reported in previous work, e.g. in specific
shallow networks with a large number of examples (Kang et al., 1993).
We will see that the choice of architecture significantly influences the presence of IGB. Architecture
design, particularly the selection of activation functions, has been extensively studied (Dubey et al.,
2022), with a focus on ReLU versus differentiable activations such as sigmoid. For instance, sigmoid
activations can achieve dynamical isometry, maximizing signal propagation depth (Schoenholz et al.,
2016), unlike ReLUs (Pennington et al., 2017). These activations are also compared in terms of
generalization performance, revealing distinct behaviors for ReLUs and sigmoids (Oostwal et al.,
2021). Notably, these studies often consider averaging over weight initializations.

2     M AIN CONTRIBUTIONS

Our main contribution is a new analysis that characterizes the conditions that trigger the IGB
phenomenon. More precisely we demonstrate that, beyond effects that may be induced by the
structure of the data itself, it is the design of the architecture that plays a crucial role.
    1
      In a system defined over an ensemble of realizations (in our case, each realization is a different weight
initialization), a self-averaging quantity is one that can be equivalently calculated either by averaging over the
whole ensemble or on a single, sufficiently large, realization; in such a situation, a single huge system is adequate
to represent the entire ensemble.


                                                         2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Specifically, the main contributions of this paper are:

       • The observation and formalization of IGB. To our knowledge, this phenomenon was not
         known before our work. IGB is relevant because it:
           ◦ Shows that a naive intuition about DNNs (but not about linear models) is wrong;
              ignoring this can lead to wrong assumptions.
           ◦ Guides architecture selection, the choice of initialization, the data standardization.
           ◦ Can be exploited for new algorithmic solutions (e.g. to counter class imbalance).
           ◦ Displays a symmetry breaking and a violation of self-averaging.
           ◦ It has an effect on the dynamics, particularly in the initial phase, which appears
              qualitatively different with and without the presence of IGB.
       • The demonstration of the robustness of the phenomenon through an extensive study across
         a wide range of settings; in particular:
           ◦ We demonstrate that IGB depends on the choice of activation function and provide
              general rules for identifying those that give rise to IGB.
           ◦ We show that IGB is generated and exacerbated by max pooling.
           ◦ We show that network depth does not cause IGB, but it intensifies it if it is already
              present.
           ◦ We develop a theory that analytically describes IGB in MLPs with random data (in-
              cluding all the settings mentioned above).
           ◦ We provide evidence of how IGB emerges in an even broader set of settings (real data,
              CNNs, ResNets, Vision Transformers, etc.).

Structure of the paper In this paper, we formally characterize IGB, explaining its occurrence
and practical implications. While we focus on binary classification in the main paper for clarity
(NC = 2), our results extend to multiclass classification as well, detailed in App. H.
We devote Sec. 3 to formally define IGB and to provide, through a qualitative argument, an intuition
into the phenomenon. We dedicate Sec. 4 to a quantitative analysis of IGB, by studying various
setups and highlighting the differences between them. In particular, we show that IGB arises because
of a PSB, and we identify a control parameter that triggers the phenomenon. We find that some kinds
of activations induce this symmetry breaking, and, consequently, the IGB. In Sec. 4.2 we show how
max-pooling and depth exacerbate IGB. In Sec. 5 we discuss the impact of our results. Due to space
reasons, and to keep the narrative simpler, we provide detailed derivations in the appendix.

3   E MERGENCE OF IGB: A FIRST INSIGHT INTO THE PHENOMENON

     Input      hidden layer     Last hidden layer        Output       : shorthand notation for the set of

                                                                       network weights

                                                                                        : dataset

                                            Pooling


                                                                    composed by pairs of input

                                                                    vectors-labels.
                                                                              : input vector

                                                                                 : pre activation function

                                                                                 nodes vector ( layer)
                                                                                 : post activation function

                                                                                  nodes vector ( layer)
                                            Pooling


                                                                                   : post Max-Pooling
                                                                          nodes vector ( layer)
                                                                        : Output node associated to

                                                                        class “c”



Figure 2: Scheme of a generic neural network for a binary classification problem (left) and main
symbols (right); for a more complete notation see App. A.


                                                      3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Setting and main notation We consider the generic architecture shown in Fig. 2. The inputs
{ξ (a) }D
        a=1 propagate through a set of L hidden layers, until they reach the output layer. The last
                                                                                                (L)
hidden layer is connected to the output layer through a dense weight matrix, with elements wij ;
                                                                          (c)
the output layer is composed of a set of two nodes (one for each class), O     c=0,1
                                                                                     . Each input is
classified by selecting the class c with the largest output value.
Our main notation is described in Fig. 2–right. For data and weights we respectively use:
          (a)
       • ξb    ∼ N (0, 1) ∀a, b: bth component of the ath dataset input.
                           2

           (l)           σw
       • wij ∼ N 0, Nl−1        ∀i, j, l : weight connecting the j th node of the lth layer to the ith node
         of the following one. We fix all the biases equal to 0.

We focus on a simple data structure, to underline effects induced by architecture design. In particular,
the choice of this data is motivated by two fundamental reasons:

      ♢ We place ourselves in a setting where the effect of IGB is minimal; we expect, indeed, that
        correlation in the data amplifies IGB.
        To gain a better understanding of this concept, we can consider a pathological extreme case
        of a dataset composed of clones of the same element; in this case we will clearly get the
        same predicted class for the whole dataset, regardless of the neural network design.
      ♢ In our work, we analyze how network design can induce a predictive bias; by using unstruc-
        tured data, we can ensure that the sources of IGB do not stem from dataset characteristics.
        For the same reason, we use identically distributed data for various classes; this way, we
        avoid bias effects related to class differences (e.g., difficulty of the class).

Beyond the analytical results, we show that when using structured data, not only is IGB still present,
but it becomes exacerbated (see App. I.1).

Two Kinds of Averages Since we need to average over both the dataset and the weights, for the
sake of compactness we employ the shorthand notation:
                              ⟨x⟩ ≡ Eχ (x | W )         and   x ≡ EW (x)
to indicate the expectation over the two different sources of randomness (see App. A for more details).

Initialization In order to make our calculations more quantitative, we make a precise choice for the
initialization of the weights, employing the Kaiming Normal initialization (He et al., 2015), which is
common in the literature. Note however that our procedure applies to any set of independent weights
drawn from a centered distribution with finite variance, with the scaling of the variance being the
crucial element.

Permutation Symmetry Breaking: the foundation of IGB The key quantity in our analysis is the
distribution (over W ) of the fraction fc (W ) of datapoints classified as class c ∈ {0, 1}. We have
fc = 1/2 in the absence of IGB, and a different value otherwise.
Since our model’s guess is assigned to the class with the largest output value, O(c) , in the limit of
infinite datapoints, the Law of large numbers gives
                                                   Z ∞
         lim fc (W ) = Pχ O(c) > O(1−c) | W =            Pχ O(c) − O(1−c) = x | W dx . (1)
      D→∞                                                 0

Without loss of generality, we will often use the class 0 as a representative class, but the same
discussion applies to any class. For class 0, equation 1 simplifies (again in the D → ∞ limit) to
                                          Z ∞
                               f0 (W ) =        Pχ (∆O = x | W ) dx ,                             (2)
                                             0

where we defined, for the sake of compactness, ∆O ≡ O(0) − O(1) . We also define ∆µ ≡
 O(0) − O(1) the difference between the distributions mean values. While fc is a convenient
and interpretable metric related to performance, it is essential to note that our analysis begins with


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


a thorough a derivation of the distribution of output layer nodes, which encodes richer information
about the proximity of points to decision boundaries.
equation 2 connects f0 (i.e. the observable we are interested in) to the nodes variables O(c) (i.e.
the set of variables we analyze through our investigation). The fraction f0 depends on how often
the output related to class 0 has a higher value of the output than   that of class 1. This is essentially
obtained by comparing the output distributions Pχ O(c) | W related to each class. We illustrate
this in Fig. 3. In the example of the figure, the output distribution related to class 0 is centered around
higher values than that of  class 1. Therefore, we will have f0 > f1 , i.e. IGB. We will show that,
for MLPs, Pχ O(c) | W , is asymptotically a Gaussian whose center, O(c) , is itself a random

variable (r.v.), which is drawn from a Normal distribution PW O(c) that has a wide support:
                                                        |W |→∞         D      E
           Distribution of outputs: Pχ O(c) | W −−−−−→ N                 O(c) , Varχ O(c)                (3)
                                            D       E  |W |→∞                    D       E
            Distribution of centers: PW        O(c)    −−−−−→ N 0, VarW             O(c)      ,          (4)

where |W | indicates the cardinality of the set W .2                In other words, the outputs of
different classes are distributed according to p.d.f.s each centered on a different value:
As O(c) are r.v.s, varying across output nodes,          0.6
they are not all identically distributed. This                    Pχ O(1) | W                        Pχ O(0) | W
difference results in a breakdown of node-               0.5
                                                                              hO(1) i      hO(0) i
                                                                                      ∆µ
permutation symmetry. As we will explain now,


                                                         0.4
                                                              Pχ O(c) | W

this asymmetry is directly related to the emer-
gence of IGB.                                            0.3

In fact, the study of IGB can be conceptually            0.2
summarized as a comparison       between the fluc-
tuations of PW O(c) , which define the dis-              0.1

tance between the  Gaussians in Fig. 3, and those        0.0
of Pχ O(c) | W , which define how wide each                    −2          0           2
                                                                                      O(c)
                                                                                                   4         6

of these Gaussians is. We will consider the two
extreme cases to underline our point. Starting Figure 3: Illustration of the key quantities used in
from equation 1, we will discuss how the inte- the analysis. The blue and orange curves represent
gral on the r.h.s. varies in these two scenarios: the distributions of the two output nodes for a fixed
                                                    set of network weights, W .
       • Absence of IGB (Fig. 4 (left)):
          If the fluctuations of PW O(c) are much smaller than the ones of Pχ O(c) | W ,
          we will have two Gaussian
                                            r.v. centered almost on the same point, therefore,
          Pχ O(0) > O(1) | W ≃ 1/2.
          In fact, the difference between two Gaussian r.v. is itself a Gaussian r.v., centered on the
          difference between the mean values of the original distributions, ∆µ . If the fluctuations
          of ∆µ are much smaller than those of ∆O , we will typically have that Pχ (∆O | W ) is a
          symmetric distribution centered very close to the origin. Therefore
                                              Z ∞
                       Pχ (∆O > 0 | W ) ≡          Pχ O(0) − O(1) = x | W dx ≃ 1/2,                                (5)
                                                    0

          i.e. the probability of both classes is equal to 1/2.
        • Deep IGB (Fig. 4 (right)):
          If, instead, the scale of PW O(c) fluctuations is much bigger than the one of

          Pχ O(c) | W we will typically fall in the opposing scenario where the two Gaussian

          distributions, Pχ O(c) | W , are well separated. We can assume, without loss of generality,

          that O(0) > O(1) . In this case we will have Pχ O(0) > O(1) | W ≃ 1.

This difference between the two scenarios just discussed suggests the following formal definition for
IGB (we write it for a generic number NC of classes).
    2
      Note that the writing |W | → ∞ is not completely unambiguous since there are several ways to take the
infinite size limit; in App. C (see Remark 1.) we discuss how not all of them are valid.


                                                          5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              Pχ O(1) | W                                          Pχ O(0) | W                                                 Pχ O(1) | W                                  Pχ O(0) | W
         1.6                                                                                                               1.6
                                                                           VarW (hO(c) i)                                                                                            VarW (hO(c) i)
         1.4                                                                Varχ (O(c) )
                                                                                               = 0.1                       1.4                                                        Varχ (O(c) )
                                                                                                                                                                                                       = 10



                Pχ (∆O | W)


                                                                                                                                 Pχ (∆O | W)


         1.2            0.50                                          5.0                                                  1.2           0.50                                 0.10


                                                              PW hO(c) i


                                                                                                                                                                      PW hO(c) i


                                       ∆µ                                                                                                              ∆µ
 Pχ O(c) | W


                                                                                                                   Pχ O(c) | W
         1.0            0.25                                          2.5                                                  1.0           0.25                                 0.05
                                         f0                                                                                                            f0
         0.8            0.00                                          0.0                                                  0.8           0.00                                 0.00
                                −2.5   0.0        2.5                   −1           0             1                                             0           5                   −10           0          10
         0.6                           ∆O                                         hO(c) i                                  0.6                        ∆O                                   hO(c) iχ
         0.4                                                                                                               0.4

         0.2                                                                                                               0.2

         0.0                                                                                                               0.0
            −6                 −4            −2         0                   2              4               6                  −6                −4       −2       0                  2             4               6
                                                        (c)
                                                        O                                                                                                        O(c)
Figure 4: Comparison of two extreme scenarios: no IGB on the left, and strong IGB on the right. If the
centers of the distributions, O(c) , have small fluctuations compared to the ones of the distributions

Pχ O(c) | W , the two distributions almost completely overlap, resulting in a similar probability
that one output node exceeds the other (left). If, instead, the centers are typically much further apart
than the fluctuations scale of the distributions Pχ O(c) | W , the values drawn from one distribution
exceed the other one with high probability (right). Each plot contains two inset plots. The inset plot
in the upper left represents the distribution of the difference of the r.v.s shown in the main plot, (∆O ).
Note that, fixing the set W in a given experiment, and assuming a dataset big enough, equation 2
holds (the probability mass of the r.h.s. is depicted with a red area bounded by the distribution
                                                                                                       and
the integration extremes). The inset plot in the upper right shows instead PW O(c) to give an
idea of the fluctuations of O(c) for the two cases.


    Definition 3.1 (IGB). We have an absence of IGB if and only if:
                                                                                                 1
                                                        lim fc (W ) =                              , ∀c ∈ {0, . . . , NC − 1}.                                                                          (6)
                                                        D→∞                                     NC
    Instead, we have IGB if we observe a disproportion between the values {fc }, even in the limit
    D → ∞ (so not due to finite size effects).

Given the asymptotically Gaussian distribution of output, increasing IGB leads to points uniformly
moving away from decision boundaries.
Understanding the emergence of different node distributions due to Permutation Symmetry Breaking
(PSB) is key to grasping IGB. Regardless of the activation function in the first hidden layer, PSB
doesn’t occur. However, from the second layer onward, the choice of activation function becomes
decisive and can lead to symmetry breaking in that layer.
In the next section, we analyze a single hidden layer network, where symmetry breaking only occurs
in the output layer. As we deepen the network, the second layer, formerly holding the output nodes,
becomes the second hidden layer. In deep neural networks, this shift allows for symmetry breaking
in the hidden layers (from the second layer onward). We’ll observe that starting from a layer with
PSB and propagating the signal to the next layer increases the difference between node distributions,
exacerbating IGB with increasing network depth.

4         Q UANTITATIVE ANALYSIS
We formalize and expand upon the insights introduced in Sec.3 by deriving PW (f0 ) for various
architectural choices, from simple models to more complex ones. This helps us identify the key
architectural elements that influence IGB. Detailed derivations can be found in the appendices.
Furthermore, in App.I.2, in addition to our analytical findings, we demonstrate the presence of IGB
across an even wider range of architectures, including ResNets and Vision Transformers

4.1            S INGLE HIDDEN LAYER
We start by sketching the derivation of PW (f0 ) for a perceptron with a single hidden layer of N1
nodes (the full calculation is in App. D.1):3
     3
         In this case, the infinite size limit (|W | → ∞) means N1 → ∞.


                                                                                                               6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   I. First, we show that, for every output node, Pχ O(c) | W asymptotically converges to a

      Gaussian distribution, whose mean, O(c) , is itself a r.v.. Instead, its variance Varχ O(c)
                                          2
      converges to a deterministic value σ∞ :
                                                          D       E
                                      (c)       N1 →∞
                              Pχ O | W −−−         −−→ N    O(c) , σ∞ 2
                                                                          .                    (7)
       Consequently for the difference between the two nodes we will have:
                                                 N1 →∞             2

                                   Pχ (∆O | W ) −−− −−→ N ∆µ , 2σ∞                                        (8)
  II. From the definition of f0 [equation 2], we get an implicit expression for ∆µ (f0 )
                                         Z ∞
                                                                 2

                                   f0 =       N y; ∆µ (f0 ), 2σ∞     dy .                                 (9)
                                             0
      We can then compute PW (f0 ) as
                                         PW (f0 ) = PW (∆µ (f0 )) .                     (10)

 III. We show that PW O(c) asymptotically converges to a Gaussian distribution, with 0 mean
                                             2
      and a finite deterministic variance, σ̂∞  , i.e.:
                                         D         E
                                               (c)       N1 →∞         2
                                    PW      O           −−− −−→ N 0, σ̂∞   .            (11)
       So, from equation 11 and the definition of ∆µ , the r.h.s. of equation 10 becomes
                                                                              2

                           PW (f0 ) = PW (∆µ (f0 )) = N ∆µ (f0 ); 0, 2σ̂∞         .                      (12)
In our analysis we consider three different setups to highlight the different behaviours. Fig. 5 shows
PW (f0 ) (both empirical histogram and theoretical curves) for the following cases:
        • Linear: the distribution asymptotically converges to a delta distribution peaked on f0 =
          1/2.4 The theoretical curve shown in the plot takes into account the finite dataset size
          effects5 (since in real simulation D < ∞) as discussed in App. C.
        • ReLU: the distribution, in this case, does not concentrate at f0 = 1/2 and stays asymptoti-
          cally wide (we detail this in App. C, Fig. 6), so f0 will, with high probability (w.h.p.), be
          away from 1/2. The mode of the distribution remains, as for the linear case, at f0 = 1/2.
          Yet, in this case, the fluctuations from the peak are not due to finite size effects and keep
          finite in the limit of infinite data points.
        • ReLU + MaxPool: With respect to the previous case we add a pooling layer defined as
                                            n           o              n               o
                           (1;m)                   (1)                             (1)
                          ρl      = ρ(m)      g hj        m
                                                              := max m
                                                                         max(0, gj ) ,              (13)
                                                          j∈Sl       j∈Sl
          where Slm indicate the l subgroup of m nodes.
          As in the case of the ReLU, we have a wide distribution that does not concentrate in the
          limit of infinite data. The difference with the previous case is that now the distribution is
          peaked at the extremes (we will elaborate more on this in Sec. 4.2); in this case, it is very
          likely that the untrained network will classify most of the dataset as belonging to one of the
          two classes.
Note how, for the output layer, permutation symmetry corresponds to symmetry between classes.
The latter is always
            R
                      preserved
                              at the   ensemble level, in fact in all three cases f0 (W ) = 1/2, where
f0 (W ) ≡ P W = W̃ f0 W̃ dW̃ indicate the average of f0 (W ) over the ensemble of weight
initializations. However, while in the linear case, the symmetry between classes is also conserved
on the single element of the ensemble,6 in the other two cases the single realization diverges, w.h.p.
from the mean over the ensemble. PSB thus results in a break in symmetry between classes and a
consequent self-averaging breakdown for the observable f0 . We stress how this difference between
the two estimates is not due to finite size effects of the network; our predictions (theoretical curves in
Fig. 5) are, instead, asymptotically exact in this limit.
   4
    By asymptotically, we mean in the D → ∞ limit.
   5
    To take finite-dataset-size effects into account, we substitute the population data distribution, with the
empirical one, defined over the finite set of D points.
  6
    In the linear case, we have limD→∞ f0 (W ) = f0 (W ) = 1/2.


                                                      7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                    IGB (L = 1)
                                                                                   Theor. Linear                  Linear
                                                                               3
                                                                          10       Theor. ReLU                    ReLU
Which activations cause IGB and which do                                           Theor. ReLU + MaxPool
                                                                                           ReLU + MaxPool
not Our results can be extended to a generic               102


                                                                PW (f0)
activation function. In particular, we can clarify
(App. G) what is the fundamental attribute of              101
                       (1)
the activated nodes gi that triggers PSB (and              100
consequently IGB), ∀i ∈ [0, N1 ] :
       D              E                                   10−1
                 (1)
    if ρ(m) gi          = 0 ⇒ no IGB          (14)             0.0    0.2    0.4    0.6    0.8       1.0
       D              E                                                          f0
                 (1)
    if ρ(m) gi          ̸= 0 ⇒ IGB                  Figure 5: PW (f0 ) in a single-hidden-layer percep-
                                                    tron, for different choices of activation functions
Thus, the results we obtained on IGB apply to and with/without max pooling.
any kind of activation function: activations with-
out IGB align with the description for linear activations, while those with IGB qualitatively resemble
ReLU. We emphasize that Condition equation 14 relies on data averages ⟨. . .⟩, which means IGB
can be controlled by data standardization. Although our analysis centers on data around 0, other
standardization methods (e.g., inputs in [0,1]) will induce IGB.
As a general guideline, antisymmetric activations exhibit no IGB when the data is centered around
zero inputs. Condition equation 14 also suggests that activations can be redefined to gain or lose their
IGB property. For instance, in App. G.3, we demonstrate that shifting ReLU functions appropriately
can eliminate IGB.
4.2 E XTENSION TO M ULTI - LAYER CASE & A MPLIFICATION OF IGB

IGB arises when the distribution Pχ O(c) | W is not the same for all classes (recall Fig. 4). In Sec. 4

we saw how Pχ O(c) | W asymptotically tends to a Gaussian, whose variance is concentrated around
a deterministic value, while the mean value is a r.v.. Therefore, to characterize
                                                                                  the level of discrepancy
in the distributions, we can compare the fluctuations of PW O(c) with the asymptotic value of the

variance of Pχ O(c) | W . To set up this comparison, in our analysis, we will consider the variances

Varχ O(c) and VarW O(c) as a measure of the fluctuations for the two distributions. We will
now show that this phenomenon can be amplified, consequently causing an amplification of IGB.
In particular, building on the picture presented in Sec. 3 we will discuss how, in certain regimes,
we have a shift toward the scenario depicted in the right    plot of Fig.  4. To do so it is sufficient to

show that the gap between the variance of Pχ O(c) | W , Varχ O(c) , and the one of PW O(c) ,

VarW O(c) , increases. In particular, we want to show that the latter becomes much greater than
the former. Note, in fact, that
                      VarW (⟨O (c) ⟩)
                       Varχ (O (c) )
                                       = ∞ =⇒ PW (f0 = x) = 21 δ (x) + 21 δ (x − 1)                   (15)

which means that in each experiment the dataset is completely classified either as belonging to the
class 0 or to the class 1.
We will specifically discuss how this happens in a single hidden layer network, through the introduc-
tion of Max-Pooling (see Fig. 5). We will also show how the depth of the network itself has a similar
effect to max-pooling in amplifying the discrepancy (see Fig. 7).

 IGB amplification with Max-Pooling Max-Pooling layer changes node distribution; particularly,
larger kernel size m increases the mean-to-standard deviation ratio. By employing activation functions
such that                 D       E D                    E D           E
                            (1;m)                  (1)
                           ρi       ≡ ρ(m) g hi             = ρ(1;m) ̸= 0,                        (16)
we get
                                     D          E                          D        E2
                                                     N →∞
                               PW        O(c)          1
                                                     −−− −−→ N           2
                                                                     0, σw   ρ(1;m)      .                                 (17)
(details in App. C.2). In the second equality of equation 16 we used the fact that, for every activation
                                      (1)
function employed, the variables {hi } are identically distributed.7 Further
                                                   D      E
                                       N1 →∞
                     Pχ O(c) | W −−−      −−→ N      O(c) , Varχ ρ(1;m) σw    2
                                                                                 .                  (18)
   7
       We do not have PSB in the first hidden layer, irrespective of the employed activation function.


                                                            8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(details in App. C.3). In App. E) we prove that
                                           2
                               ⟨ρ(1;m) ⟩          VarW (⟨O (c) ⟩) m→∞
                           lim               = ∞ ⇒ Var O(c) −−−−→ ∞ .                                      (19)
                          m→∞ Varχ (ρ(1;m) )          χ(      )

 IGB amplification with depth The analysis of Sec. 4.1 can be extended to deep architectures
(App. F.1). Let us consider a MLP with ReLU activation function (no max-pooling). From the
second hidden layer on we have PSB;8 nodes belonging to the same layer are not anymore identically
distributed. By increasing the depth of the neural network we obtain, similarly to the previous case,
an amplification of distributions discrepancy that leads PW (f0 ) to concentrate on the two extremes
of the support (details in App. F.2), i.e.
                                          VarW (⟨O (c) ⟩) L→∞
                                           Varχ (O (c) )
                                                               −−−−→ ∞ .                                   (20)

Difference between max-pooling and depth Max-pooling and network depth both induce IGB
amplification [equation 19 and equation 15]. However, a fundamental aspect differentiates the two
cases; while the max-pooling layer can cause the emergence of IGB (as well as amplify it), depth
can only amplify it. Indeed, from equation 16 we see that the condition for the emergence of IGB
depends jointly effect of the activation function
                                                    and the pooling layer. For a (deep) network without
                                     (m=1)     (1)       (1)
Pooling layers, however, we have ρ            gi     = gi ;9 therefore, the condition for the emergence
of IGB [equation 16] remains constrained to the only choice of activation function.

5    D ISCUSSION
We examined the classification bias in untrained neural networks, uncovering a phenomenon named
IGB that arises from architectural choices that break permutation symmetry among hidden and output
nodes within the same layer. IGB conditions are related to activation and pooling choices. Factors
such as max-pooling or network depth can exacerbate IGB to the extent that all dataset elements are
assigned to a single class.
This phenomenon can be summarized in a node-symmetric phase, where node-permutation symmetry
is contingent on the activation functions and type of pooling being used. Interestingly, while depth
does not break this symmetry, it amplifies IGB when present.
Our study of IGB also sheds light on the properties of different initialization and mean-field schemes.
In fact, a key factor √ for IGB is that the weights in each layer l are distributed with a standard
deviation of order 1/ Nl . This is the scaling that one has in most initializations schemes, in some
mean-field (Schoenholz et al., 2016; Poole et al., 2016) and neural tangent kernel limits (Jacot et al.,
2018). This kind of initialization has beneficial properties in terms of e.g. vanishing/exploding
gradients (Arpit et al., 2019). If however we use initial conditions of order 1/Nl (as is done in other
mean-field limits (Mei et al., 2018)), we do not have IGB. It is not clear whether IGB helps or hinders
the initial learning (this could even be problem-dependent, e.g. with or without class imbalance, or
in the presence of subclasses); nevertheless, its presence does create qualitative differences in the
dynamics, making it a relevant phenomenon (see App. I.3).
In addition to the settings analyzed in our theoretical work, we demonstrated IGB’s generality across
a wider range of settings (App.I). While our analysis is based on random i.i.d. data, we anticipate
IGB’s presence in real datasets due to correlated data patches, increasing the likelihood of similar
classifications. Hence, we expect stronger IGB in datasets other than random data (as shown in
App.I.1 with experiments on real data).
Our experimental results in App. I.3 demonstrate that IGB significantly alters the training dynamics
when using gradient-based methods. Due to its data and architecture-dependent nature, IGB remains
a complex phenomenon that requires further investigation to fully understand its implications. IGB
could be exploited to achieve better model training, e.g. with imbalanced datasets, where increasing
the size of the gradients of the minority classes can significantly improve the initial phases of
learning (Francazi et al., 2022). Furthermore, many works set the dynamics in the small learning rate
regime (Francazi et al., 2022; Sarao Mannelli et al., 2020; Tarmoun et al., 2021); also in this context,
the presence of IGB could turn out to be relevant since the dynamics are more bound to the initial
state.
   8
     With one hidden layer the nodes in the hidden layer are identically distributed and we only have PSB in the
output layer.
   9
     The absence of a pooling layer is formally equivalent to a pooling layer with kernel size, m = 1.


                                                           9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, and Zhao Song. A convergence theory for deep learning via over-
  parameterization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 242–252. PMLR, 2019.
Devansh Arpit, Víctor Campos, and Yoshua Bengio. How to initialize your network? robust initializa-
  tion for weightnorm &amp; resnets. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc,
  E. Fox, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Cur-
  ran Associates, Inc., 2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
  paper/2019/file/e520f70ac3930490458892665cda6620-Paper.pdf.
Lenaic Chizat, Edouard Oyallon, and Francis Bach. On lazy training in differentiable programming.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Donald A Darling. Bv gnedenko and an kolmogorov, limit distributions for sums of independent
  random variables. 1956.
Li Deng. The MNIST database of handwritten digit images for machine learning research. IEEE
  Signal Processing Magazine, 29(6):141–142, 2012.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An
  image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.
Viktor Dotsenko. An introduction to the theory of spin glasses and neural networks, volume 55.
  World Scientific, 1994.
Simon Du, Jason Lee, Haochuan Li, Liwei Wang, and Xiyu Zhai. Gradient descent finds global
  minima of deep neural networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1675–1685.
  PMLR, 2019.
Simon S Du, Xiyu Zhai, Barnabas Poczos, and Aarti Singh. Gradient descent provably optimizes
  over-parameterized neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.02054, 2018.
Shiv Ram Dubey, Satish Kumar Singh, and Bidyut Baran Chaudhuri. Activation functions in deep
  learning: A comprehensive survey and benchmark. Neurocomputing, 2022.
Emanuele Francazi, Marco Baity-Jesi, and Aurelien Lucchi. A theoretical analysis of the learning
 dynamics under class imbalance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.00391, 2022.
Xavier Glorot and Yoshua Bengio. Understanding the difficulty of training deep feedforward neural
  networks. In Proceedings of the thirteenth international conference on artificial intelligence and
  statistics, pp. 249–256. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2010.
Boris Vladimirovich Gnedenko, Andreı̆ Nikolaevich Kolmogorov, Joseph L Doob, and Pao-Lu Hsu.
  Limit distributions for sums of independent random variables, volume 233. Addison-wesley
  Reading, MA, 1968.
Richard HR Hahnloser, Rahul Sarpeshkar, Misha A Mahowald, Rodney J Douglas, and H Sebastian
  Seung. Digital selection and analogue amplification coexist in a cortex-inspired silicon circuit.
  nature, 405(6789):947–951, 2000.
Boris Hanin and David Rolnick. How to start training: The effect of initialization and architecture.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Delving deep into rectifiers: Surpassing
  human-level performance on imagenet classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE international
  conference on computer vision, pp. 1026–1034, 2015.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 770–778, 2016.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Matthew Hutson. Who should stop unethical AI. The New Yorker, 2021.
Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by
  reducing internal covariate shift. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 448–456.
  pmlr, 2015.
Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clément Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and
  generalization in neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Kukjin Kang, Jong-Hoon Oh, Chulan Kwon, and Youngah Park. Generalization in a two-layer neural
  network. Physical Review E, 48(6):4805, 1993.
Joseph B Keller and Rachel Kuske. Rate of convergence to a stable law. SIAM Journal on Applied
  Mathematics, 61(4):1308–1323, 2001.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images, 2009.
  URL https://www.cs.toronto.edu/~kriz/cifar.html.
Henry Lam, Jose Blanchet, Damian Burch, and Martin Z Bazant. Corrections to the central limit
  theorem for heavy-tailed probability densities. Journal of Theoretical Probability, 24:895–927,
  2011.
Alexander G de G Matthews, Mark Rowland, Jiri Hron, Richard E Turner, and Zoubin Ghahramani.
  Gaussian process behaviour in wide deep neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.11271, 2018.
Song Mei, Andrea Montanari, and Phan-Minh Nguyen. A mean field view of the landscape of two-
  layer neural networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(33):E7665–E7671,
  2018.
Marc Mézard, Giorgio Parisi, and Miguel Angel Virasoro. Spin glass theory and beyond: An
 Introduction to the Replica Method and Its Applications, volume 9. World Scientific Publishing
 Company, 1987.
Roman Novak, Lechao Xiao, Jaehoon Lee, Yasaman Bahri, Greg Yang, Jiri Hron, Daniel A Abolafia,
  Jeffrey Pennington, and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein. Bayesian deep convolutional networks with many
  channels are gaussian processes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.05148, 2018.
Elisa Oostwal, Michiel Straat, and Michael Biehl. Hidden unit specialization in layered neural
  networks: Relu vs. sigmoidal activation. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications,
  564:125517, 2021.
Wolfgang Paul and Jörg Baschnagel. Stochastic processes. From Physics to Finance, Springer, Berlin,
 1999.
Jeffrey Pennington, Samuel Schoenholz, and Surya Ganguli. Resurrecting the sigmoid in deep
  learning through dynamical isometry: theory and practice. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 30, 2017.
Valentin V Petrov. Sums of independent random variables, volume 82. Springer Science & Business
  Media, 2012.
Ben Poole, Subhaneil Lahiri, Maithra Raghu, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, and Surya Ganguli. Exponential
  expressivity in deep neural networks through transient chaos. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 29, 2016.
Ali S. Qadeer and Edward Millar.   Keeping you on track. Science for the Peo-
  ple, 24(2):19–23, 2021. URL https://magazine.scienceforthepeople.org/
  vol24-2-dont-be-evil/keeping-you-on-track/.
Stefano Sarao Mannelli, Giulio Biroli, Chiara Cammarota, Florent Krzakala, Pierfrancesco Urbani,
  and Lenka Zdeborová. Complex dynamics in simple neural networks: Understanding gradient
  flow in phase retrieval. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3265–3274, 2020.
Andrew M Saxe, James L McClelland, and Surya Ganguli. Exact solutions to the nonlinear dynamics
  of learning in deep linear neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6120, 2013.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Grégory Schehr and Satya N Majumdar. Exact record and order statistics of random walks via
  first-passage ideas. In First-passage phenomena and their applications, pp. 226–251. World
  Scientific, 2014.
Samuel S Schoenholz, Justin Gilmer, Surya Ganguli, and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein. Deep information
  propagation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.01232, 2016.
Haim Sompolinsky, Andrea Crisanti, and Hans-Jurgen Sommers. Chaos in random neural networks.
  Physical review letters, 61(3):259, 1988.
Salma Tarmoun, Guilherme Franca, Benjamin D Haeffele, and Rene Vidal. Understanding the
  dynamics of gradient flow in overparameterized linear models. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 10153–10161. PMLR, 2021.
Vladimir V Uchaikin and Vladimir M Zolotarev. Chance and stability: stable distributions and their
  applications. Walter de Gruyter, 2011.
Han-Jia Ye, De-Chuan Zhan, and Wei-Lun Chao. Procrustean training for imbalanced deep learning.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 92–102, 2021.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Appendix
Organization of the Appendix We first provide a summary of the notations in App. A. We then
provide derivations on: the validity of Central Limit Theorems in our calculations (App. B); the
output distributions at fixed weights, with an emphasis on ReLU and max-pooling (App. C); the
fraction of initial guesses for each class in a 1-layer perceptron (App. D); an explicit analysis on
how max-pooling intensifies IGB (App. E); the effect of depth (App. F); necessary and sufficient
conditions for activations to give rise to IGB (App. G); multiple classes (App. H). Finally, App. I
contains some experiments showing IGB on real datasets, and additional architectures. App. J
describes the limitations and ethics of this work.


A    N OTATION
              −1
      • {·}M
           i=0 : set of M elements. If some of the indices of the variables are fixed (i.e. equal for
        every element of the set), the set indices (indices that vary across different elements of the
        set) are reported explicitly on the right. If the index of the set elements is not explicitly
        reported, it means the absence of fixed indices for the set variables (i.e. all indices are set
        indices).
      • E (x): Indicate the expectation value of the argument, x. If the average involves only one
        source of randomness this is explicitly indicated, e.g. Eχ (x) indicates an average over
        the dataset distribution, while EW (x) an average over the distribution of network weights.
        For the sake of compactness, we will employ, where necessary the shorthand notation
        ⟨x⟩ ≡ Eχ (x) and x ≡ EW (x).
      • erf (·): Error function.
          (M )
      • fc : fraction of dataset elements classified as belonging to class c. The argument M
        indicates the total number of output nodes for the variable definition, i.e. the number of
        classes considered. For binary problems we omit this argument (f0 ) as there is only one
        non-trivial possibility, i.e. M = 2 .
                      n       oM −1                               n       oM −1
          (M )           (M )                                        (M )
      • fc̃ : the set fc              contain the same elements of fc̃          , but these are ranked
                               c=0                                            c=0
                                     (M )                                                (M )
         by magnitude, such that f0̃        is the greatest output value between the M f1̃      the second
         one and so on.

                                                       (l)          (l)
      • g (l) : vector of the lth hidden layer nodes, g0 , . . . , gNl −1 , after passing through the
                              (l)
        activation function; gi indicate the component corresponding to node i.

                                                      (l)          (l)
      • h(l) : vector of the lth hidden layer nodes, h0 , . . . , hNl −1 , before passing through the
                              (l)
         activation function; hi indicate the component corresponding to node i.
      • NC ≡ NL+1 : number of output nodes, i.e. the number of classes.
      • Nl : number of nodes in the l-layer; N0 ≡ d indicates the dimension of the input data
        (number of input layer nodes) while NL+1 the number of classes (number of output layer
        nodes).

      • N µ, σ 2 : Given a Gaussian r.v., X, with  mean µ and variance σ 2 , N µ, σ 2 indicate the
        distribution of X, i.e. P (X) = N µ, σ 2 .

      • N x; µ, σ 2 : Given a Gaussian r.v. X, we indicate with N x; µ, σ 2 the probability
                                                                        − 1 2 (x−µ)2
        density computed at X = x, i.e. N x; µ, σ 2 ≡ P (X = x) = e 2σ     √
                                                                             2πσ 2
           (c)
      • OM : output layer node; c is the node index; the index M, instead, indicate the total number
        of nodes considered. For binary problems we omit the subscript index to keep the notation
        lighter, i.e. O(c) .


                                                    13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                      n      oM −1                             n      oM −1
           (0̃)         (c̃)                                     (c̃)
        • OM : the set OM          contain the same elements of OM          , but these are ranked
                                   c=0                                        c̃=0
                                            (0̃)                                           (1̃)
          by magnitude, such that OM is the greatest output value between the M , OM the second
          one, and so on.
        • P (·): depending on the argument this notation may indicate:
            – p.d.f. associated to a given r.v. X, P (X) = P (X = x)
                                                      Rx
            – a probability mass, e.g. P (X < x) = −∞ P (X = x′ ) dx′
          we use the notation P (A | B) to indicate the probability of the event A conditioned to event
          B.
          Finally, for variables with multiple sources of randomness,if some of them are either fixed or
          marginalized, we will report the remaining ones (the ones that actually induce randomness)
          as subscript. E.g. PW (f0 ) indicate the p.d.f. of f0 (W ), which, fixed the dataset (or its
          distribution), is a function of the random set W .
        • Var (·): Indicate the variance of the argument. Since we have r.v.s with multiple sources of
          noise where necessary we will specify in the subscript the source of noise used to compute
                                                               2
          the expectation. For example Varχ (·) ≡ ⟨· − ⟨·⟩⟩ . For the sake of compactness, we will
          employ sometimes the shorthand notation Varχ (·) = σ·2 .
                                                                             (l)
        • W : shorthand notation for the set of network weights, {wij }. We use, instead the
          notation W l ⊆ W to indicate the subset of weights relative to a specific layer, i.e.
                   (l)
          W l ≡ {wij } j∈[0,...,Nl ] . W <l , W >l , . . . are defined analogously.
                          i∈[0,...,Nl+1 ]
             (l)
        •   wij : element ij of the matrix W (l) , connecting two consecutive layers (l ∈ [0, . . . , L]).
                                 (l)
            Given the matrix W we use a ‘placeholder’ index, ·, to return column and row vectors
                                                     (l)
            from the weight matrices. In particular wj· denotes row j of the weight matrix W (l) ;
                        (l)
            similarly, w·j denotes column j.

                                                       (l;m)        (l;m)
        • ρ(l;m) : vector of the lth hidden layer,    ρ0 , . . . , ρ Nl −1 , after passing through the
                                                                   ⌈∗⌉   m
                                                     (l;m)
          max-pooling layer with kernel size m; ρi      indicate the component corresponding to node
          i.
        • χ = (ξ (a) , ya )D
                           a=1 : dataset composed by D pairs of input vectors-labels.
        • ξ (a) ∈ Rd : ath input vector; when the index a is omitted we mean a generic vector, ξ, drawn
          from the population distribution.
        • Θ (x): Heaviside step function.
        • δ (x): Dirac delta function.

B     L IMIT DISTRIBUTIONS
Here we discuss results relative to asymptotic distribution convergence.

B.1     D ISTRIBUTION CONVERGENCE

We start discussing the convergence of the distribution of r.v.s combination to an asymptotic form; we
will see under which condition this convergence is guaranteed and how to characterize the asymptotic
distribution. In particular we will start from the Central Limit Theorem, discussing after its extensions.

B.1.1       C ENTRAL L IMIT T HEOREM
In the analysis we present we will make extensive use of the Central Limit Theorem (CLT). We
present below an essential discussion of the theorem (without proof). For further details on the topic
see, for example, (Gnedenko et al., 1968; Uchaikin & Zolotarev, 2011; Paul & Baschnagel, 1999).
Given a sequence of i.i.d. r.v.s x1 , x2 , x3 , . . . drawn from a population with overall mean µ < ∞


                                                     14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and finite variance σ 2 < ∞,10 called x̄n  the sample
                                                        mean of the first n samples, then the limiting
                                           x̄n −µ
form of the distribution, Z = limn→∞ σx̄            with σx̄n ≡ √σn is a standard normal distribution,
                                                   n
i.e. N (0, 1). For 1 ≪ n < ∞ this represent
                                            the leading term of an expansion; the correction to the
asymptotic Gaussian profile are o        √1    (see for example Keller & Kuske (2001)).
                                           n


B.1.2          CLT EXTENTION

The assumption of identically distributed variables can be relaxed; it is possible to formulate an
extension of the CLT for combination of (not necessarily identically distributed) r.v.s. In particular, we
can use, in this case, several conditions that guarantee the validity of the CLT, such as the Lyapunov
condition or the Lindeberg condition.
Given a sequence of independent r.v.s x1 , x2 , x3 , . . . , with µi = E (xi ), the Lindeberg condition can
be formalized as:
                                  Xn      Z
                                        1
                             lim        2
                                                    (x − µi )2 dFXi (x) = 0 ,                          (21)
                            n→∞
                                  i=1
                                       sn   |x|≥ϵsn

             Pn
where s2n = i=1 E (xi − µi )2 and FXi (x) is the c.d.f. of xi .

 Theorem B.1 (Lindeberg theorem). For a set of independent r.v.s {Xi }ni=1 , if Lindeberg’s
 condition holds for all positive ϵ, then
                                          P
                                   Sn − i µi n→∞
                                             −−−−→ N (0, 1),                           (22)
                                        sn
  where Sn = X1 + · · · + Xn .

For our analysis we will employ an alternative set of necessary and sufficient conditions to guarantees
the asymptotic convergence to a normal distribution (for more details see for example Petrov (2012)).
We will first introduce, with Thm.B.2, a set of necessary and sufficient conditions that guarantee the
convergence for the sum of r.v.s to a Gaussian distribution.
Then in Thm. B.3 we will provide a set of sufficient conditions (easy to verify for our interest cases).
We will show the sufficiency of these conditions by proving that a set of r.v.s which satisfy them,
satisfy also the conditions of Thm.B.2.

 Theorem B.2 (Distribution convergence). Let us consider a set of independent zero-mean r.v.s
 {Xi }ni=1 . If and only if, for every fixed ϵ > 0, the following conditions are satisfied:

         Concentration:
         Xn
                           n→∞
            P (|Xi | ≥ ϵ) −−−−→ 0        ∀ϵ ∈ R+ ,                                                   (23)
         i=1
         Mean Normalization:
                                 !
         X Z                       n→∞
                   xP (Xi = x) dx −−−−→ 0 ,                                                          (24)
           i      |x|<ϵ

         Variance Normalization:
                                                                              !2 
               X Z                                     Z
                                                                                   n→∞
         s2n =           x2 P (Xi = x) dx −                   xP (Xi = x) dx     −
                                                                                   −−−→ σ 2 ,        (25)
                  i       |x|<ϵ                        |x|<ϵ

                                   P
  the distributions of the sum       i Xi will converge to N      0, σ 2 .


  10
       This condition can be relaxed by using a generalized CLT (Darling, 1956; Lam et al., 2011).


                                                       15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For the proof of Thm.B.2 see Chapter 4 of Petrov (2012).



 Theorem B.3 (Sufficient condition for Thm. B.2). Let us consider a set {Xi }ni=1 of independent,
 zero-mean,a r.v.s satisfying, for some constants σ̃ 2 ∈ R+ , the following conditions
                                            Variance convergence:
                                            Xn
                                                                2   n→∞
                                                E Xi2 − E (Xi ) −−−−→ nσ̃ 2 ,                                       (26)
                                            i=1
                                            Fast decreasing tails:

                                                                               1
                                              lim P (Xi = x) = O                        , ∀i .                      (27)
                                            x→±∞                               x4
 Let us define the new set {X̃i }ni=1 such that
                                                                  Xi
                                                            X̃i ≡ √ ,                                               (28)
                                                                 c n
 where c > 0 is a constant. We now proof that the set {X̃i }ni=1 satisfy equation 23, equation 24,
                                                 P
 equation 25 leading to the convergence of S̃n = i X̃i to N 0, σ 2 .
      a
          In general if E (Xi ) ̸= 0 we can define a new set of variables {(Xi − E (Xi ))}.


Proof. We will now prove that, starting from equation 26 and equation 27, the conditions of Thm. B.2
holds.
We start showing the Concentration condition [equation 23]

n
X               Xn  Z −ϵ                  Z ∞
  P |X̃i | ≥ ϵ =         P X̃i = x̃ dx̃ +    P X̃i = x̃ dx̃ =
i=1                               i=1       −∞                         ϵ
 n        Z −c√nϵ                                 Z ∞                      !
X                                                                              n≫1
                         P (Xi = x) dx +           √
                                                         P (Xi = x) dx          =
i=1           −∞                                  c nϵ

Xn        Z −c√nϵ         Z ∞       ! X   n    Z −c√nϵ      !     Z ∞           !
               1                 1                     1                 1
           O         dx + √ O       dx =     O            dx + O    √
                                                                            dx    =
i=1   −∞       x4          c nϵ  x4      i=1    −∞     x4          c nϵ x
                                                                          4

Xn
        1         1     n→∞
    O    3 = O     1   −−−−→ 0.
i=1
       n 2       n 2

                                                                    (29)

In the third line we used the Fast decreasing tails condition [equation 27].
Now we show the validity of mean normalization condition [equation 24]:


  Z                                         !                                            Z −c√nϵ               !         Z ∞               !
n
X                                                      n
                                                       X               n
                                                                       X                            1  1                        1   1
                                                 n≫1
                       x̃P X̃i = x̃ dx̃           =         E X̃i −             O                   √     dx       +O       √
                                                                                                                                √       dx   =
 i            |x̃|<ϵ                                    i   | {z }         i              −∞       c n x3                  c nϵ c n x
                                                                                                                                      3

                                                             =0

               1        n→∞
=O              1       −−−−→ 0 .
              n2
                                                                                                                         (30)


                                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Finally, for the Variance normalization condition [equation 25], we can now replace equation 30 into
the definition of the variance. This gives
                                                                  !2 
      X Z                                  Z
                                                                         n≫1
                   x̃2 P X̃i = x̃ dx̃ −          x̃P X̃i = x̃ dx̃  =                          (31)
        i      |x̃|<ϵ                                      |x̃|<ϵ

               n                   Z −c√nϵ               !      Z ∞                !
      σ̃ 2     X                                1 1                     1 1               1
           −           O                               dx  + O    √
                                                                               dx    + O     =         (32)
      c2       i                    −∞         c2 n x2           c nϵ c 2 n x2            n

      σ̃ 2             1           n→∞     σ̃ 2
           +O              1       −−−−→        .                                                      (33)
      c2               n   2               c2


B.2     C ONCENTRATION OF R . V. S DISTRIBUTION

If we consider a set of n r.v.s whose fluctuations (namely their variance) scale with n we can have
concentration phenomena for the distribution of their sum. In App. B.2.1 we consider some examples,
relevant for our study, to show the point and the different scenarios induced by difference in the
scaling; we will see one case where the distribution stays asymptotically stable and another where it
concentrates (i.e. the distribution narrows around a single value).
In App. B.2.2 we will then move
                                from the sum of r.v.s to the combination of r.v.s. In particular we will
                                 (l+1)                                         (l+1)
analyze the distribution Pχ hi         | W (fixed W , we can indeed express hi        as a combination
                                         n       oNl+1
                                           (l+1)
of r.v.s). We will show how the nodes hi               may not be identically distributed, for l ≥ 1.
                                                                i=1

B.2.1       R ESCALED G AUSSIAN VARIABLES
                                                                           2

Let us consider a set of independent r.v.s {Xi }ni=1 such that Xi ∼ N 0, σn , ∀i, with σ 2 not
scaling with n, i.e. σ 2 = O(1). We are interested in analyze the distribution of sum of r.v.s, in
particular to understand if it shows asymptotic concentration phenomena. Let us start defining
  (n)   Pn                                                      (n)
Sx = i=1 Xi . To understand if the distribution of the r.v. Sx narrows in the limit of n → ∞,
we can look at the standard deviation as an estimate for the order of magnitude of the fluctuations
from the mean value. From the definition of Xi and the additivity of the variance it follows that
                                    r                        2
                                            (n)        (n)
                           σS (n) = E Sx − E Sx                = O(1).                           (34)
                                           x


In other words the distribution of the sum stys asymptotically stable, meaning that it doesn’t narrow
around the mean value.
                                         (n)    Pn
Let us consider now, instead, the r.v. Sx2 = i=1 Xi2 . Since for a Gaussian variable σx22 = O σx4 ,
in this case, again using the additivity of the variance, we have
                                    r                         2
                                             (n)        (n)            1
                          σS (n) = E Sx2 − E Sx2                =O √        .                     (35)
                             x2                                         n
                                                                                (n)
In this case, we have a concentration phenomenon; the fluctuations of Sx2 go asymptotically to 0,
i.e. the measure of the distribution concentrate around the mean value.

B.2.2       C OMBINATION OF RESCALED G AUSSIAN VARIABLES
To study how does the node distribution change passing from one layer to the next one, we have to
                                (l+1)   P (l) (l)
analyze the distribution of hi        = j wij gj , where the set W is fixed. We have thus a linear
combination of r.v.s. It is easy to show that for this set of r.v.s the hypothesis of Thm. B.3 are satisfied
(see for example B.2.3 ). We will have therefore
                                                                                         
                                           X          D E X                  2
                      (l+1)                       (l)    (l)            (l)           (l)
              Pχ hi          |W =N             wij gj ,              wij      Varχ gj  .              (36)
                                                       j                 j



                                                                    17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                            (l+1)
We are now interested to understand how Pχ hi     | W change over the elements of the set
  (l+1) N  l+1
{hi     }i=1   . To evaluate this, since we have a Gaussian distribution, is sufficient to study how
                                                                 (l+1) Nl+1
much its mean and variance vary over the different nodes   D {hi E }i=1      , i.e. employing different
                                                                        P (l) D (l) E
                    (l) Nl+1                                  (l+1)
set of weights {wi · }i=1 . Let us start from the mean hi            = j wij gj          The problem,
formulated from this perspective is completely reversed, meaning that now, to evaluate the fluctuations
   D        E          nD EoNl                                                              n      oNl
      (l+1)                (l)                                                                 (l)
of hi        , the set    gj          play the role of fixed constants set,11 while the set wij
                                   j=1                                                                  j=1
change with the node index i. Again, it is easy to see that, for this combination of r.v.s, the hypothesis
of Thm. B.3 are satisfied. We will then get
               D        E nD EoNl
                  (l+1)        (l)
       Pw(l)     hi           gj             =
          i·                          j=1
                                                                                              
           X           D E X                        D E2                        Nl D
                                                                                X           E2
                   (l)   (l)                  (l)     (l)                    1          (l)           (37)
       N         wij gj ,          VarW wij          gj        = N 0, σw 2
                                                                                      gj       ,
              j |{z}           j |       {z       }                         Nl j=1
                     =0                        σ2
                                              ≡ Nw
                                                 l

           n     oNl                      D E2
       (l)   (l)                            (l)
where wi· ≡ wij      If now we assume that gj   respect the CLT12 (we will prove it for our
                          j=1
case of interest) we have
                                   N l D     E2                   D E
                                1 X      (l)    N →∞                (l)
                                                                        2
                                        gj      −−l−−→ Ew(l−1)     gj     ,                            (38)
                                Nl j=1                   j·



leading to
                      D       E nD EoNl                           D E
                                          N →∞                          2
                        (l+1)      (l)                 2            (l)
             Pw(l)     hi         gj      −−l−−→ N 0, σw Ew(l−1)   gj     .                            (39)
               i·                              j=1                        j·

                                                             n oNl
                                                               (l)
In App. C we show (see Remark 1.) how the elements in the set gj   are asymptotically
                                                                                  j=1
independent; therefore
                                                  D E   D E
                                                        2        2
                                                    (l)      (l)
                                       Ew(l−1)     gj     = gj     .                                   (40)
                                         j·



B.2.3    A CONCRETE EXAMPLE
We will see now an example where all the elements just introduced are discussed in detail. The
computation presented in this section represent an important piece in the derivation of PW (f0 ) for
deep architectures. In App. F.1 we show that
                                                    D      E
                             (3)        N2 →∞          (3)              (3)
                       Pχ hi | W −−−       −−→ N      hi      , Varχ hi
                                                                              
                               X N2      D     E XN2          2                                 (41)
                                     (2)   (2)           (2)             (2)
                       ≡N          wij gj      ,      wij       Varχ gj  .
                                   j=1                j=1

We want to apply the analysis described in B.2.2 to understand the differences between the set of
              n               oN3
                     (3)
distributions Pχ hi | W             . The differences in the distributions are induced by the difference
                                i=1
                                                                 nD      EoN2       n              oN2
                                              (2)                    (2)                      (2)
in the corresponding set of weight vectors {wi · }N 3
                                                  i=1 . The sets    gj           and Varχ gj            ,
                                                                     j=1                    j=1
                                     (3)                               (3) N3
instead, are the same for each node hi . To study the differences in {hi }i=1 statistics we will
  11
     This is the same set of elements ∀i ∈ [1, . . . , Nl+1 ].
  12
     as we are not studying the convergence to the mean value, also the law of large numbers would be enough
in this case


                                                      18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                              (2)
consider therefore the latter as sets of fixed random coefficients, while {wi · }N 3
                                                                                 i=1 constitute the r.v.s
changing from node to node. With this idea in mind let us start considering the variance expression
                                                XN2         2
                                          (3)          (2)          (2)
                                    Varχ hi    =      wij     Varχ gj     .                                                 (42)
                                                               j=1

                                                   (3)
Again, to characterize how much the r.v. Varχ hi         varies, we can proceed by computing its mean
andnvariance
             to  have
                  o   an  idea of the asymptotic order of magnitude of the fluctuations. Recall that the
             (2)
set Varχ gj         is fixed as we are not evaluating randomness induced by the whole initialized set
                                                                                               (2)
of weights, but only by the differences in the set of vectors {wi · }. So we have
                                   
        XN2          2                  XN2                   2                        N2
                                                                                       X
                (2)           (2)                        (2)             (2)      2 1            (2)
Ew(2)        wij      Varχ gj  =           Ew(2)     wij        Varχ gj      = σw        Varχ gj     .
   i ·
         j=1                            j=1
                                                i ·                                 N2 j=1
                                                                                                                            (43)

The sum in the last member involve a set of fixed random  objects;
                                                                  in particular as we are using the
                                                            (2)
ReLU activation function, the explicit expression for Varχ gj    will be
                             Z ∞                           Z  ∞                      2
                    (2)            2             2
                                                                              2

           Varχ gj        =       x N x; µj , σh dx −            xN x; µj , σh dx              (44)
                                          0                                                    0
                                                                D     E         PN1 (1)
                                                                  (2)
where, to make the notation lighter we defined the r.v. µj ≡ hj         = g (1)             2
                                                                                 i=1 wji , σh =

Varχ g (1) σw
            2
              . We will show now that

                                                        (2)
                                    σh2 = sup Varχ gj         .                             (45)
                                                              µj ∈R


Proof.                Z 0

                                                                                       (2)           (2)
             σh2 =             (x − µj ) N        2
                                                         x; µj , σh2         dx +Varχ gj     > Varχ gj     ,                (46)
                         −∞
                     |                   {z                                    }
                                                  >0
and                  Z 0

                                                                           (2)
              lim             (x − µj )2 N x; µj , σh2 dx = 0 =⇒ lim Varχ gj     = σh2 .                                    (47)
             µj →∞       −∞                                                                   µj →∞


This means that
                    2 Z                     Z               D     E2
              (2)        4                     4          2   (1)
       Varχ gj       <  σh PW (µj = x) dx =   σh N x; 0, σw g          dx < ∞.                                              (48)
                                R                                                  R
                 n            o
                         (2)
Therefore the set Varχ gj       follow the CLT and, in particular, combining with equation 42
and equation 43 we get

                                       (3)     N2 →∞   2        (2)
                        Ew(2) Varχ hi         −−− −−→ σw Varχ gj      ,                  (49)
                                        i ·

with
                                              Z                                                         D      E2
                              (2)                             (2)                                   2      (1)
                 Varχ        gj         =         Varχ       gj         (µj ) N            µj ; 0, σw    g          dµj ,   (50)
                                              R

                      (2)                                                  (2)
where with Varχ gj          (µj ) we underlined the dependence of Varχ gj        from the r.v. µj . Note
that in the integrand of equation 50 there is no scaling dependence with respect to N2 ; this means that

                                 (2)                              (3)
                       Varχ gj         = O(1) =⇒ Ew(2) Varχ hi           = O(1).                     (51)
                                                                             i ·


                                                                        19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To evaluate
             the order of magnitude of the fluctuations, we recall that, given a fixed coefficient
       (2)
Varχ gj ,
                                       2                             2              2
                                (2)              (2)            (2)            (2)
                    Var        wij         Varχ gj      = Varχ gj      Var    wij       .                                        (52)
                                                          2
                                                     (2)
Also, for gaussian variables σx22 = O σx4 so Var    wij       = O N12 . Then from the extensi-
                                                                                                    2

tivity of the variance follows that
                         s                                                        2
                                                                                        1
                               Ew(2)        σ 4 (3)         − Ew(2)      σ 2 (3)    =O √      .                                  (53)
                                     i ·         hi                 i ·   hi             N2

                                                                                                   PN2         (2)
                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                (2)

By this we conclude that, in the N2 → ∞ limit, the distribution of the r.v.                             j=1   wij         Varχ gj

                                   2       (2)
narrows around the mean value σw     Varχ gj .

We can proceed analogously to evaluate  the mean
                                                 value fluctuations; therefore we have to repeat
                                        (3)                             PN2 (2) D (2) E
the same analysis on the mean of Pχ hi | W , i.e. (from equation 41) j=1 wij gj . In this
case, we have
                                            
                            XN2       D     E   N2
                                                X                 D     E
                                  (2)   (2)                  (2)    (2)
                   Ew(2)        wij gj  =         Ew(2) wij      gj     = 0.              (54)
                       i ·                            i ·
                             j=1                j=1 |     {z     }
                                                                                      =0

Proceeding as in equation 52 we get
                          s                                                      2
                                      Ew(2)           µ2 (3)       − Ew(2) µh(3) = O(1) .                                        (55)
                                           i ·         hi              i ·        i


                                                   (3)
This means that the center of the distribution Pχ hi | W keeps fluctuating from node to node
even in the limit N2 → ∞.
More specifically
                                                 2           N2 D
                                                             X        E2
                              2                         2 1       (2)
                      Ew(2) µh(3) − Ew(2) µh(3)      = σw        gj      .                                                       (56)
                        i ·     i     i ·   i             N2 j=1
                     D      E2
                        (2)
Using the fact that gj         is definite positive we can proceed as in equation 46 and equation 47. It
is easy then to show that the sum in the last member of equation 56 converges to a well-defined mean
                                             n        D     EoN2
                                                  (2)   (2)
value. Also, it is easy to show that the set wij gj              respect the conditions of Thm. B.3; this
                                                                                 j=1
means that
                                            D          E                                 D     E2
                                                 (3)           N2 →∞                 2     (2)
                                PW              hi          −−−−−→ N             0, σw    gj        ,                            (57)

while

                                             N2 →∞             (2)
                                 PW σh2 (3) −−−        2
                                                −−→ δ σw Varχ gj      .                                                          (58)
                                                  i


C    D ISTRIBUTIONS DERIVATION

In this section, we will
                        focus on the  r.v. O (c) . In particular, the final aim here is to derive an expres-
sion for PW O     (c)
                        and Pχ O | W , which, as seen in App. D.1, constitute the fundamental
                                  (c)

ingredients to derive PW (f0 ). To do so we will proceed by steps:


                                                                     20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       • In App. C.1 we will derive an expression for O(c) for the various cases of interest.
       • Once derived an expression for O(c) we will use it to derive the asymptotic expression for

         the distribution PW O(c) in App. C.2.

       • Finally in App. C.3 we will derive Pχ O(c) | W .

Remark 1.                                            X
                                           (1)              (0)
                                          hi     =         wij ξj                                  (59)
                                                     j
the independence follows directly from the independence hypothesis of the input components.
Since we use the CLT also for
                                                         N1
                                                         X
                                    O(c) (ξ; W ) =              (1) (1)
                                                               wcm gm .                            (60)
                                                         m=1
                                                     (1)
independence must also be fulfilled by the set {gm }. As the activation function is an element-wise
                            (1)
transformation of the set {hm }, it is sufficient to have independence of the latter. The problem of the
                   (1)      (1)
independence of hi and hj can then be reformulated like this:
Let us consider three independent random vectors X, Y , Z ∈ Rn such that
                                      P (X) = N (0, I)                                             (61)

                                                       1
                                      P (Y ) = N 0, √ I                                            (62)
                                                        n

                                                      1
                                      P (Z) = N 0, √ I .                                           (63)
                                                        n

We fix two vectors Ỹ , Z̃, drawn from equation 62 and equation 63 respectively. We want to prove,
in the limit n → ∞, the independence of the two r.v.s, XZ̃ and XỸ , where we indicated with the
notation AB the scalar product between A and B. This may seem counterintuitive as XZ̃ and XỸ
are both function of the random vector X, while to have independence we have to reduce to the
factorized form

                   P XZ̃ , XỸ | Z̃, Ỹ = P XZ̃ | Z̃, Ỹ P XỸ | Z̃, Ỹ .                     (64)

We will argue now that as n grows, the projections of a random vector over two random directions
are independent. From the linearity of the scalar product it follows that
                                       AB+C = AB + AC .                                            (65)
If we could find a vector W such that, for some a, b ∈ R,
                                           Ỹ = aW + bZ̃                                           (66)
then the factorization in equation 64 would not be possible because of the dependence of Ỹ on Z̃
and vice versa.
On the other hand, for n → ∞, the two vectors Ỹ and Z̃ are, w.h.p., orthogonal; it is therefore not
possible to find a decomposition as equation 66.
The orthogonality follows directly from the CLT; in particular from the defintion of equation 62 and
equation 63 it follows that
                                            n→∞   1
                                      ỸZ̃ −−−−→ √ N (0, 1)                                     (67)
                                                   n
                        n→∞
Therefore, w.h.p., ỸZ̃ −−−−→ 0. Note that, because of the difference in the normalization, XZ̃ (and
XỸ ) stays asymptotically finite. In fact, again from the CLT
                                               n→∞
                                        XZ̃ −−−−→ N (0, 1) .                                       (68)
Let us now focus on our case of interest. To apply the above argument to our case (ξ (i) ∈ Rd plays
the role of X), we need d → ∞. In the above discussion we considered two fixed random vectors


                                                     21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                                     n     oN1
                                                                                       (0)
(Z̃ and Ỹ ), but for our analysis we will have, instead, N1 → ∞ fixed random vectors wj·      ,
                                                                                                      i=1
       (0)
with wj· ∈ Rd . When we pass from two to an infinite number of fixed random vector we have to be
more careful; the number of vectors, N1 , cannot grow too fast with respect to the dimension of the
vector space, d. We know, in fact, that in a vector space of dimension d it is not possible to identify
a set of linear independent vectors with cardinality greater than d. A necessary condition for the
   n       oN1
       (l)
set wj·         to be mutually orthogonal is, therefore, N1 < d. When we take the limits we should
            i=1
therefore enforce this condition, namely
                                                                N1
                                               lim         ,       < 1.                               (69)
                                             d,N1 →∞            d
                                                                                                      (1)
Finally note that, if we work with a deep architecture (see App. F), once we end up with a set {hm }
of linear independent r.v.s, we can repeat the same argument to iterate to the next layer. In our analysis,
we will send the number of nodes of each hidden layer to infinity (to get asymptotic converge of
distributions). Analogously to as we discussed above, calling Nl the number of nodes in the lth layer,
we will have (in a neural network with L hidden layers) the following constraints on the asymptotic
growth of the numbers of nodes:
                                                               Nl+1
                                            lim        ,            < 1, ∀l.                          (70)
                                         {Nl }L
                                              l=1 →∞
                                                                Nl

C.1     O(c)

As discussed in Sec. 1, our system is characterized by two different sources of noise. In each single
experiment we set the configuration of the network with the initialization and we keep it fixed to
evaluate the initial guessing distribution. The randomness coming from the set of weight is therefore
fixed, while the output nodes values, {O(c) }, still fluctuate varying the input ξ (i) . O(c) , computed
on a given experiment, will be therefore a r.v. varying with the weights initialization. Here we will
derive the expression for the r.v. O(c) for different choices of the activation function. In App. C.2

we will employ the expressions derived here to get the distribution PW O(c) . In the following
computation we will consider a single hidden layer perceptron. These result will also constitute the
starting point to formulate the case of deep architectures (see, for example, Sec. F.1). We will employ
the same setting discussed at the beginning of Sec. 4.
                      (1)
Fixing the set W , hi is a linear combination of r.v.s which respect the conditions of Thm. B.3. This
means that in the limit d → ∞
                                                                                               
                                   X               X           2                 X              2
           (1)          d→∞              (0)              (0)                              (0)
     Pχ hi | W −−−→ N                 wij ⟨ξj ⟩ ,       wij     σξ2j  = N 0,           wij      (71)
                                     j                     j                         j

where in the last step we used the definition of ξ, for the random data used in our analysis, to substitue
⟨ξj ⟩ = 0, σξ2j = 1 ∀j. As shown in B.2.1
             d
             X             2                2
                    (0)        d→∞     (0)       2        (1)    d→∞       2

                   wij         −−−→ d wij     = σw =⇒ Pχ hi | W −−−→ N 0, σw                          (72)
             j=1


                                                           (1)      (1)                      (1)
       • Linear Let us consider the activation function g hi     = hi . The distribution of gi ≡
                                                      Pd
             (1)                                 (1)         (0)
         g hi      therefore will match that of hi ≡ j=1 wij ξj , i.e.

                                               (1)    d→∞       2
                                           Pχ gi | W −−−→ N 0, σw                                     (73)

         By definition
                                                                    N1
                                                                    X
                                             O(c) (ξ; W ) =                (1) (1)
                                                                          wcm gm .                    (74)
                                                                   m=1


                                                           22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            We are interested in the expression of the mean value computed over the dataset elements,
            for a given set of fixed weights. In other words W is a set of random coefficients. We have
            that
                     D       E Z X   N1         Y   (1)
                         (c)              (1)
                       O      =         wcj xj      Pχ hk = xk | W dxk =
                                            R j=1               k
                         X                  Z +∞                       Y Z +∞                                                     (75)
                                   (1)                         2
                                                                                           2

                     =        wcj                xj N xj ; 0, σw   dxj          N xk ; 0, σw   dxk = 0
                                              −∞                             −∞
                          j                 |         {z             }|k̸ =j
                                                                                 {z              }
                                                          =0
                                                                                                        =1

                                                                                                         (1)
            We have used the fact that the set W is independent from hj                                        at initialization and we
                                                                       (1)
            assumed the validity of the CLT for the set of variables {hj }. This assumption is formally
            true in simplified settings (e.g. if the components of the input data are independent r.v.s with
            finite variance). For real input the assumption should be evaluated case by case 13 . Also we
                                                                     (1)
            used the independence of the elements in the set {hj } 14 to factorize the corresponding
            joint probability distribution (see discussion in App. C, Remark 1.).
            Note that it was not necessary to invoke the CLT in equation 75 order to conclude that
              O(c) = 0; in fact
                                              *N              +
                                 D       E      X  1             XN1 D        E
                                     (c)              (1) (1)             (1)    (1)
                                   O       =         hj wcj =            hj     wcj = 0                 (76)
                                                          j=1                              j=1

            On the other  hand, by employing the CLT, we can go further and derive the distribution
            PW O(c) (see App. C.2 and Fig.6).
            It is worth noting that equation 75 is formally true only in the limit of infinite size dataset;
            if we work with a finite size  dataset, instead,
                                                       P we have      to compute the  average
                                                                                                   over the
                                             (1)            D          (1)     (1)
            empirical distribution, P(E) hk | W ≡ a=1 D          1
                                                                   δ hk − ĥk ξ (a) , where the set
                (1)
            {ĥk ξ (a) }D i=1 contains the values mapped from each element of the dataset to the k
                                                                                                          th

            node of the first hidden layer. We will have then

                         D              E       Z X
                                                  N1                      Y
                                  (c)                    (1)        (1)               (1)     (1)
                              O             =           hj wcj                  P(E) hk | W dhk =
                                                R j=1                       k
                                                                                !                                                 (77)
                         N1
                         X                        D
                                                1 X                                      N1
                                                                                         X                     N1
                                                                                                               X
                                   (1)                    (1)                                   (1) 1                 (1)
                                  wcj                   ĥk         ξ (a)           ∼          wcj √    Zj =         wcj Z̃j
                         j=1
                                                D a=1                                    j=1
                                                                                                    D          j=1
                                                                                 2

                                    2                                           σw
            where Zj ∼ N (0, σw       ), while Z̃j ∼ N 0, D .
            Note that in the last line of equation 77 we again used the CLT for the sum of r.v.s.
            The  crucial difference
                                         with the previous derivation is that we don’t  use the CLT      for
                   (1)                                                                         (1)
            Pχ hk | W ; we substituted instead the empirical distribution, P             (E)
                                                                                              hk | W . The
            latter being defined on the dataset elements, takes into account the finite size effect of the
            dataset itself (see dependence from D). Note that the distribution of the variables involved
            in the sum in the last side of equation 77 (Z̃j ) narrows increasing in the limit D → ∞; in
            this limit, the finite size effects disappear and we converge to the result derived in equation 75.

                                                                                                                                 (1)
          • ReLU Now we repeat the computation of equation 75 using the activation function gj ≡

               (1)             (1)                                              (1)
            g hj     = max{0, hj } (introduced in Hahnloser et al. (2000)). gj will follow the

  13
       for example the pixel of an image could be highly correlated
  14                                                                (0)
       which follows from the independence of the random vectors {wi · }


                                                                          23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                            (1)
           same distribution of hj on the positive support 15 . The probability density on the negative

                            (1)                                                           (1)
           support of Pχ hj | W will instead collapse on 0 16 . Substituting to Pχ hj | W the
           Gaussian distribution of equation 72 we get
                                 Z
                (1)                            (1)                                      (1)
           Pχ gj = x | W =               Pχ hj = x̃ | W dx̃ δ (x) + Θ (x) Pχ hj = x | W =
                                                  R−
             1                       2

            = δ (x) + Θ (x) N x; 0, σw   .
             2
                                                                                                                  (78)
           where δ (x) stands for the Dirac’s delta distribution while Θ (x) stands for the Heaviside
           step function.
           Having the distribution we can integrate over it, proceeding as in the previous case:
           D      E Z       XN1        YN1
                                  (1)             (1)
             O(c) =             wcj xj     Pχ gk = xk | W dxk =
                                  RN1 j=1           k=1
                                                                                
            N1
            X       (1)
                              YZ            1
                                                                                   Z
                                                                                           1

                   wcj                                                    2
                                              δ (xk ) + Θ (xk ) N xk ; 0, σw dxk     xj                               2
                                                                                             δ(xj ) + Θ(xj )N xj ; 0, σw dxj =
            j=1                       R     2                                       R      2
                              k̸=j
                          |                               {z                     }
                                                               =1
            N1
            X             Z +∞                                        N1
                                                                      X              Z +∞                       N1
                                                                                                                X
                    (1)                               2
                                                                             (1) 2                     2
                                                                                                           x2j       (1) σw
                   wcj               xj N    xj ; 0, σw       dxj =         wcj σw          N xj ; 0, σw  d 2 =     wcj √ .
            j=1               0                                       j=1             0                    2σw  j=1
                                                                                                                          2π
                                                                                                                  (79)
           Note that the last side of equation 79 is, in general, not equal to 0.
           Note also that, in this case, we don’t need to take into account the finite size effects of
           the dataset as did at the end of App. C.1. In fact while for a linear activation function
           limD→∞ O(c) = 0 (see equation 75) for the ReLU limD→∞ O(c) ̸= 0 (see equa-
                                                          1

           tion 79), so the finite size corrections of O D    are negligible for D O(c) ≫ 1.

           In Fig. 6 the distribution PW O(c) is compared for the two choices of the activation
           function. As expected from equation 75 and equation 79 we see that, in the linear case, the
           distribution narrows around 0 increasing D while in the ReLU case, it stays stable.
                                                                                                (1)
           ReLU + Max-Pool With the Max Pool, we group the set {gk } in subgroups and select
           for each subgroup the maximum value; in this way is possible to reduce the dimensionality
           of the layer. Adding this to the analysis in App. C.1 translate in having
                                         n           o
                             (1;m)              (1)                               (1)
                           ρl      =ρ       g hj          m
                                                              = max  m
                                                                       {max{0, gj }},          (80)
                                                                       j∈Sl          j∈Sl

           where Slm indicate the l subgroup of m nodes.
                                                                                         (1;m)
           To proceed with the computation of the previous section we have to derive Pχ ρl     |W .
           In general if we have Y ≡ max{X1 , . . . , Xm }, with {Xi }m
                                                                      i=1 i.i.d. , we have:
                                                                   m
                                                                   Y                   Ym
           FY (y) ≡ P (Y ≤ y) = P (max{X1 , . . . , Xm } ≤ y) =        P (Xi ≤ y) ≡         FX (y) = FX (y)m
                                                                                          i=1           i=1
                                                                                                                  (81)
           By differentiating, we find that
                                                  P (Y = y) = mP (X = y) FX (y)m−1                                (82)
           For our case, we substitue to P (X = x) the distribution used in App. C.1, i.e.
                                                        1
                                           (1)                                         2
                      P (X = x) ≡ Pχ gj = x | W = δ (x) + Θ (x) N x; 0, σw                 .                      (83)
                                                            2
  15         (1)      (1)            (1)
       since gj = hj for hj > 0
  16                (1)        (1)
       since since gj = 0 for hj < 0


                                                                      24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                  Linear activation function
                                           D = 100                D = 1000                  D = 10000               D = 100000
                                                 4
                                                                         4
                                                                                                   4
                                                                                                                            4

                                           N 0, 100               N 0, 1000                 N 0, 10000              N 0, 100000
                              102


                              101

                 PW hO(c) i


                              100


                         10−1


                         10−2


                         10−3

                                    −0.8      −0.6         −0.4     −0.2          0.0           0.2       0.4       0.6        0.8
                                                                              hO(c) i

                                                                  ReLU activation function
                                           D = 100                                                                   D = 10000

                                           D = 1000                               N 0, π2                            D = 100000


                         10−1

                 PW hO(c) i


                         10−2



                         10−3


                                      −3              −2           −1              0                  1         2          3
                                                                              hO(c) i


Figure 6: Comparison of the PW O(c) between the linear (upper plot) and ReLU case (bottom
plot) for different choice of D. In both plots is also present the theoretical distribution (derived in
App. C.2). Note the difference in the two cases: in the Linear case the distribution narrows increasing
D while in the ReLU counterparts it stays stable (as we already expected from equation 79 and
equation 77). For these simulations we used the dataset GBon the model SHLP. (see App. I.4 for
more details).


                                                                        25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            From Equation 83 follows
                                                Z y 1
                                   (1)                                              2
                   FX (y) ≡ Pχ gj ≤ y | W =                δ (x) + Θ (x) N x; 0, σw     dx =
                                                      −∞ 2
                                                                                
                   Z y            Z y                                                                        (84)
                         1                                 1 1            y 
                           δ(x) +      N x; 0, σh2 j dx = + erf  q                Θ(y)
                    −∞   2          0                      2    2         2σh2 j
            Sending m → ∞ using the Fisher–Tippett–Gnedenko
                                                                theorem we can find an asymptotic
                                            (1;m)
            result for the distribution Pχ ρl     | W . For general m values, putting all the pieces
            together we have
                         D     E Z        X          Y   (1;m)
                                                 (1)
                           O(c) = N1         xl wcl    Pχ ρl     = xl | W dxl =
                                             Rm   l            k
                                         Z ∞                                               !!m−1             (85)
                              X                                          1 1        x
                                   (1)
                                  wcl          mxl N            2
                                                       xl ; 0, σw         + erf    p l             dxl
                                         0                               2 2        2σw2
                              l
            which we can approximate by an asymptotic expansion, or by evaluating it numerically.
            The combination of Max pooling with linear activation function can be computed similarly
            substituting the simple Gaussian distribution for P (X = x).
            Note that the integral in the last expression of equation 85 is independent from the set
                     N1
               (1) m 17
            {wcl }l=1   . To lighten the notation, we define
                                   Z ∞                                                     !!m−1
                                                      2
                                                          1 1                        x
                      cm (σw ) ≡        mxN x; 0, σw         + erf                 p               dx.       (86)
                                    0                      2 2                         2
                                                                                     2σw

C.2      PW     O(c)

We now want to derive the whole distribution PW                     O(c) . Let us consider again case by case:

          • Linear: From equation 77
                                                       D    E XN1
                                                                   (1)
                                                        O(c) ∼    wcj Z̃j                                    (87)
                                                                        j=1

            So O(c) is a combination of N1 independent r.v.s. Notice that if we are in the limN1 →∞
            in equation 87 we have again a sum of i.i.d. r.v.s with finite variance. The distribution of the
            sum will then converge, for
                                        the CLT, to a Gaussian. In particular, for independent r.v.s, we
                                   (1)
            have that, since wcj = E Z̃j = 0,
                                                                       σ2 σ2
                                       (1)               (1)
                                Var wcj Z̃j = Var wcj Var Z̃j = w w                                 (88)
                                                                          N1 D
            Then, from the CLT,
                                           D     E             σ2 σ2
                                            O(c) ∼ N 0, w w .                                       (89)
                                                                 D
          • ReLU: for the case of ReLU the derivation is even more straightforward. In this case, is not
            even necessary to apply the CLT. From equation 79, indeed, we have
                                            D     E X  N1
                                                              (1) σw
                                              O(c) =        wcj √ .                                 (90)
                                                       j=1
                                                                   2π

             O(c) is therefore a linear combination of Gaussian r.v.s, which is also Gaussian; more
            precisely
                                            D      E          4
                                                             σw
                                               (c)
                                             O       ∼ N 0,                                     (91)
                                                             2π
  17
       also from the index l if σl = σ∀l as assumed in equation 85


                                                             26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       • ReLU + MaxPool: This case is conceptually analogous to the previous one. In fact, from
         equation 85,
                                    D     E X  N1
                                                    (1)
                                      O(c) =       wcj cm (σw ).                            (92)
                                                                   j=1

         Again we have a linear combination of Gaussian r.v.s, therefore
                                      D     E
                                       O(c) ∼ N 0, σw   2 2
                                                          cm (σw )                               (93)

In general, If ρ(1;m) ̸= 0 we will get
                                     D          E                          D       E2
                                                     N →∞
                               PW        O(c)          1
                                                     −−− −−→ N           2
                                                                     0, σw  ρ(1;m)      .        (94)

            (1;1)        (1)
Note that ρi        = gi .

C.3   Pχ O(c) | W

As discussed O(c) is a r.v. that varies with the set of weights W . In App. C.2 we derived its
distribution. Here we are interested
                                   in the distribution of the output, fixed a given configuration for
the set of weights, Pχ O(c) | W .

                                                                                   (1)      (1)
       • Linear: from equation 74, substituting, the linear activation function g hi     = hi , we
         get
                                                   XN1
                                          O(c) =          (1) (1)
                                                        wcm  hm .                               (95)
                                                                   m=1
                                  (1)
         Since the random vector wc · is fixed we have a linear combination of Gaussian r.v.s. In this
         case is not even necessary to invoke Thm. B.2; the linear combination of Gaussian r.v.s is
         itself a Gaussian
                                                                                      !
                                          X (1) D (1) E X   (1)  2
                          (c)                                                   (1)
                   Pχ O | W = N               wci hi      ,      wci    Varχ hi         =
                                                          i                  i
                                                      !                                          (96)
                                    X      (1)
                                                  2
                               2
                     N     0, σw          wci
                                    i

         Note that also in this case, in principle, we could proceed analogously to App. C.1 and take
         into account the correction due to the finite size of the dataset.
       • ReLU: in this case we have:
                                                                   N1
                                                                   X
                                                       O(c) =             (1) (1)
                                                                         wcm gm                  (97)
                                                                   m=1
                     (1)                                                             (1)
         where {gm } are distributed according to equation 78. If wc · is fixed we have a linear
         combination of r.v.s.
         From equation 78 we have
                         D      E      σw
                            (1)
                           gm     =√                                                        (98)
                                        2π
                                          Z
                                  (1)
                        Varχ gm         =     x2m Pχ gm
                                                      (1)
                                                          = xm | W dxm − µ2g =
                                           R+
                           Z                                        2
                        1                                         σw  (π − 1)               (99)
                               x2m Pχ h(1)m = xm | W dxm −µg =
                                                               2
                        2 R                                            2π
                           |                {z             }
                                                       2
                                                      σw



                                                              27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                      (1)
         where in the second step we used the symmetry of Pχ hm | W . Since the r.v.s involved
         in the sum of equation 97 are not Gaussian r.v.s (as in the previous case) we cannot use the
         same argument. However, the r.v.s involved in the sum have finite variance and exponentially
         fast decreasing tails; it is, therefore, trivial to prove that the conditions of Thm. B.3 are
         satisfied. Assuming N1 ≫ 1, we can then apply the Thm. B.2 for the linear combination of
         r.v.s. In particular, in the limN1 →∞ , we have:
                                                                                         !
                                           X (1) D (1) E X   (1)  2
                         (c)                                                       (1)
                  Pχ O | W = N                wci gi         ,     wci     Varχ gi         =
                                                     i                          i
                                                                                    !                            (100)
                         σ     X                 2
                                            (1) σ (π − 1)
                                                          X   (1)  2
                   N     √w                wci , w           wci                        .
                          2π       i
                                                   2π     i

       • ReLU + MaxPool: This case is conceptually equal to the previous one in the sense that
         again we have a linear combination
                                      D        Eof i.i.d. r.v.s.
                                                                The only  difference is that we don’t have
                                         (1;m)                    (1;m)
         an analytical expression for ρi         and Varχ ρi             . This doesn’t represent a problem;
         by fixing the m parameter we can numerically compute the two cumulants whose expression
         is
                                                                                            !!m−1
            D         E Z ∞          1                                1 1             x
                (1;m)                                         2
              ρ        =      mx       δ (x) + N x; 0, σw                + erf p                     dx =
                          0          2                                2 2             2σw 2

            Z ∞                                               !!m−1
                                2
                                    1 1                 x
                   mxN x; 0, σw         + erf p                          dx
              0                      2 2                2σw 2

                                                                                                       (101)
                                                                           !!m−1 
                           Z ∞
                                     1                        1   1     x
         Varχ ρ(1;m) =        mx2                      2
                                       δ (x) + N x; 0, σw       + erf p           dx
                             0       2                        2 2         2
                                                                        2σw
                                                                 !!m−1 
            D       E2    Z ∞                                                D     E2
                                                 1 1          x
         − ρ  (1;m)
                       =        2
                               mx N x; 0, σw 2
                                                  + erf p              dx − ρ(1;m) .
                           0                     2 2            2
                                                              2σw
                                                                                                                 (102)
         So analogously to equation 100 we get
                                                                                                         !
                                                X           D               E X        2
                        (c)                           (1)           (1;m)         (1)
              Pχ O            |W       =N            wci        ρ            ,   wci     Varχ ρ(1;m)         =
                                                 i                              i
                                                                                            !                    (103)
                       D       EX                    X        2
                                   (1)                   (1)
              N         ρ(1;m)    wci , Varχ ρ(1;m)     wci                                     .
                                       i                                    i


D     S INGLE HIDDEN LAYER PERCEPTRON
Here we will use the results derived in App. C to derive our final target PW (f0 ). In particular we will
focus here on the single hidden layer perceptron. The results will be extended to deep architectures in
App. F

D.1    D ERIVATION OF PW (f0 )

Let us consider a binary classification problem with a single hidden layer perceptron. From now on
we will focus on architectures with the structure depicted in Fig.2. The nodes of the last hidden layer
                                                       1
                                                                                           n       o1
                                                                                               (1)
are therefore connected to two output nodes O(c) c=0 through two random vectors wc ·                    .
                                                                                                    c=0
                                   (1)
Each output node O(c) ξ; W 0 , wc · will follow the distributions derived in App. C.3.


                                                                28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Note that, fixed a set W , different output nodes depends on a different
                                                                            subset of W as the last matrix
                                                                (c)       0   (1)
of weights is not shared over all the nodes. The writing O            ξ; W , wc · underlines this aspect.
This is crucial to understand why the output nodes have different distributions. For the sake of
compactness, we will, anyhow, indicate a common generalized dependence from the whole set W , i.e.
we will write for example O(c) (ξ; W ). To derive the distribution PW (f0 ) we can argue as follows:
                                   n       o1
                                       (1)
For a single experiment the set wc ·            is fixed. We can then compute Pχ O(c) | W . Now,
                                            c=0
recalling that f0 represent the fraction of the dataset classified as belonging to class 0, for the Law of
the Large Numbers, increasing the size of the dataset, D, this fraction will converge to the probability
                                                                           Z ∞
                    (0)      (1)                  (0)     (1)
  f0 (W ) = Pχ O > O | W = Pχ O − O > 0 | W =                                     Pχ (∆O = z | W ) dz
                                                                            0
                                                                                                  (104)
where f0 (W ) indicates the fraction f0 that we get for the specific fixed configuration W . f0 is a
quantity clearly dependent from the set of r.v.s W ; so it is itself a r.v. which change with the set of
weight of the network. Defining ∆O = O(0) − O(1) we can write
                       Z                   Z ∞
           PW (f0 ) =     P W = W̃ δ                Pχ ∆O = z | W̃ dz − f0 dW̃                    (105)
                          Ω                       0

where Ω is the space of all the possibles initial configurations. equation 105 provides us an expression
for the PW (f0 ); on the other end the computation of the integral in the r.h.s. is not trivial. We now
introduce a second approach to avoid the computation of this integral; we will show that this approach
is asymptotically exact in the limit of N1 → ∞.
In App. C.3 we derive an expression for Pχ O(c) | W for the different cases; we saw that,
                                                                                         PN (1)
in general, these are Gaussian distributions whose cumulants depends on Swc ≡ j 1 wcj and
        PN   (1)  2
Swc2 ≡ j 1 wcj . We can look at the standard deviations as an estimate for the order of magni-
tude of the fluctuations from the mean value. In App. B.2.1 we show that

                                   q
                                       Swc − Swc 2 = O(1)                                          (106)
                                   q
                                                          1
                                       Swc2 − Swc2 2 = O √      .                                  (107)
                                                           N1
In other words, the distribution of Swc stays asymptotically stable, while the distribution of Swc2
asymptotically concentrates around the mean value. This difference in the scaling of the fluctuations
for the two cases will be relevant for the following discussion.
To use a common notation we can say that, in general, from App. C.3, we got

                             Pχ O(c) | W = N µ (Swc ) , σ 2 Swc2                                (108)
                                                                    (1)
where µ (Swc ) and σ Swc2 are functions of the set of r.v.s {wcj }N      1
                                                                        j=1 dependent from the specific
setting (in our case the choice of activation function). In particular we derived in App. C.2 the
distribution of µ (Swc ). From equation 107 we know, instead, that the distribution of σ Swc2

narrows around its mean values for N1 → ∞; so, in this limit, σ Swc2 converge to a deterministic
                 distribution of µ (Swc ) does not asymptotically narrow around a deterministic value,
quantity. As the
Pχ O(c) | W will be different for different nodes, {O(c) }, even in the infinite size limit. We call
the emergence of this difference between distributions of nodes belonging to the same layer Nodes
Symmetry Breaking (PSB). The discussion of Sec. 3 shows how PSB and IGB represent two sides of
the same coin; more precisely IGB is a direct conseguence of this symmetry breaking. In Sec. 4.2
we will discuss it more in details, showing also how the same phenomenon, in deep architectures
happens not only inn the output layers, but also in the intermediate hidden layers.
Now, coming back to the problem that opened this section, we can imagine that, for a given initializa-
                                                                                       (1)      (1)
tion, we are fixing the configuration W , and, in particular, the two random vectors w0 ·  and w1 · . We
will have then two corresponding distribution for Pχ O | W and Pχ O | W . To compute
                                                             (0)                 (1)



                                                   29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the probability that O(0) > O(1) we can first pass to the distribution Pχ (∆O | W ). Since ∆O is a
difference between two Gaussian r.v.s we have

                Pχ (∆O | W ) = N µ (Sw0 ) − µ (Sw1 ) , σ 2 Sw02 + σ 2 Sw12                  (109)

From equation 107 we know that the distribution of Swc2 asymptotically narrows around its mean

value, so that, in the limit of N1 → ∞ we can neglect the fluctuations of the r.v. σ 2 Swc2 ;

substituting σ 2 Swc2 = σ 2 Swc2 ≡ σ∞2
                                       , we get

                                             N →∞                          2

                            Pχ (∆O | W ) −−−
                                           1
                                             −−→ N µ (Sw0 ) − µ (Sw1 ) , 2σ∞                                      (110)
                                                                                                            (1)
This convergence is crucial to get rid of the explicit dependence from the random vectors {wc · } and
avoid the integration over all the possible configurations. In fact, since we have an explicit form for
the distribution of µ (Swc ) (see App. C.2), calling
                                            ∆µ = µ (Sw0 ) − µ (Sw1 )                                              (111)
we can find an implicit expression for ∆µ , i.e.
                                        Z ∞
                                                                2

                             f0 (W ) =         N y; ∆µ (f0 ), 2σ∞   dy.                                           (112)
                                                  0

Given the centers of the two Gaussian distributions Pχ O(c) | W , and in particular their difference,
∆µ , equation 112 gives back the corresponding value of f0 . We can invert equation 112 (for
example calculating it numerically)
                                            and obtain ∆µ (f0 ) associated to a given value f0 . Note that
µ (Swc ) ∼ PW O        (c)
                              is a r.v.; consequently so will ∆µ (f0 ).
Reformulated in these terms, PW (f0 ) is simply PW (∆µ (f0 )). More precisely, since µ (Sw0 ) and
µ (Sw1 ) are i.i.d. r.v.s we have
                                     Z ∞        D     E             D       E
 PW (f0 ) = PW (∆µ (f0 )) =                PW     O(1) = x̃ PW          O(0) = x̃ + ∆µ (f0 ) dx̃ =
                                      −∞
     Z ∞         D        E                D     E                                                  (113)
                      (c)
  =       PW        O       = x̃ PW          O(c) = x̃ + ∆µ (f0 ) dx̃ ,
         −∞

where we integration come from the fact that the condition we are enforcing is only on the differ-
ence between the nodes mean values and therefore is invariant under a translation of both values.
In the last equality, we used the fact that O(0) and O(1) are identically distributed. Since
               N1 →∞               18
PW O(c) −−−       −−→ N 0, σ̂∞ 2
                                  , equation 113 is an integral of a product between two indepen-
dent Gaussian distributions.19 We can solve it and get
                                                                       2

                         PW (f0 ) = PW (∆µ (f0 )) = N ∆µ (f0 ); 0, 2σ̂∞                     (114)

Remark 2. equation 114 shows a Gaussian distribution in terms of the variable ∆µ (f0 ). Note
however that PW (f0 ), in general, will not be a Gaussian since ∆µ (f0 ) is a non-linear function.

D.2       M AX -P OOL PEAKS : AN EXAMPLE ON HOW TO COMPUTE THE THEORETICAL PREDICTION
          FOR PW (f0 )

We can use the result derived in App. D.1 to compute the theoretical prediction for PW (f0 ). For
example, we can quantify the density on the extreme peaks, empirically observed in presence of
Max-Pooling. Let us say that we have a dataset of D elements, and we want to compute the probability
density PW (f0 = 0). Sec. 4.1 gives us a recipe on how to do it. First of all we have to identify the
                      1
value ∆(T ) = ∆µ D       inverting equation 112. ∆(T ) represent a threshold value; ∀∆µ (f0 ) < ∆(T )
                                                       1
we will get from equation 112 a value lower than D        that correspond to f0 = 0 because of the
resolution of f0 (fixed by the dataset size D). We can therefore compute PW (f0 = 0) in two simple
steps:
  18                  2
       The quantity σ̂∞  depends on the details of the model; for more details see App. C.2.
  19
       Note that the product of Gaussian distributions is itself proportional to a Gaussian distribution.


                                                          30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       • Compute ∆(T ) :
         first thing to do is to invert equation 112

                             1 1           ∆µ (f0 )
                f0 = 1 −        + erf          2
                                                                      2
                                                       ⇒ ∆µ (f0 ) = 2σ∞ erf −1 (2f0 − 1) .                          (115)
                             2 2            2σ∞

       • Integrate equation 114 over all ∆µ (f0 ) < ∆(T ) , i.e.
                             Z ∆(T )
                                                         2
                                                                        1 1                         ∆(T )
            PW (f0 = 0) =              N ∆µ (f0 ); 0, 2σ̂∞   d∆µ (f0 ) = + erf                                  .   (116)
                               −∞                                       2 2                         2σ̂∞
                                                                       (min)                (max)
In general, if we want the probability mass between two values f0    and f0    , we can compute
it as
            Z f0(max)                    Z ∆µ f0(max)


                                                                        2

                      PW (f0 = x) dx =                N ∆µ (f0 ); 0, 2σ̂∞ d∆µ (f0 ) =
                (min)                            (min)
               f0                           ∆µ f0
                                                                                                                (117)
                         (max)                  (min)
            1       ∆µ f 0         1      ∆µ f0
              erf               − erf               .
            2          2σ̂∞        2         2σ̂∞


E    E FFECT OF M AX -P OOLING

In this section we will discuss how the impact of   Max-Pooling. Here we will show that increasing
the value of m, the distribution Pχ ρ(1;m) | W concentrates around an increasing value. For the
sake of clarity, we will discuss here the asymptotic convergence, i.e. m → ∞. Let us consider the set
   (1)
{gi }m i=1 such that
                                              1
                               (1)                                        2
                         Pχ gi = x | W = δ (x) + Θ (x) N x; 0, σw             ,                (118)
                                                2
for a fixed set W . Let us now define the set of r.v.s {ωi }m
                                                            i=1 , calling n = log(m),

                                                 (1)         (1)
                                               g       g
                                        ωi ≡ p i     ≡ √i .                                                         (119)
                                              log(m)     n

Using the relation
                            Pχ (ωi = x | W ) dω = Pχ g (1) | W dg (1) ,                                             (120)
we can write
                                                                                2
                                              1                                σw
                        Pχ (ωi = x | W ) =      δ (x) + Θ (x) N        x; 0,            .                           (121)
                                              2                                 n

We can now consider the number of elements in the set {ωi } whose value fall in the interval
[ω̃, (ω̃ + dω̃)], ω̃ > 0; we call this number #(ω̃). In particular if we consider its expectation value,
we’ll have
                                                    r           ω2 n
                                                                          r
                                                                                           ω2

                                                          n − 2σ               n     −n     2 −1
   E (#(ω̃)) = mE (I(ω ∈ [ω̃, (ω̃ + dω̃)])) ∼ m            2
                                                             e w2 dω̃ =          2
                                                                                    e     2σw
                                                                                                  dω̃.
                                                       2πσw                  2πσw
                                                                                                   (122)
Also, we see that, being the probability to get a value from Pχ (ω | W ) to be between ω̃ and (ω̃ + dω̃)
small, this follows a Poisson law, so that the variance is equal to the mean. If we define
                                                     ω2
                                           s(ω) ≡     2
                                                        − 1,                                                        (123)
                                                    2σw

we have that


                                                    31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            • If s(ω) < 0 the average number of draws with value ω is exponentially close to 0. From
              equation
                   p 123 we see that this happens (as we are interested       in the positive interval) when
              ω > 2σw    2 . In this case, using the Markov inequality 20 , we can conclude that, w.h.p. the
              number of draws (and not only its expectation value) is actually 0. In fact, from Markov
              inequality,
                                                P (#(ω̃) ≥ 1) ≤ E (#(ω̃)) .                             (124)
                                                                                p
              Therefore, w.h.p. as n → ∞, all draws have values lower than 2σw        2.

            • If s(ω) > 0, the expectation value of the number of draws is different from 0. We can use
              again the Markov inequality to show that, also in this case, the actual number of draws
              concentrate around the non null expectation value, as n → ∞. In fact
                                                                         !
                                                                  2            E   (#(ω̃)  − E (#(ω̃)))
                                                                                                        2
                       #(ω̃)                         #(ω̃)
              P               −1 ≥k =P                       − 1 ≥ k2 ≤
                    E (#(ω̃))                      E (#(ω̃))                         k 2 (E (#(ω̃)))
                                                                                                    2


                     Var (#(ω̃))         E (#(ω̃))       e−ns(ω̃)


               ≤                 2 ≃                   ∝          ,
                  k 2 (E (#(ω̃)))                    2
                                     k 2 (E (#(ω̃)))        k2
                                                                                                    (125)
              where we have used the fact that, being small the probability of ωi taken randomly from
              Pχ (ω | W ) to be between ω̃ and ω̃ +dω̃, #(ω̃) follows a Poisson law; therefore the variance
              is equal to the mean. As n grows, the probability of deviation goes exponentially to zero
                                               #(ω̃)
              when s(ω̃) > 0, so that w.h.p., E(#(ω̃)) is arbitrary close to 1.

                                                                                   m (1)
We shown, thereforepthat, when n grows the maximum among the set {gi }i=1 converge to the
deterministic value 2σw  2 log (m). In other words the maximum value asymptotically concentrates
around an increasing value. More fine analysis are possible to characterize the extreme value statistics.
For more information about the topic, see, for example, Schehr & Majumdar (2014) and references
within it.


F        D EEP ARCHITECTURES

In Sec. 4.1 we discussed how to derive PW (f0 ) for a neural network with a single hidden layer. In
the following section we will discuss the extention of the computation to a network with an arbitrary
number of hidden layers.

F.1        M ULTI - LAYER PERCEPTRON

In this Section we will extend the result discussed in Sec. 4.1. Our analysis will clarify the decisive
impact of the network deepness for the IGB phenomenon. There is in fact a foundamental difference
between the two cases determining a possible exacerbation of the phenomenon, as we will discuss
here.
The strategy that we will follow is similar to the one presented for the single hidden layer counterpart
(see Sec. 4.1). In other word we will propagate
                                                      across
                                                           the network layers keeping track of the
                                        (l+1)                   (l+1)
changes in the distribtions Pχ hi      | W and PW hi            . Using CLT considerably simplifies
this propagation process because to keep track of changes in the distribution it is sufficient to see
how certain quantities vary 21 . Compared to the analysis in Sec. 4.1 however, there is an important
                                                        (1)
complicating element. While the elements in the set {hi } follow the same distribution (regardless
of the choice of activation function), from the second layer onward the activation function can
induce a break in symmetry among the layer nodes, in the sense that they will follow, fixed a given
configuration for the network weights, different distributions. This symmetry breaking, as we shall
see, can cause an accentuation of the IGB effect. To show this point we will consider in our analysis
    20
         Markov inequality states that if X is a non-negative random variable, then P (X ≥ k) ≤ E (X) /k
    21
         a Gaussian distribution is completely determined from the first two cumulants


                                                        32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the ReLU activation function 22 . Starting from the same setting described in Sec. 4.1 we will derive a
set of iterative equation to propagate across multiple layers.

       • layer-1
         as showed in Sec. 4.1 and in App. C.1, in the limit d → ∞,
                               X (0) CLT
                        (1)                            (1)       d→∞ 2
                       hi ≡        wij ξj ==⇒ Pχ hi | W −−−→ N (0, σw  )
                                     j
                                                                                                             (126)
                            ReLU    (1)    d→∞                2
                                                                  1
                           ===⇒ Pχ gi | W −−−→ Θ (x) N x; 0, σw  + δ (x) .
                                                                  2
                             (1)                                                                       (1)
          All the nodes {hi } follow the same distribution and so do the nodes {gi } . In particular,
          this means that                  D     E D       E
                                             (1)
                                            gi     = g (1) , ∀i .                              (127)

       • layer-2
         We start again from a combination of r.v.s
                                                    (2)
                                                                 X         (1) (1)
                                                   hi       ≡            wij gj .                            (128)
                                                                 j

                                                     (1) (1)
          It is easy to proof that the generic r.v. wij gj     involved in the sum satisfies the conditions
          of equation 26 and equation 27. So, in the limit N1 → ∞, again we have a convergence to a
          normal distribution. In particular
                                                        D      E
                                 (2)        N1 →∞
                          Pχ hi | W −−−        −−→ N      g (1) Swi , Varχ g (1) Swi2 =
                              D      E                                                               (129)
                          N     g (1) Swi , Varχ g (1) Swi2 ,

          where                                                                 D          E 2
                                                  (1)                    (1)         (1)
                                         Varχ g             =        g         − g                 .         (130)

          In the last step of equation 129, as done for Pχ O(c) | W in Sec. 4.1, we used the
          concentration result derived in App. B.2.1. In particular that the distribution of the r.v.
                  PN1 (1)
          Swi ≡ j=1      wij stays stable in the limit N1 → ∞ 23 , while the distribution of Swi2 ≡
          PN1            2
                    (1)
             j=1 wij       asymptotically narrow around the mean value. Note that, as the distribution
          of Swi does not asymptotically concentrate, and since g (1) ̸= 0, each node in the set
             (2)
          {hi } will follows a different distribution. In particular we will have a set of normally
          distributed r.v.s, centred in different random points, { g (1) Swi }. After passing through
          the ReLU activation function we will have
                                                          D      E
                             (2)       N1 →∞
                     Pχ gi | W −−−         −−→ Θ (x) N      g (1) Swi , Varχ g (1) Swi2 +
                                                              !!
                            1 1                g (1) Swi                                         (131)
                      +        + erf q                             δ (x) .
                            2 2             2Varχ g (1) Swi2

       • layer-3
         We can repeat the approach of the previous layer for the new set of variables
                                            (3)
                                                  X (2) (2)
                                           hi ≡        wij gj ,                                              (132)
                                                                 j

  22
      we do not include the MaxPooling to underlining the amplification of the IGB; in the presence of MaxPooling,
increasing the kernel size we observe deep IGB even with a single hidden layer architectures. Note that absence
of MaxPooling is equivalent of a MaxPooling with minimum kernel size
   23
      fluctuations and mean stay both O (1)


                                                            33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        getting
                                                                                           
                                                 XN2      D     E XN2         2
                       (3)             N2 →∞          (2)   (2)          (2)          (2)
             P hi            |W       −−− −−→ N     wij gj      ,      wij     Varχ gj  .       (133)
                                                       j=1           j=1
                                                               D     E
                                                                 (2)             (2)
        Note that in this case we cannot take out from the sums gj     and Varχ gj     since the
                      (2)
        nodes {gj } are not identically distributed. In App. B.2.3 we analyze the differences in

             (3)                                      (3)
        Pχ hi | W between the different nodes {hi }. In particular, we show that

                                                                D      E
                                       (3)          N2 →∞          (3)              (3)
                                  Pχ hi | W −−−        −−→ N      hi     , Varχ hi         ,      (134)
                                      D       E                       D      E2
                                          (3)     N2 →∞             2    (2)
                                  PW    hi       −−−  −−→ N 0, σw       gj        ,               (135)

                                                (3)      N2 →∞        2          (2)
                                  PW Varχ hi            −−−−−→ δ σw Varχ gj              .        (136)

      • layer-l
        The steps described for the propagation of the layer-3 provide us an iteration scheme that
        we can follow for a generic layer l ≥ 3. In fact, knowing the statistics of the previous layers,
        we can compute
                               Z                                         D        E2
                       (l−1)                  (l−1)                    2    (l−2)
              Varχ gj           =     Varχ gj         (µj ) N µj ; 0, σw gj            dµj ,      (137)
                                    R
              D        E2     Z  D        E2                    D        E2
                 (l−1)              (l−1)                     2    (l−2)
                gj        =        gj        (µj ) N µj ; 0, σw  gj           dµj .               (138)
                                       R

                                                         (l−1)
        Again, in the above expressions we defined Varχ gj       as

                          Z ∞
                                                    Z ∞

                                                                          2
                 (l−1)
           Varχ gj      =     x2 N x; µj , σh2 dx −     xN x; µj , σh2 dx ,                       (139)
                                           0                               0
                                                                                         D        E
                                                                                            (l−1)
        where, to make the notation lighter, we defined the r.v. µj ≡                     hj         =
        PNl−2 (l−2) D (l−2) E 2 PNl−2   (l−2)  2 2
           j=1 wij       gj       , σh = j=1 wij             σ (l−2) . Note that now, the difference in
                                                              gj
                                                                                   n                 o
                                         (l−2)                                                (l−1)
        the distributions of the nodes {gj     } induce a difference in the values Varχ gj            .
        From equation 137 and equation 138 we can compute then
                                       N →∞       D      E
                           (l)           l−1         (l)      2         (l−1)
                      Pχ hi | W −−−−−−→ N           hi , σw Varχ gj              ,                (140)
                           D       E  N →∞             D         E2
                               (l)      l−1          2     (l−1)
                      PW     hi       −−−−−−→ N 0, σw     gj          .                           (141)

        Finally we can use equation 141 to iterate the set of equation 137 and equation 138 for the
        layer l, i.e.
                                Z
                              (l)                 (l)
                       Varχ gj     =     Varχ gj (µj ) PW µh(l) = µj dµj ,                   (142)
                                                                               j
                                                   R
                             D E2 Z D E2
                               (l)    (l)
                              gj   = gj   (µj ) PW µh(l) = µj dµj .                               (143)
                                                                      j
                                               R

      • layer-(L+1)
        Arriving at the output layer, following the same iterative scheme we will have


                                                             34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         
                                                                N →∞                        (L)
                                         
                                                  Pχ O(c) | W −−L−−−→ N    O(c) , σw2
                                                                                       Varχ gj
                                                                               D     E2                                                      (144)
                                                               NL →∞
                                         
                                                  PW O   (c)                2
                                                                −−−−−→ N 0, σw gj
                                                                                 (L)



              These two distributions are the only ingredient that we need to replicate the steps described
              at the end of App. D.1 to get PW (f0 ).


                                         IGB (L = 1)                                                                IGB (L = 5)
                   Theoretical distr.                            ReLU                        Theoretical distr.                             ReLU
      1.50
                                                                                  4
      1.25

      1.00                                                                        3
PW (f0)


                                                                             PW (f0)
      0.75
                                                                                  2
      0.50
                                                                                  1
      0.25

      0.00
             0.0        0.2             0.4         0.6    0.8    1.0                  0.0        0.2             0.4         0.6   0.8       1.0
                                              f0                                                                        f0


Figure 7: Effects induced by the depth of the network. The case of ReLU is emblematic because it
clearly shows the differences in the two cases. For a single hidden layer network (left) we have a
stable distribution (i.e. that does not narrow around EW (f0 ) = 0.5 for D → ∞) but still peaked on
EW (f0 ) = 0.5. Increasing the number of hidden layers the probability mass moves from the center
to the extremes. For these simulations we used the GB dataset on model MHLP (see App. I.4 for more
details).



F.2       C ONVERGENCE OF PW (f0 ) IN DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS

Here we prove the result discussed in Sec.4.2, i.e. that the distribution of PW (f0 ) converge to a delta
peaked distribution in a multi-layer perceptron with ReLU activation when the number of layers goes
to infinity. More precisely

 Theorem F.1 (limL→∞ PW (f0 )). Let us consider a multi-layer perceptron with L hidden
 layers and ReLU activation function. Let us assume that, in the limNl →∞ ∀l ∈ [0, . . . , L],
 w.h.p.:

                                                           Varχ h(l) > 0, ∀l                                                              (145)

 and in particular

                                                           lim Varχ h(l) > 0,                                                             (146)
                                                          l→∞

 where Varχ h(l) indicate the variance of Pχ h(l) | W . Then

                                     VarW O(c)
                                 lim                =∞              (147)
                                L→∞ Varχ O (c)

 where VarW O(c) is the variance of PW O(c) and Varχ O(c) the variance of

 Pχ O(c) | W .



                                                                        35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To prove equation 147 we will show that
                                D        E                 D      E
                        VarW      h(l+1)    > (K + ϵ)VarW    h(l)    ,                            (148)

                        Varχ h(l+1) < (K − ϵ)Varχ h(l) ,                                          (149)

where K is a constant. Once proved the above relations we can, indeed, write
                             l                                                     !
       VarW h(l+2)             1    VarW h(2)               l       1 VarW h(2)
                         >                        (K + ϵ) > l                     ϵ
         Varχ h(l+2)          K       Varχ h(2)                     K Varχ h(2)
                                                                  |          {z     }
                                                                                              1
                                                                                             ≡C

             Varχ h(l+2)       1
         =⇒                  <C .                                                                 (150)
            VarW h(l+2)        l
Therefore if we consider an infinite depth network, i.e. L → ∞, we have:

    Varχ h(L)              1          VarW O(c)              1           VarW O(c)
                    =O          =⇒                    =O        =⇒ lim                 =0
   VarW h(L)               L           Varχ O(c)            L       L→∞ Varχ O (c)
                                                                                        (151)

Proof. Let us start from equation 148. From equation 140
                                             D            E         D E2
                                                                      (l)
                                    VarW         h(l+1)           2
                                                               = σw  gj   .                       (152)


                D     E2 Z ∞     D     E
                  (l)
                 hj     =    PW    h(l) = x x2 dx =
                               −∞
                    Z 0         D       E            Z ∞     D     E                              (153)
                =         PW        h(l) = x x2 dx +     PW    h(l) = x x2 dx .
                     −∞                                         0

We now use the symmetry of PW h           (l)
                                     (which is a Gaussian centered in 0), i.e.
                             D     E             D     E
                        PW     h(l) = x = PW       h(l) = −x ,                                    (154)

to rewrite equation 153 as

                                       Z ∞
                          1 D (l) E2             D     E
                             hj      =      PW     h(l) = µ (µ)2 dµ ≡
                          2             0
                             Z ∞        D     E                                                   (155)
                                                                    2
                          ≡        PW     h(l) = µ (µ+ (µ) + µ− (µ)) dµ ,
                               0

where we defined
                                     Z ∞
                          µ+ (µ) =          N x; µ, Varχ h(l+1) xdx > 0 ,
                                      0
                                     Z 0                                                          (156)
                                                                    (l+1)
                          µ− (µ) =          N x; µ, Varχ h                       xdx < 0 .
                                      −∞


We can thus rewrite
                          Z ∞
             1 D (l) E2           D
                                     (l)
                                         E
                hj      =     PW    hj = µ µ+ (µ)2 + µ− (µ)2 + 2 µ+ µ− dµ.                        (157)
             2             0                                     | {z }
                                                                                             ≤0



                                                          36
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Note that µ+ µ− = 0 implies either µ+ = 0 or µ− = 0 i.e. a distribution Pχ h(l) | W with non-

positive or non-negative support. Since Pχ h(l) | W is a Gaussian distribution this may only happen
in the limit of its variance going to 0 24 . By hypothesis we excluded this possibility (equation 145
and equation 146); therefore µ+ µ− < 0 and we can rewrite
                                  Z ∞
                     1 D (l) E2              D     E
                        hj      <     PW       h(l) = µ µ+ (µ)2 + µ− (µ)2 dµ .                  (158)
                     2              0
                                  |                     {z                      }
                                                                  ≡I

Now let us focus on the integral I of equation 158. We note that
                                  Z 0
                   −µ− (µ) = −          N x; µ, Varχ h(l+1) xdx =                              (159)
                                    −∞
                               Z ∞
                             =       N y; −µ, Varχ h(l+1) ydy = µ+ (−µ)                        (160)
                                         0

where in the second step we just changed the integration variable x → y ≡ −x. We can therefore
rewrite
        Z ∞      D      E                                   Z ∞       D     E
                    (l)               2            2

  I=        PW     h      = µ µ+ (µ) + µ+ (−µ) dµ =              PW     h(l) = µ µ+ (µ)2 dµ
            0                                                          −∞
             2
       g (l)
                                                                                               (161)
where for the second step we used again equation 154. To summarize we showed that

                                        (l) 2    1         2
                                      g       >       h(l)                                     (162)
                                                 2

Now let us pass to another quantity:
                D                          Z ∞
                          2 E                      D     E
                   g (l)          2
                              ≡ ⟨x ⟩g(l) =     PW    h(l) = µ ⟨x2 ⟩g(l) (µ) dµ =
                                            −∞
                    Z ∞         D     E
                 =         PW     h(l) = µ ⟨x2 ⟩g(l) (µ) + ⟨x2 ⟩g(l) (−µ) dµ =                 (163)
                    Z0 ∞        D     E
                 =         PW     h(l) = µ ⟨x2 ⟩+ (µ) + ⟨x2 ⟩− (µ) dµ,
                           0

where, analogously to equation 156, we defined
                                     Z ∞
                        ⟨x2 ⟩+ (µ) =     N x; µ, Varχ h(l+1) x2 dx ,
                                                0
                                              Z 0                                              (164)
                               ⟨x2 ⟩− (µ) =          N x; µ, Varχ h(l+1) x2 dx.
                                                −∞

From the above definitions, we see that
                                      ⟨x2 ⟩+ (µ) + ⟨x2 ⟩− (µ) = ⟨x2 ⟩h(l) (µ);                 (165)

therefore substituting into equation 163 we get
                    D               Z ∞
                              2 E             D     E
                       g (l)      =      PW     h(l) = µ ⟨x2 ⟩h(l) (µ) dµ =
                                     0
                           Z           D     E                                                 (166)
                        1 ∞                                           1 D (l)  2 E
                     =            PW     h(l) = µ ⟨x2 ⟩h(l) (µ) dµ =      h       .
                        2 −∞                                          2
  24
       i.e., if the Gaussian shrink into a Dirac delta distribution


                                                           37
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Finally, let us consider
                           D        2 E          2    1 D (l)  2 E           2
               Varχ g (l) ≡ g (l)       − g (l) =           h         − g (l) <
                                                      2                                             (167)
                  1 D (l)  2 E 1 (l) 2        1          (l)
                                                               Nl−1 →∞ 1
                                                                                   (l)

                <     h       − h          = Varχ h            −−−−−−→ Varχ h            .
                  2              2            2                           2
where in the last
                step we used the concentration result discussed in App. B.2.2, i.e. that the distribution
of Varχ h(l) asymptotically narrows around its mean value, becoming, w.h.p. independent of the
realization W .
Now we have all the ingredient we need; in fact, from equation 140 we know that

                                                               (l−1)
                                 Varχ h(l) = σw    2
                                                     Varχ gj           .                            (168)
Therefore, from equation 167, we can conclude
                                              σ2
                                    (l+1)        w       ′
                           Varχ h          <       − ϵl Varχ h(l) ,                                      (169)
                                                2
      ′
with ϵl > 0. Similarly, combining equation 141 with equation 162 we get
                              D         E    σ 2                D      E
                                  (l+1)          w
                        VarW    h          >       + ϵl VarW      h(l)    ,                              (170)
                                                2
with ϵl > 0. Calling
                                            ϵ ≡ inf ϵl ,                                                 (171)
                                                             l
we can finally write
                                         l                                l                         !
    VarW h(l+2)                     2        VarW h(2)            2
                                                                 σw                 2 VarW h(2)
                           >        2
                                                                    +ϵ        >l    2
                                                                                                   ϵ
     Varχ h(l+2)                   σw         Varχ h(2)           2                σw  Varχ h(2)
                                                                                 |        {z         }
                                                                                           1
                                                                                          ≡C             (172)

        Varχ h(l+2)       1
    =⇒                  <C .
       VarW h(l+2)        l
Therefore if we consider an infinite depth network, i.e. L → ∞, we have:

    Varχ h(L)             1          VarW O(c)              1            VarW O(c)
                   =O          =⇒                  =O           =⇒ lim               = 0.
  VarW h(L)               L            Varχ O(c)            L       L→∞ Varχ O (c)
                                                                                       (173)


G    C ONDITIONS FOR THE EMERGENCE / ABSENCE OF IGB
We discussed how the choice of the activation function can induce IGB. To make the discussion more
concrete we picked some emblematic examples (i.e. the linear activation function and the ReLU)
that we were able to work out analytically. Here we will discuss the problem from a more broad
perspective showing that these examples belongs to different classes of activation functions. We can
then conclude the emergence of IGB, for a generic activation function, depending on which of the
two class it belongs.
The fundamental difference that distinguishes the two cases discussed is as follows: with the linear
activation function the output nodes are asymptotically identically distributed; hence we have absence
of IGB. With the ReLU in contrast we observe a break in the symmetry of the output nodes. These
are still asymptotically Gaussian, but centered at different points.
The symmetry breaking is related to the fact that the ReLU in the first hidden layer maps the null-
                            (1)
averaged inputs to a r.v., gi , with a nonzero mean. We can therefore consider a generic activation
function and distinguish two cases. In the following we will consider a generic activation function
from each of the two classes and repeat the analysis to show the emergence/absence of IGB. We will
use the same setting used in the previous analysis (i.i.d. Gaussian input and Kaiming initialization for
the weights). As seen in App. C.1, irrespective to the activation function used we have

                                        (1)        d→∞             2
                                  Pχ hi | W −−−→ N 0, σw               .                           (174)


                                                            38
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G.1       N ON - NULL MEAN ACTIVATION FUNCTION

Let us consider a generic activation function g (·), such that
                               D       E D            E D      E
                                   (1)           (1)
                                 gi     ≡ g hi          = g (1) ̸= 0.                              (175)

                                                        (1)
where the second step follow from the fact that {hi } are identically distributed. Starting from
this hypothesis on the activation function (equation 175) we can follow exactly the same analysis
presented in App.F.1. In particular:
                                               D      E
                        (2)         N1 →∞
                  Pχ hi | W −−−        −−→ N     g (1) Swi , Varχ g (1) Swi2 =
                      D      E                                                              (176)
                  N     g (1) Swi , Varχ g (1) Swi2 ,

where, again, Varχ g (1) follows the definition from equation 130. From equation 176 we can
already see the nodes symmetry breaking; the centers of the distributions is a r.v. varying from node
to node. Note that hor a single hidden layer architecture

                                 Pχ O(c) | W = Pχ h(2)    c | W    .                            (177)

For a generic deep  architecture
                               we can keep following the analysis of App.F.1, substituiting the right
                     (2)
expression to Pχ gi | W dependent to the specific used activation function. Proceeding in this
way we will find, for each layer, a symmetry breaking in the nodes distribution, similarly to what we
observed in the second layer (equation 176).

G.2       N ULL MEAN ACTIVATION FUNCTION

Let us now consider the opposite scenario, i.e. an activation function g (·), such that
                             D       E D             E D        E
                                 (1)            (1)
                               gi     ≡ g hi           = g (1) = 0.                                (178)

                                                              (1)
where, again, the second step follow from the fact that {hi } are identically distributed. In this case,
instead of equation 176, we will have


              (2)    N1 →∞
          Pχ hi | W −−− −−→ N 0, Varχ g (1) Swi2 = N 0, Varχ g (1) Swi2 .                          (179)

Therefore we don’t have nodes symmetry breaking in this case. We can, therefore, pass to the
next layer getting a similar result (asymptotically equally distributed nodes). We can finally iterate
till reaching the output nodes, which will be equally distributed as well. If we consider a generic
activation function may be not trivial to associate it in one of the two classes we just discussed. Below
we provide an example of functions set whose elements all satisfies equation 178.

G.2.1       A NTI - SYMMETRIC ACTIVATION FUNCTIONS

The analysis presented in Sec. 4.1 highlighted the differences induced by the choice of the activation
function (see Fig. 5). In particular, we show how this choice can determine the emergence of IGB,
absent with a (trivial) identity activation function. Here we will elaborate more on this showing the
existence of a class of activation functions (anti-symmetric activation functions) that, similar to the
identity25 , never show IGB. We can reformulate the definition of IGB (Def. 3.1) to the framework of
the analysis presented.

  25
       the identity is an element of this class


                                                   39
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Definition G.1 (IGB). Let us assume that Pχ O(c) | W asymptotically converge to a Gaussian
  distribution (e.g. see App. C.3) with a non-zero variance. Then, if
                                    D      E
                               PW     O(c) = x = δ (x − a) , ∀c                        (180)

  for some a ∈ R, we have absence of IGB.
  If instead equation 180 does not hold, we have IGB, i.e. we will observe a disproportion
  between the values {fi }, even in the limit D → ∞ (so not due to finite size effects).

For concreteness we consider an example, to show the general idea. Let us consider the following
activation function

                  (l)     (l)           (l)
                 gi = g hi      = tanh hi , l ∈ {0, . . . , L}, i ∈ {0, . . . , Nl }.       (181)

                                                                   (1)
From equation 71 we know the asymptotic distribution of Pχ hi | W . Note that this result is
independent of the choice of the activation function. Now we ask ourselves "How does the distribution
change after passing through the activation function (equation 181)?" We can use the relation
                                                P (x) dx = P (y(x)) dy ,                                  (182)
to find
                                                                      (atanh(y))2
                                                                  −
                                                                         2σ 2
                                                             e            1h(l)
                                     (1)
                             Pχ gi            =y|W          = q                  .                        (183)
                                                                  2
                                                               2πσh(l) (1 − y2 )

We   can immediately       see
                              from equation     183 that the distribution is symmetric, i.e.
       (1)                     (1)
Pχ gi = y | W = Pχ gi = −y | W . This is a direct consequence of the anti-symmetricity

                                                        (l)
of the activation function and from the symmetry of Pχ hi | W 26 . This implies that
                                     D          E         D     E
                                          (1)               (2)
                                         gi         = 0 =⇒ hj     = 0, ∀i, j                              (184)

This represents a crucial difference with respect to the examples analyzed in the previous section
                          (2)
because now all nodes {hj } are identically distributed, and, in particular,
                                         D     E
                                    PW     h(2) = x = δ (x) .                                (185)

Propagating further across the remaining hidden layers, the situation
                                                                   doesn’t
                                                                          change. Apart from
                                                                                             the
                                                                    (2)            (1)
value of the variance, there is in fact no difference between Pχ hi | W and Pχ hi | W , so
we can reiterate the same reasoning, finding
                                           D      E
                                     PW      h(3) = x = δ (x) ,                            (186)

and so on ∀l ∈ {3, . . . , L + 1}. In particular, for l = L + 1 this implies that
                                            D      E
                                      PW      O(c) = x = δ (x) .                                          (187)

which means that, employing an anti-symmetric activation function (as tanh), we don’t observe
IGB27 .

G.3       E LIMINATE /T RIGGER IGB WITH A GENERIC ACTIVATION FUNCTION
  26
    we would get therefore an analogue result considering a different anti-symmetric activation function

  27
    note that we also are implicitly assuming that the initialization chosen keeps the variance of Pχ O(c) | W
asymptotically non-null


                                                             40
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We just showed that the set of activation func-
tions can be partitioned in two subsets; depend-                  SReLU                        ReLU

ing on which subset a given function belongs
we will observe or not IGB. We emphasize how-            101
ever that our analysis allows us to characterize


                                                          PW (f0)
these subset by a simple attribute (i.e. equa-
tion 175 and equation 178). This means that,             100
starting from a given activation function we can,
in principle, modify it getting a new function,
member of the opposite subset. In other words,          10−1
by slightly modifying the definition of an acti-              0.0      0.2 0.4    0.6    0.8     1.0
vation function (or acting by some regulariza-                                 f0
tion) we can start by a network with IGB and
make it disappear (or vice-versa). This idea is
reminiscent of some procedures introduced in Figure 8: Comparison between SReLU and ReLU.
machine learning in similar contexts. For exam- A simple shift of the ReLU can make it satisfy
ple in Ioffe & Szegedy (2015) they introduce equation 179 eliminating IGB. Here we can ob-
the Batch-Normalization as a scaling procedure serve, from PW (f0 ), the difference in the two
to mitigate the Internal Covariate Shift, i.e. the regimes. For these simulations we used the dataset
change in the distribution of network activations GBon the model SHLP. (see App. I.4 for more de-
due to the change in network parameters dur- tails).
ing training. In our case we are not considering
these differences induced by the learning, but rather differences between nodes due to the initial-
ization. On the other hand, for what just said, our analysis suggest that a similar scaling could be
effective in eliminate IGB as well.
To make the discussion more concrete we provide now an example. We saw how the ReLU trigger
IGB. Let us consider now a variant of ReLU defined as follow
                                          (
                                                 (1)
                                               hi − √σ2π
                                                       w           (1)
                                                          , if hi > 0 ,
                                  (1)
                             g hi       =                          (1)                          (188)
                                               − √σ2πw
                                                             if hi < 0 ,

where √σ2πw
             is the ReLU mean value (we can easly compute it from equation 78 ). This shifted
variant of ReLU, which we call SReLU , satisfy equation 178, and belongs therefore to the subset of
functions with absence of IGB (see Fig. 8).
In this example we could easly compute the expectation value and directly subtract it to shift the
activation function to a null mean value. For an arbitrary activation function we could however
perform a shift based on the empirical average computed on the forwarding batch, in a similar spirit
to the approach proposed in Ioffe & Szegedy (2015).


H     M ULTI - CLASS EXTENSION

We want now to extend the analysis to the multi-class case, i.e. to problem with NC > 2. Following
the framework introduced we can easily extend the computation. We will again consider the distribu-
tion among the NC classes of the dataset elements after initialization. In particular we can define NC
values associated to the fraction of dataset elements classified as belonging to each of the NC classes.
The statistics of these variables will clearly change with the number of classes. To take track of this
we slightly modify the notation, for the multi-class. We indicate explicitly the number of classes used
                             n      oM −1
                               (M )
to build the statistics, i.e. fi           , where M is the number of classes considered.
                                      i=0
We could also consider the distribution of the sorted frequencies; in other word in each experiment
we order the classes according to the corresponding frequencies and not by their label. To distinguish
                                                    n      oM −1                        n       oM −1
                                                      (M )                                 (M )
this frequencies (and their statistics) from the set fi           , we call this new set fĩ          . In
                                                                    i=0                         ĩ=0
             (M )                                                         (M )
particular f0̃      indicates the bigger frequency among the M , f1̃
                                                                   the second one and so on. Finally
                                                                      n       oM −1
                                                                          (c)
we add the information of the cardinality also on the output nodes set OM           . Analogously to
                                                                                  c=0


                                                     41
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                              n      oM −1
                                                                (c̃)
the set of fractions, we define the set of ranked output nodes OM          In the following, similarly
                                                                                   c̃=0
                                                   (M )
to Sec. 4.1 we will derive the distribution of f0         .


                                                  IGB (m = 20, NC = 10)

                                                                                             (N )
                                                              Theoretical distr.            f0 C = N1C

                       101
                                                              ReLU + MaxPool                          (N )
                                                                                            empirical f0 C

                (N )
           PW f 0 C


                       100


                   10−1


                             0.0      0.2             0.4               0.6           0.8             1.0
                                                               (N )
                                                              f0 C

Figure 9: PW (f0 ) in a multi-class problem with NC = 10. The empirical mean value is reported;
note that despite the difference in the distribution the mean value is the same that we would observe
                                    (N )
using a linear activation function f0 C = N1C . For these simulations we used the dataset GBon the
model SHLPwith MaxPooling (m=20). (see App. I.4 for more details).

                                       (M )
We will make in the derivation of f0        the following approximation: We will repeat the same
approach of the binary setting comparing the generic class "0" with the class with bigger mean
output value among the NC − 1 remaining classes.
                                                                  (0̃)
The first ingredient that we need is therefore the statistics of ONC −1 . From the analysis of previous

                                 (0̃)
sections, we know that Pχ ONC −1 | W is asymptotically Gaussian. The mean value of this
Gaussian variable will follow the distribution of the maximum among NC − 1 drawn from the
Gaussian distribution PW O(c) as, by definition,
                                  D        E                  D     E
                                      (0̃)
                                    ONC −1 ≡        max        O(c) .                             (189)
                                                    c∈{1,...,NC }


Maximum over NC − 1 Gaussian draws We will follow the same approach used in App. C.1 .
We will again start from equation 82. In this case,
                                            D       E
                        P (X = x) ≡ PW        O(c) = x = N x; 0, σˆ2 ,          (190)

where we used a generic σˆ2 to indicate the variance. We will perform the computation in this general
settings; then to analyze the specific cases we can just substitute the right variance for the specific
case (see App. C.2).
                 Z y                        Z y
                                                                 1            y
      FX (y) ≡           P (X = x) dx =         N x; 0, σˆ2 dx =     1 + erf √        .                      (191)
                  −∞                         −∞                  2             2σ̂
Now, putting all pieces together in equation 82, we get our target distribution,
                     D        E                                                           NC −2
                         (0̃)                                  2
                                                                   1               y
 P (Y = y) ≡ PW        ONC −1 = y = (NC − 1) N y; 0, σ̃                  1 + erf √              .
                                                                    2              2σ̃
                                                                                             (192)


                                                      42
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Now we can proceed following again the steps presented at the end of Sec. 4.1. The only difference
we will have is in equation 113; now we will have
                   Z ∞          D       E          D         E
           (N )                     (0)                (0̃)            ˆ f (NC ) dx̃ ,
    PW f0 C =               PW     ONC = x̃ PW       ONC −1 = x̃ − ∆        0                (193)
                                −∞
     D      E
       (0̃)                                                      ˆ f (NC ) is a function of
where ONC −1 the biggest mean output among the NC − 1. Note that ∆   0
    (N )
f0 C . Substituting equation 190 and equation 192 we have:
                          Z ∞                                                                   !!!NC −2
                                                                       1                    ˆ
                                                                                       x̃ − ∆
                                N x̃; 0, σˆ2 (NC − 1)N x̃; ∆,
                                                           ˆ σˆ2
           (N )
PW        f0 C        =                                                     1 + erf     √                    dx̃ .
                          −∞                                           2                  2σ̂
                                                                                                           (194)

I     E XPERIMENTS
The analysis presented is able to identify IGB and analytically describe the phenomena in a variety of
settings (e.g., MLPs with different activation functions, arbitrary depth, and the presence or absence
of pooling layers). However, IGB is significantly broader in scope, as it may be observed in a wide
range of dataset and architectural combinations. Although our theoretical analysis does not go into
these scenarios (a further extension of the analytical conclusions to more sophisticated designs will be
the focus of future research), we provide some representative instances to demonstrate the breadth of
scenarios where IGB is significant in real-world circumstances. The experiments presented, while not
exhaustive, aim to provide insights and emphasize three fundamental points that will be developed in
a separate publication:

           • IGB is amplified in structured data, particularly in cases of strongly correlated data (App. I.1).
           • IGB is a ubiquitous phenomenon, that happens with most combinations of datasets and
             architectures (App. I.1, I.2).
           • The differences induced by IGB on the initial state of the network have an impact on its
             dynamics, rendering it qualitatively distinct, especially in the initial phase, compared to the
             case without IGB (App. I.3).

I.1     E XPERIMENTS ON R EAL DATA

In this section, we show some empirical evidence of IGB on combinations of models and data which
are not covered by our theory, such as CNN architectures and the MNIST, CIFAR10 and CIFAR100
datasets.28 In App.I.2, we will also include experiments on additional architectures (ResNet and
Vision Transformers). The experiments we will discuss do not presume to show in a complete and
exhaustive way the range of models and cases in which IGB can occur; this question is outside
the scope of our work. Rather, they are some didactic examples intended to show how, beyond
the assumptions used in our analysis to quantitatively treat the phenomenon, IGB also emerges
in a broader context. We first present and discuss the experiments. For technical details for the
reproducibility we refer the reader to App. I.4.

I.1.1      A P ROTOTYPE FOR H IGHLY C ORRELATED DATA : MNIST
In the analysis we presented in the main part of the paper, we focused on a simple data structure, to
underline effects induced by architecture design: a remarkable conclusion from this setting is the
following:
In a classification problem, an untrained network with biases set to zero and fed with i.i.d. data-points
(i.e. different classes are identically distributed) often starts the training process with a strong bias
toward one of the classes.
For our theoretical analysis, we placed ourselves in a setting where the effect of IGB is minimal
and unaffected by the data structure. This ensures that the sources of IGB, which our analysis
  28
     MNIST is a particularly insightful dataset for IGB, because the correlations between pixels are high. This is
opposite to what we cover with our theory, which is based on i.i.d. inputs.


                                                       43
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              IGB on CNN , MNIST: even versus odd                             IGB on CNN , MNIST: even versus odd
      40
                             ReLU + MaxPool                                                  ReLU + MaxPool
      35
                                                                         1
                                                                    10
      30
                             Tanh + AvgPool                                                  Tanh + AvgPool
      25
 PW (f0)


                                                          PW (f0)
      20                                                            100

      15

      10
                                                               10−1
       5

       0
            0.0     0.2    0.4        0.6     0.8   1.0                      0.0    0.2    0.4        0.6     0.8   1.0
                                 f0                                                              f0


Figure 10: Comparison of Pχ (f0 ) between two untrained neural networks fed with MNIST dataset;
the ten classes of the dataset were merged in two macro groups: even and odd. The two architectures
employed in the comparison differ in the choice of activation function and pooling. For these
simulations we used the E&O dataset on the model CNN-B. (see App. I.4 for more details). On the
right, the same plot in a logarithmic scale to better visualize the differences in the low-density regions.


links to architectural design elements, do not stem from dataset characteristics. Below, we present
experiments in which these hypotheses on data are violated, to demonstrate how the phenomenon
manifests itself (more prominently) in real datasets, where:

            • Data-points belonging to different classes will not be identically distributed.
            • Components of a single data-point will not be independent; for example pixels of an image
              will clearly be correlated.
            • Similarly, correlation between different data-points (belonging to the same class) is possible.

MNIST constitutes a good candidate to represent a scenario of strong correlations in the data. In fact,
in this dataset the images are characterized by a small percentage of nonzero pixels; this leads to the
formation of areas, within the same image, characterized by similar values and therefore strongly
correlated. In addition, image areas are strongly correlated between different elements. For example,
we are unlikely to observe the writing of a number on the edges of an image; therefore, different
images will have similar values of pixels along the edges. When considering images of the same class,
this correlation is even more pronounced. From the MNIST dataset, we defined two macro-classes,
even and odd, by merging the 10 starting classes according to their parity. We then propagated
the binary dataset, obtained in this way, through two untrained convolutional neural networks. The
difference between the two networks lies in the choice of activation and pooling function employed. In
particular the dataset is propagated through CNN-B (network details in App. I.4). The CNN-B model
is a CNN where the last convolutional layer is directly connected to the outputs. We choose it this
way, because, as earlier shown, IGB cannot arise without hidden layers. This indicates that the
observation of IGB is caused by the convolutional layers or, to put it more precisely, it emerges from
the propagation of structured data through the convolutional layers.
We show this in Fig. 10, which contains two important messages:

           ♢ Unlike the cases presented in our theoretical analysis, neither of the two choices has total
             absence of IGB. This is consistent with the intuition that correlations in the data cause or
             amplify IGB.
           ♢ While we observe presence of IGB in both cases, this is more pronounced for the architecture
             with ReLU and MaxPooling, consistent with what we saw in our study.

These observations show how IGB is a rather universal phenomenon, related to the combined effect
of data structure and the design of the neural network.

I.1.2        A FURTHER EXAMPLE : CIFAR10
We now show a multi-class example, on the same network as in App. I.1.1 (CNN-B) we propagated
CIFAR10. The results are reported in Fig. 11. As with MNIST, the results are qualitatively consistent


                                                          44
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             IGB on CNN , CIFAR10: NC = 10                                                                     IGB on CNN , CIFAR10: NC = 10
              70
                                                                                   (N )                                                                                               (N )
                                       Tanh + AvgPool (TA)                    TA: f0 C                                                       Tanh + AvgPool (TA)                 TA: f0 C
              60

              50                                                                                                   101


                                       ReLU + MaxPool (RM)                          (N )                                                     ReLU + MaxPool (RM)                      (N )
     (N )


                                                                                                (N )
                                                                              RM: f0 C                                                                                           RM: f0 C
PW f 0 C


                                                                                           PW f 0 C
              40


              30                                                                                                   100

              20

              10                                                                                               10−1

                  0
                       0.0       0.2       0.4            0.6         0.8           1.0                                  0.0          0.2           0.4            0.6     0.8         1.0
                                                   (N )                                                                                                    (N )
                                                  f0 C                                                                                                    f0 C


                                    (N )
Figure 11: Comparison of Pχ fc C between two untrained neural networks fed with CIFAR10
dataset (with 10 classes). The two architectures employed in the comparison differ in the choice of
activation function and pooling. In the absence of IGB, the distributions would concentrate around
the vertical line. For these simulations we used the dataset C10 on the model CNN-B described below
(see App. I.4). On the right, the same plot in a logarithmic scale to better visualize the differences in
the low-density regions.


                                       Cifar100 on CNN                                                                                      Cifar100 on CNN
            102                                           1                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                        1010
                                                         NC                                                                                                  NC
                                                                                                               8
                                                                                                          10
                                                                                            PW (f0 + 1e − 9)


            101
                                                                                                          106
 PW (f0 )


                                                                                                          104
            100

                                                                                                          102

       10−1                                                                                               100



                      0.0        0.2        0.4                 0.6         0.8                                                10−8         10−6            10−4         10−2          100
                                                   f0                                                                                              f0 + 1e − 9



Figure 12: CNN-A (ReLU+MaxPool case) with C100 in this case (NC = 100). The peak at
f0 = N1C , corresponding to the No IGB case (in the absence of IGB, the distribution should
concentrate around this value), is reported as a reference. The plot on the right contains the same data
as that on the left, but has a logarithmic x axis. We add a small number (109 ) to the value of f0 , in
order to show the peak at f0 = 0.



with the conclusions of our theory: the network with ReLU and MaxPooling displays a stronger IGB
than its counterpart with tanh and AvgPooling. Note, also, how in both cases, symmetry between
                                                                                                                                                          (N )
classes is preserved at the ensemble level. In both cases, in fact, we get fc C = 1/NC . To show
this we show in Fig. 11 two vertical lines at the mean values calculated on the empirical distributions
(histograms), each surrounded by its own uncertainty, estimated through the standard error.


I.1.3                 H IGH CARDINALITY DATASET: C IFAR 100

We also provide another example of a multi-class dataset. In this case, we choose Cifar-100 as a
prototype of a high-cardinality dataset (with a high number of classes) to demonstrate the presence
of IGB in this scenario as well. In the absence of IGB, the distribution should be peaked at f0 =
1/NC = 1/100. However, the histogram shows a peak at 0 (most of the time, the generic class does
not receive any assigned elements). The gap between the peak at 0 and the rest of the distribution,
particularly evident in the log-log scale plot, indicates a resolution limit due to the finite number of
dataset elements (D = 104 ).


                                                                                           45
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             IGB on ResNet                                    IGB on Vision Transformer
       12
                                                                  1.2
       10
                                                                  1.0
            8
 PW (f0 )


                                                            PW (f0 )
                                                                  0.8

            6
                                                                  0.6

            4                                                     0.4

            2                                                     0.2

            0                                                     0.0
                 0.0   0.2     0.4        0.6   0.8   1.0               0.0   0.2    0.4        0.6   0.8   1.0
                                     f0                                                    f0



Figure 13: Plot of PW (f0 ) for a ResNet34 (left), i.e. ResNet , and a Vision Transformer (right),
i.e. ViT (see Sec. I.4), on two classes extracted from Cifar10 (same setting as Fig. 1 in the main
paper). In this case, we also observe the wide profile that characterizes IGB.


I.2             E XPERIMENTS ON OTHER ARCHITECTURES

The experiments presented in App. I.1 illustrate how IGB can also emerge in CNNs. Below, we
provide some examples to give an idea of the breadth of settings and architectures related to the
presence of this phenomenon. We specifically conduct simulations on a Residual Network and a
Visual Transformer. Similarly to what was observed for CNNs, these architectures also exhibit the
presence of IGB (Fig. 13).

I.3             E FFECTS ON THE T RAINING DYNAMICS

As we will see, the presence or absence of IGB induces important differences in the subsequent
training dynamics. The objective of this section is to present some key elements that distinguish
between cases with and without IGB. Our intention is not to provide an exhaustive review, as this
would demand an extensive discussion beyond the scope of this study. Nevertheless, we present several
key experimental results that clearly demonstrate the practical significance of IGB, highlighting that
this phenomenon is worth further investigation.
Considering that IGB is observed in a variety of settings, including advanced architectures capable of
achieving state-of-the-art performance, it is reasonable to assume that IGB does not profoundly affect
convergence at the end of the dynamics. However, the qualitative differences from the case without
IGB and the resemblance to curves observed in the context of class imbalance suggest potential
additional challenges associated with the presence of IGB. To effectively illustrate the differences in
dynamics with and without IGB, we will compare the two cases in the regimes of small and large
learning rates (slow/stable and unstable regimes). We will clarify the relevance of these two limits in
the discussion.

Small learning rate Fig. 14 illustrates the comparison in the small learning rate regime (slow
dynamics), which is of particular interest and widely studied (Sarao Mannelli et al., 2020; Tarmoun
et al., 2021; Francazi et al., 2022). One noticeable difference is the behavior of individual class
curves. In the absence of IGB, the curves averaged over both classes closely align with those of
each individual class. In contrast, in the presence of IGB, there is a substantial difference between
them; global measures, therefore, such as accuracy or loss do not serve as reliable indicators of
individual class performance in this case. The differences in dynamics between the two cases are
especially prominent in the initial training phase. Specifically, in presence of IGB, the per-class
recall of one class remains low for an extended duration. This closely resembles situations observed
in the presence of class imbalance, which has become a recent concern (see e.g., Fig. 1 and Fig. 4
of Francazi et al. (2022)). To gain insight, it is worthwhile to consider the well-established impact
of class imbalance bias on dynamics. For instance, Ye et al. (2021); Francazi et al. (2022) explore
this from a theoretical perspective, discussing how the initial imbalance between classes leads to
learning delays. It is well-known that the slowdown in dynamics poses a limitation, for example, in
hyper-parameter tuning (Francazi et al., 2022), as the initial phase of the dynamics is uninformative.


                                                            46
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             average over multiple runs - Small learning rate regime
                                  Dataset (IGB)                Cat (IGB)                  Dog (IGB)
                                  Dataset (No IGB)             Cat (No IGB)               Dog (No IGB)



                     0.55                                                                                 0.55
          Train Recall


                                                                                                             Test Recall
                     0.50                                                                                 0.50


                     0.45                                                                                 0.45


                           100     101       102     103              100     101   102     103
                                                     # steps +1
                                  single (typical) run - Small learning rate regime
                                 Dataset (IGB)                 Cat (IGB)                   Dog (IGB)
                                 Dataset (No IGB)              Cat (No IGB)                Dog (No IGB)

                     1.0                                                                                   1.0

                     0.8                                                                                   0.8
          Train Recall


                                                                                                             Test Recall
                     0.6                                                                                   0.6

                     0.4                                                                                   0.4

                     0.2                                                                                   0.2

                     0.0                                                                                   0.0
                       100        101       102      103              100     101   102      103
                                                           # steps +1
Figure 14: Comparison of the initial phase of the dynamics in the IGB and No IGB cases for
CNN-A trained on two classes extracted from Cifar10 (same setting as Fig. 1 in the main paper)
with a small learning rate (for both cases we used a constant learning rate: η = 10−7 ). In the IGB
case, by averaging over multiple realizations, it is not possible to observe the initial imbalance, as the
symmetry between the two classes is preserved at the ensemble level (consistent with what is shown
in the histogram in Fig.1 of the Main paper). Therefore, in addition to the average over multiple
realizations (left), the curves corresponding to a typical single run are also presented.


                                                               47
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              average over multiple runs - Big learning rate regime
                               Dataset (IGB)                Cat (IGB)                  Dog (IGB)
                               Dataset (No IGB)             Cat (No IGB)               Dog (No IGB)
                    1.0                                                                               1.0
         Train Recall


                                                                                                        Test Recall
                    0.8                                                                               0.8


                    0.6                                                                               0.6


                    0.4                                                                               0.4

                        100     101       102     103              100     101   102     103
                                                     # steps +1
                                  single (typical) run - Big learning rate regime
                               Dataset (IGB)                Cat (IGB)                  Dog (IGB)
                               Dataset (No IGB)             Cat (No IGB)               Dog (No IGB)

                    1.0                                                                               1.0

                    0.8                                                                               0.8
         Train Recall


                                                                                                        Test Recall
                    0.6                                                                               0.6

                    0.4                                                                               0.4

                    0.2                                                                               0.2

                    0.0                                                                               0.0
                      100       101       102     103              100     101   102     103
                                                        # steps +1
Figure 15: Comparison of the initial phase of the dynamics in the IGB and No IGB cases for
CNN-A trained on two classes extracted from Cifar10 (same setting as Fig. 1 in the main paper) with
a big learning rate (for both cases we used a constant learning rate: η = 10−3 ).


                                                            48
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Large learning rate In the absence of class imbalance, the slowdown observed in the small
learning rate regime is generally resolved by using higher learning rate values. In the presence
of class imbalance, the difference in per-class gradients makes the dynamics more susceptible to
instability, where the dominant gradient contribution shifts from one class to another at each step.
Therefore, finding an intermediate learning rate value between these two regimes becomes non-trivial,
complicating hyper-parameter tuning procedures. It is interesting to note that even in this scenario,
curves computed on balanced datasets in the presence of IGB show similarities to the behavior
observed in the presence of class imbalance (see Fig. 15).
Conversely, the fact that IGB creates an imbalance between classes in balanced datasets opens up
the possibility of exploiting the phenomenon to counteract the effects of class imbalance for the
dynamics’ benefit by acting on the network’s design rather than on the dynamics itself.

I.4   R EPRODUCIBILITY

Here we provide technical details about the experiments, to allow for reproducibil-
ity.     The code used for the experiments presented in this work are available at
https://anonymous.4open.science/r/Algorithms-82EC/README.md.

Datasets

       • Gaussian Blob (GB): Consistent with the analysis presented, for most of the experiments
         shown we used a Gaussian blob as input. Specifically, all elements of the dataset are
         i.i.d. and each individual element consists of a random vector of d = 3072 i.i.d. normally
         distributed components, i.e.:
                                                (a)
                                               ξb        ∼ N (0, 1)
         Note that the value of d is chosen so that the random vectors we generate have the same
         dimension of CIFAR10.
       • CIFAR10 (C10): We use CIFAR10 (https://www.cs.toronto.edu/~kriz/
         cifar.html) (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) as an example of a real multi-class dataset. Before
         the start of the simulation we perform the standardization of the dataset: the pixel values
         are rescaled in the interval [0, 1] and then shifted by the mean value and rescaled by the
         standard deviations (calculated on each channel).
       • CIFAR100 (C100): We use CIFAR100 (https://www.cs.toronto.edu/
         ~kriz/cifar.html) (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) as an example of high cardinality dataset,
         i.e. a dataset with a big number of classes
       • MNIST (E&O): We use MNIST (http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist/) (Deng,
         2012) to reproduce binary experiments on real data. The binary dataset is defined by merging
         the starting classes into two macro groups according to the parity of digits; thus, we will
         have the even number class {0, 2, 4, 6, 8} and the odd number class {1, 3, 5, 7, 9}.

Models We here provide details on the architectures we used for our experiments. Our description
of the models does not include the loss functions because the loss function is irrelevant in untrained
networks.

       • MLP: Our analysis provides theoretical predictions for MLP. In order to support the results
         of the study, we considered two different MLP networks in the proposed experiments:
           – MLP with a single hidden layer (SHLP): The number of nodes nodes in the hidden
             layer varies between N1 = 100 for networks without Pooling and N1 = 500 for
             networks equipped with MaxPooling layer. Different activation functions have been
             coupled to the networks to show the differences; details regarding the choice of these
             elements are given case by case.
           – MLP with multiple hidden layers (MHLP): In this case we have L hidden layers, each
             one composed by N = 100 nodes. As in the previous case, the activation function is
             an element we varied to set a comparison and underline the differences coming from
             this choice.


                                                    49
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       • CNN: To show how IGB manifests outside the setting employed in the quantitative treatment
         presented we propose, some experiments on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) as an
         alternative to the MLPs discussed above. In particular, we used:
           – CNN-A: This architecture was used for simulations related to the histogram in Fig. 1;
             two classes from CIFAR10 (three-channel images) were selected for these experiments.
             Starting from the input layer we have:
              * a first convolutional layer with: out channels=16 (Number of channels produced
                 by the convolution), m = 5 ( Size of the convolving kernel), stride=1, padding=2.
                 The output of the layer is then passed through an activation function and a pooling
                 layer. The choice of these elements varies to compare two different scenarios (as
                 explained in Fig. 1). In both cases, however, we set common parameters for the
                 pooling layer, i.e. m = 2 (kernel size), stride=2.
              * Next comes a second convolutional layer with the same parameters as the previous
                 one, except for the number of output chanels; in this case we have out channels=64.
                 Again the convolutional layer is followed by an activation function and a pooling
                 layer (same as the first layer). The parameters of the pooling layer in this case are
                 i.e. m = 4 (kernel size), stride=4. The processed signal is then connected with a
                 weights layer to the output layer.
           – CNN-B: We also consider a second CNN architecture deeper than CNN-A. Specifically
             starting from the input layer:
              * we start with a sequence of five convolutional layers (each followed by an activation
                 function and pooling layer). Except for the number of output channels the rest of
                 the parameters are fixed the same for each of these layers, in particular we have for
                 the convolutional layer = 5, stride=1, padding=4. For the pooling layer, however,
                 m = 5, stride=1. Finally, the number of output channels for the various layers is
                 [16, 32, 32, 64, 32].
              * This is followed by an additional convolutional layer defined by the following
                 parameters: out channels=16, m = 5, stride=1, padding=2. This is accompanied by
                 the activation function and a Pooling layer whose parameters are: m = 2, stride=2.
              * Finally, a last sequence of convolutional layers, activation function and pooling
                 layer precedes the output layer. The only parameter that differs from the sequence
                 that precedes it is the kernel size of the pooling layer; specifically in this case
                 m = 4. The processed signal is then connected with a weights layer to the output
                 layer.
           – ResNet: We propose ResNet34 (ResNet), introduced in He et al. (2016) as an example
             of an architecture equipped with skip connections.
           – Vision Transformer: We propose ViT (ViT), introduced in Dosovitskiy et al. (2020)
             as an example of an architecture equipped with skip connections.

Note that in both the CNN architectures we use, the final convolutional layer is directly connected to
the output, without any additional fully-connected hidden layer (as the ones described by our theory).
This indicates that the observed IGB is also also a feature of CNNs independently of the presence of
fully-connected hidden layers at the end of the network (which as we proved would also cause IGB).

J   L IMITATIONS AND E THICS
Limitations We can identify the following limitations to our work:

       • Our work focuses on systems simple enough to clearly show the main aspects of the
         phenomenon and at the same time complex enough to investigate non-trivial effects induced,
         for example, by network depth. A comprehensive picture emerges that clarifies the effect of
         some particular elements of the architecture and their connection with IGB. On the other
         hand, the observation of IGB is not restricted to the subset of networks/datasets considered
         in the study. Although the treatment of more articulated setups is outside the scope of the
         study, whose main goal is to present the phenomenon (which to the best of our knowledge
         has never been reported in the literature) in a clear manner, the characterization of IGB for
         more realistic systems remains an interesting question.


                                                 50
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      • Our analysis suggests that some forms of regularization (e.g., batch normalization) might be
        effective in mitigating IGB. To draw conclusions in this regard, however, an in-depth study
        comparing different kinds of normalization is needed: note how such regularizations are not
        included in our simulations.
        If architectural elements such as batch normalization help suppressing IGB, this would be
        a further step towards an aware choice of the architectures, allowing to choose whether to
        have initial conditions with IGB or not.

Ethics By informing model selection, data preparation and initial conditions, our results can
improve the training of machine learning models. Better-performing machine learning models
allow to better address wide ranges of problems, but can also be adapted for potentially harmful
applications (Hutson, 2021; Qadeer & Millar, 2021).

The CIFAR datasets, are subsets of the 80 million tiny images, which are formally withdrawn since
it contains some derogatory terms as categories and offensive images (http://groups.csail.
mit.edu/vision/TinyImages/). However, note that none of the experiments described in
the paper was performed on the overall tiny images dataset: the said derogatory images are not
present in CIFAR10 nor CIFAR100.


                                                51
