Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A U T O G E N : E NABLING N EXT-G EN LLM
A PPLICATIONS VIA M ULTI -AGENT C ONVERSATION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                                        Plot a chart of                       Output:
        Conversable agent                                               META and TESLA
                                                                        stock price change
                                                                        YTD.                                  $
                                                                                  Execute the
                                                                              following code…                        Month
                                                                       Error package                          No, please plot %
                                  Multi-Agent Conversations
                                                                       yfinance is not                        change!
                                                                       installed
                                                                                                                  Got it! Here is the
                                                                          Sorry! Please first                        revised code …

                                                                   …
                              …          …            …
                                                                          pip install yfinance
                                                                            and then execute                  Output:
                                                                                      the code
                                    …          …      …       …        Installing…                            %

                                  Joint chat       Hierarchical chat
                                                                                                                     Month

        Agent Customization   Flexible Conversation Patterns                             Example Agent Chat


Figure 1: AutoGen enables diverse LLM-based applications using multi-agent conversations.
(Left) AutoGen agents are conversable, customizable, and can be based on LLMs, tools, humans,
or even a combination of them. (Top-middle) Agents can converse to solve tasks. (Right) They can
form a chat, potentially with humans in the loop. (Bottom-middle) The framework supports flexible
conversation patterns.

                                                       A BSTRACT
             AutoGen1 is an open-source framework that allows developers to build LLM
             applications via multiple agents that can converse with each other to accomplish
             tasks. AutoGen agents are customizable, conversable, and can operate in vari-
             ous modes that employ combinations of LLMs, human inputs, and tools. Using
             AutoGen, developers can also flexibly define agent interaction behaviors. Both
             natural language and computer code can be used to program flexible conversation
             patterns for different applications. AutoGen serves as a generic infrastructure
             to build diverse applications of various complexities and LLM capacities. Em-
             pirical studies demonstrate the effectiveness of the framework in many example
             applications, with domains ranging from mathematics, coding, question answer-
             ing, operations research, online decision-making, entertainment, etc.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Large language models (LLMs) are becoming a crucial building block in developing powerful agents
that utilize LLMs for reasoning, tool usage, and adapting to new observations (Yao et al., 2022; Xi
et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b) in many real-world tasks. Given the expanding tasks that could
benefit from LLMs and the growing task complexity, an intuitive approach to scale up the power of
agents is to use multiple agents that cooperate. Prior work suggests that multiple agents can help
encourage divergent thinking (Liang et al., 2023), improve factuality and reasoning (Du et al., 2023),
and provide guardrails (Wu et al., 2023). In light of the intuition and early evidence of promise, it is
intriguing to ask the following question: how can we facilitate the development of LLM applications
that could span a broad spectrum of domains and complexities based on the multi-agent approach?
Our insight is to use multi-agent conversations to achieve it. There are at least three reasons con-
firming its general feasibility and utility thanks to recent advances in LLMs: First, because chat-
optimized LLMs (e.g., GPT-4) show the ability to incorporate feedback, LLM-agents can cooperate
    1
        https://anonymous.4open.science/r/autogen-iclr2024


                                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


through conversations with each other or human(s), e.g., a dialog where agents provide and seek rea-
soning, observations, critiques, and validation. Second, because a single LLM can exhibit a broad
range of capabilities (especially when configured with the correct prompt and inference settings),
conversations between differently-configured agents can help combine these broad LLM capabilities
in a modular and complementary manner. Third, LLMs have demonstrated ability to solve complex
tasks when broken into simpler subtasks. Multi-agent conversations can enable this partitioning and
integration in an intuitive manner.
How can we leverage the above insights and support different applications with the common re-
quirement of coordinating multiple agents, potentially backed by LLMs, humans, or tools exhibiting
different capacities? We desire a multi-agent conversation framework with generic abstraction and
effective implementation that has the flexibility to satisfy different application needs. Achieving
this requires addressing two critical questions: (1) How can we design individual agents that are
capable, reusable, customizable, and effective in multi-agent collaboration? (2) How can we de-
velop a straightforward, unified interface that can accommodate a wide range of agent conversation
patterns? In practice, applications of varying complexities may need distinct sets of agents with
specific capabilities, and may require different conversation patterns, such as single- or multi-turn
dialogs, different human involvement modes, and static vs. dynamic conversation. Moreover, devel-
opers may prefer the flexibility to program agent interactions in natural language or code. Failing
to adequately address these two questions would limit the framework’s scope of applicability and
generality.
While there is contemporaneous exploration of multi-agent approaches,2 we develop AutoGen, a
generalized multi-agent conversation framework (Figure 1), based on the following new concepts.

1 Customizable and conversable agents. AutoGen uses a generic design of agents that can
  leverage LLMs, human inputs, tools, or a combination of them. The result is that developers
  can easily and quickly create agents with different roles (e.g., agents to write code, execute code,
  wire in human feedback, validate outputs, etc.) by selecting and configuring a subset of built-in
  capabilities. The agent’s backend can also be readily extended to allow more custom behaviors.
  To make these agents suitable for multi-agent conversation, every agent is made conversable –
  they can receive, react, and respond to messages. When configured properly, an agent can hold
  multiple turns of conversations with other agents autonomously or solicit human inputs at certain
  rounds, enabling human agency and automation. The conversable agent design leverages the
  strong capability of the most advanced LLMs in taking feedback and making progress via chat
  and also allows combining capabilities of LLMs in a modular fashion. (Section 2.1)
2 Conversation programming. A fundamental insight of AutoGen is to simplify and unify com-
  plex LLM application workflows as multi-agent conversations. So AutoGen adopts a program-
  ming paradigm centered around these inter-agent conversations. We refer to this paradigm as
  conversation programming, which streamlines the development of intricate applications via two
  primary steps: (1) defining a set of conversable agents with specific capabilities and roles (as
  described above); (2) programming the interaction behavior between agents via conversation-
  centric computation and control. Both steps can be achieved via a fusion of natural and pro-
  gramming languages to build applications with a wide range of conversation patterns and agent
  behaviors. AutoGen provides ready-to-use implementations and also allows easy extension and
  experimentation for both steps. (Section 2.2)

AutoGen also provides a collection of multi-agent applications created using conversable agents
and conversation programming. These applications demonstrate how AutoGen can easily support
applications of various complexities and LLMs of various capabilities. Moreover, we perform both
evaluation on benchmarks and a pilot study of new applications. The results show that AutoGen can
help achieve outstanding performance on many tasks, and enable innovative ways of using LLMs,
while reducing the development effort. (Section 3 and Appendix D)



   2
     Note for reviewers: As of September 23rd, 2023, most prior multi-agent LLM approaches have not been
published at peer-reviewed venues and only appeared online after May 2023. Hence, per the ICLR reviewer
guide they should be considered as contemporaneous work. We refer to Appendix A for a detailed discussion.


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2     T HE A U T O G E N F RAMEWORK

To reduce the effort required for developers to create complex LLM applications across various do-
mains, a core design principle of AutoGen is to streamline and consolidate multi-agent workflows
using multi-agent conversations. This approach also aims to maximize the reusability of imple-
mented agents. This section introduces the two key concepts of AutoGen: conversable agents and
conversation programming.

2.1    C ONVERSABLE AGENTS

In AutoGen, a conversable agent is an entity with a specific role that can pass messages to send and
receive information to and from other conversable agents, e.g., to start or continue a conversation. It
maintains its internal context based on sent and received messages and can be configured to possess
a set of capabilities, e.g., enabled by LLMs, tools, or human input, etc. The agents can act according
to programmed behavior patterns described next.
Agent capabilities powered by LLMs, humans, and tools. Since an agent’s capabilities directly
influence how it processes and responds to messages, AutoGen allows flexibility to back its agents
with various capabilities. AutoGen supports many common composable capabilities for agents,
including 1) LLMs. LLM-backed agents exploit many capabilities of advanced LLMs such as role
playing, implicit state inference and progress making from conversation history, providing feedback,
adapting from feedback, and coding. These capabilities can be combined in different ways via novel
prompting techniques3 to increase skill and autonomy of an agent. AutoGen also offers enhanced
LLM inference features such as result caching, error handling, message templating, etc., via an
enhanced LLM inference layer. 2) Humans. Human involvement is desired or even essential in
many LLM applications. AutoGen lets a human participate in agent conversation via human-
backed agents, which could solicit human inputs at certain rounds of a conversation depending on
the agent configuration. The default user proxy agent allows configurable human involvement levels
and patterns, e.g., frequency and conditions for requesting human input including the option for
humans to skip providing input. 3) Tools. Tool-backed agents have the capability to execute tools
via code execution or function execution. For example, the default user proxy agent in AutoGen is
able to execute code suggested by LLMs, or make LLM-suggested function calls.
Agent customization and cooperation. Based on application-specific needs, each agent can be
configured to have a mix of basic back-end types to display complex behavior in multi-agent conver-
sations. AutoGen allows easy creation of agents with specialized capabilities and roles by reusing
or extending the built-in agents. The yellow-shaded area of Figure 2 provides a sketch of the built-in
agents in AutoGen. The ConversableAgent class is the highest-level agent abstraction and, by
default, can use LLMs, humans, and tools. The AssistantAgent and UserProxyAgent are
two pre-configured ConversableAgent subclasses, each representing a common usage mode,
i.e., acting as an AI assistant (backed by LLMs) and acting as a human proxy to solicit human input
or execute code/function calls (backed by humans and/or tools). In the example on the right-hand
side of Figure 1, an LLM-backed assistant agent and a tool- and human-backed user proxy agent
are deployed together to tackle a task. Here, the assistant agent generates a solution with the help
of LLMs and passes the solution to the user proxy agent. Then, the user proxy agent solicits human
inputs or executes the assistant’s code and passes the results as feedback back to the assistant.
By allowing custom agents that can converse with each other, conversable agents in AutoGen serve
as a useful building block. However, to develop applications where agents make meaningful progress
on tasks, developers also need to be able to specify and mold these multi-agent conversations.

2.2    C ONVERSATION P ROGRAMMING

As a solution to the above problem, AutoGen utilizes conversation programming, a paradigm that
considers two concepts: the first is computation – the actions agents take to compute their response
in a multi-agent conversation. And the second is control flow – the sequence (or conditions) under
which these computations happen. As we will show in the applications section, the ability to pro-
   3
     Appendix C presents an example of such novel prompting techniques which empowers the default LLM-
backed assistant agent in AutoGen to converse with other agents in multi-step problem-solving.


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                  ConversableAgent
                    Agent Customization:                                        Unified Conversation Interfaces:
                                                                                     •    send
                     human_input_mode = “NEVER”                                      •    receive
                     code_execution_config = False                                   •    generate_reply
                     DEFAULT_SYSTEM_MESSAGE = “You
                     are a helpful AI assistant…                                               human_input_mode = “NEVER”
                     In the following cases, suggest                                           group_chat = [               ]
    AutoGen          python code…”                           human_input_mode = “ALWAYS”
     Agents



                                      AssistantAgent              UserProxyAgent                   GroupChatManager


                  1.2 Register a Custom Reply Func:            1.1 Define Agents:
                 # This func will be invoked in
                 generate_reply
                                                                                                     # Note: when no reply
                 A.register_reply(B,                                                                 func is registered, a
                 reply_func_A2B)                                                                     list of default reply
                 def reply_func_A2B(msg):                                                            functions will be used.
                     ouput = input_from_human()
    Developer        …                                 User Proxy A                  Assistant B
      Code           if not ouput:
                       if msg includes code:                    2 Initiate Conversations:
                           output = execute(msg)        A.initiate_chat(“Plot a chart of META and
                     return output                         TESLA stock price change YTD.”, B)


                                                   The Resulting Automated Agent Chat:
                    Conversation-Driven
                       Control Flow                    Plot a chart of META and                 receive
                                                                                                           generate_reply
                                                       TESLA stock price change YTD.

                                  receive                             Execute the following      send
     Program                                                                         code…
     Execution
                        generate_reply                   Error: package yfinance is not
                                                                                                        generate_reply
                                                         installed
                                       send
                      Conversation-Centric                  Sorry! Please first pip install
                         Computation                          yfinance and then execute
                                                                       …


Figure 2: Illustration of how to use AutoGen to program a multi-agent conversation. The top
sub-figure illustrates the built-in agents provided by AutoGen, which have unified conversation
interfaces and can be customized. The middle sub-figure shows an example of using AutoGen
to develop a two-agent system with a custom reply function. The bottom sub-figure illustrates the
resulting automated agent chat from the two-agent system during program execution.

gram these helps implement many flexible multi-agent conversation patterns. In AutoGen, these
computations are conversation-centric. An agent takes actions relevant to the conversations it is
involved in and its actions result in message passing for consequent conversations (unless a termina-
tion condition is satisfied). Similarly, control flow is conversation-driven – the participating agents’
decisions on which agents to send messages to and the procedure of computation is a function of
the inter-agent conversation. This paradigm helps one to reason about a complex workflow as agent
action taking and conversation message passing between agents intuitively.
Figure 2 provides a simple illustration. The bottom sub-figure shows how individual agents perform
their role-specific, conversation-centric computations to generate responses (e.g., via LLM inference
calls and code execution). The task progresses through conversations displayed in the dialog box.
The middle sub-figure demonstrates a conversation-based control flow. When the assistant receives
a message, the user proxy agent typically sends the human input as a reply. If there is no input, it
executes any code in the assistant’s message instead.
AutoGen has the following designs to allow conversation programming:
1. Unified interfaces and auto-reply mechanisms for automated agent chat. Agents in
   AutoGen have unified conversation interfaces for performing the corresponding conversation-
   centric computation, including a send/receive function for sending/receiving messages and
   a generate reply function for taking actions and generating a response based on the received
   message. AutoGen also introduces and by default adopts an agent auto-reply mechanism to
   realize conversation-driven control: Once an agent receives a message from another agent, it au-
   tomatically invokes generate reply and sends the reply back to the sender unless a termina-


                                                              4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   tion condition is satisfied. AutoGen provides built-in reply functions based on LLM inference,
   code or function execution, or human input. One can also register custom reply functions to
   customize the behavior pattern of an agent, e.g., chatting with another agent before replying to
   the sender agent. Under this mechanism, once the reply functions are registered, and the conver-
   sation is initialized, the conversation flow is naturally induced, and thus the agent conversation
   can proceed automatically without any extra control plane, i.e., a special module that controls
   the conversation flow. For example, with the developer code in the blue-shaded area (marked
   “Developer Code”) of Figure 2, one can readily trigger the conversation among the agents, and
   the conversation would proceed automatically, as shown in the dialog box in the grey shaded area
   (marked “Program Execution”) of Figure 2. The auto-reply mechanism provides a decentralized,
   modular, and unified way to define the workflow.
2. Control by a fusion of programming and natural language. AutoGen allows the usage of
   programming and natural language in control flow management in various patterns: 1) Natural
   language control via LLMs. In AutoGen, one can control the conversation flow by prompting
   the LLM-backed agents with natural language. For instance, the default system message of the
   built-in AssistantAgent in AutoGen uses natural language to instruct the agent to fix errors
   and generate code again if the previous result indicates there are errors. It also guides the agent
   to confine the output of LLM to certain structures, making it easier for other tool-backed agents
   to consume. For example, instructing the agent to reply with “TERMINATE” when all tasks are
   completed to terminate the program. More concrete examples of natural language controls can
   be found in Appendix C. 2) Programming language control. In AutoGen, Python code can be
   used to specify the termination condition, human input mode, and tool execution logic, e.g., the
   number of max auto replies. One can also register programmed auto-reply functions to control
   the conversation flow with Python code, as shown in the code block pointed by “Conversation-
   Driven Control Flow” in Figure 2. 3) Control transition between natural and programming
   language. AutoGen also supports flexible control transition between natural and programming
   language. One can achieve transit from code to natural language control by invoking an LLM
   inference containing certain control logic in a customized reply function; or transit from natural
   language to code control via LLM-proposed function calls (Eleti et al., 2023).

With the conversation programming paradigm, one can realize multi-agent conversations of diverse
patterns. In addition to static conversation with predefined flow, AutoGen also supports dynamic
conversation flows with multiple agents. AutoGen provides two general ways to achieve this: 1)
Customized generate reply function: within the customized generate reply function, one
agent can hold the current conversation and invoke conversations with other agents depending on the
content of the current message and context. 2) Function call: In this approach, LLM decides whether
or not to call a particular function depending on the conversation status. By messaging additional
agents in the called functions, the LLM can drive dynamic multi-agent conversation. In addition,
AutoGen also supports more complex dynamic group chat via built-in GroupChatManager,
which could dynamically select next-speaker and then broadcast its response to other agents. We
elaborate on this feature and its application in Section 3. We provide implemented working systems
to showcase all these different patterns, with some of them visualized in Figure 3.

3   A PPLICATIONS OF A U T O G E N

We demonstrate six applications using AutoGen (see Figure 3) to illustrate its potential in simplify-
ing the development of high-performance multi-agent applications. These applications are selected
based on their real-world relevance (A1, A2, A4, A5, A6), problem difficulty and solving capabil-
ities enabled by AutoGen (A1, A2, A3, A4), and innovative potential (A5, A6). Together, these
criteria showcase AutoGen’s role in advancing the LLM application landscape.

A1: M ATH P ROBLEM S OLVING

Mathematics is a foundational discipline and the promise of leveraging LLMs to assist with math
problem solving opens up a new plethora of applications and avenues for exploration, including
personalized AI tutoring, AI research assistance, etc. This section demonstrates how AutoGen
can help develop LLM applications for math problem-solving, showcasing strong performance and
flexibility to support various problem-solving paradigms.


                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Student Assistant                                  Assistant           Retrieval-augmented Retrieval-augmented
                                                                              User Proxy           Assistant

                                         Ask
                                        expert                                                                                                                 ALFWorld
                                                                                                                                                               Executor

                                                                                                                                               Assistant
                                                                                                                                                                                Grounding
                                                      Expert                                                                                                                      Agent

    A1. Math Problem Solving                                               A2. Retrieval-augmented Chat                                                     A3. ALF Chat


                                Commander                                                                                                                    Chess Board
                                                                                                              Manager

                                                                           Broadcast                              Speak


                                                                                                                                             Human/AI Chess               Human/AI Chess
   Writer                                      Safeguard                                                                                        Player A                     Player B

        A4. Multi-agent Coding                                               A5. Dynamic Group Chat                                                A6. Conversational Chess


Figure 3: Six examples of diverse applications built using AutoGen. Their conversation patterns
show AutoGen’s flexibility and power.

                           80                                                                                      80
                                                                   120 Level-5 problems                                     AutoGen
                                   69.48%                                                                                   AuotGen W/O interactive retrieval 66.65%
                           70                                      Whole Dataset                                   70
                                                                                                                            DPR                                     62.59%
                           60                                                                                      60                                                     58.56%
                                                                    55.18%
       Success Ratio (%)


                                52.5%
                                                                                                  Percentage (%)



                           50               48.33%                                                                 50
                                                       45.0%
                           40                                                                                      40

                           30
                                                                 30.0%
                                                                             26.67%                                30    25.88%
                                                                                      23.33%                                   22.79%
                           20                                                                                      20
                                                                                                                                     15.12%
                           10                                                                                      10
                            0                                                                                       0
                                 AutoGen ChatGPT ChatGPT           GPT-4 Multi-Agent LangChain
                                          +Code +Plugin                   Debate       ReAct                                     F1                              Recall
                                                         Methods                                                                               Metrics
                  (a) A1: Performance on MATH (w/ GPT-4).                                                                (b) A2: Q&A tasks (w/ GPT-3.5).
                          100
                                                                                                                                                                     Multi-GPT4
                                                                                  Average                                                                            Single-GPT4
                                         77%
                                                                                  Best of 3                       100   96.00%                        98.00%         Multi-GPT3.5
                           80
                                                                                                                              88.00%                                 Single-GPT3.5
                                  69%                                                                                               83.00%
      Success Ratio (%)


                                                                                      66%                                                                    78.00%
                                                                                                 Percentage (%)


                                                                                                                   80
                                                               63%                                                                                                 72.00%
                           60
                                                        54%                    54%
                                                                                                                   60
                                                                                                                                          48.00%
                           40
                                                                                                                   40
                                                                                                                                                                          32.00%
                           20                                                                                      20


                                                                                                                    0
                            0
                                AutoGen (3 agent) AutoGen (2 agent)               ReAct                                           F1                           Recall
                                                         Methods                                                                               Metrics
                                 (c) A3: Performance on ALFWorld.                                                       (d) A4: Performance on OptiGuide.

Figure 4: Performance on four applications A1-A4. (a) shows that AutoGen agents can be used out
of the box to achieve the most competitive performance on math problem solving tasks; (b) shows
that AutoGen can be used to realize effective retrieval augmentation and realize a novel interactive
retrieval feature to boost performance on Q&A tasks; (c) shows that AutoGen can be used to intro-
duce a three-agent system with a grounding agent to improve performance on ALFWorld; (d) shows
that a multi-agent design is helpful in boosting performance in coding tasks that need safeguards.


(Scenario 1) We are able to build a system for autonomous math problem solving by directly reusing
two built-in agents from AutoGen. We evaluate our system and several alternative approaches,
including open-source methods such as Multi-Agent Debate (Liang et al., 2023), LangChain Re-


                                                                                                 6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Act (LangChain, 2023), vanilla GPT-4, and commercial products ChatGPT + Code Interpreter, and
ChatGPT + Plugin (Wolfram Alpha), on the MATH (Hendrycks et al., 2021) dataset and summarize
the results in Figure 4a. We perform evaluations over 120 randomly selected level-5 problems and
on the entire4 test dataset from MATH. The results show that the built-in agents from AutoGen al-
ready yield better performance out of the box compared to the alternative approaches, even including
the commercial ones. (Scenario 2) We also showcase a human-in-the-loop problem-solving process
with the help of AutoGen. To incorporate human feedback with AutoGen, one only needs to set
human input mode=‘ALWAYS’ in the UserProxyAgent compared to the system in scenario
1. We demonstrate that this system can effectively incorporate human inputs to solve challenging
problems that cannot be solved without humans. (Scenario 3) We further demonstrate a novel sce-
nario where multiple human users can participate in the conversations during the problem-solving
process. Our experiments and case studies for these scenarios show that AutoGen enables better
performance or new experience compared to other solutions we experimented with. Due to the page
limit, details of the evaluation, including case studies in three scenarios are in Appendix D.

A2: R ETRIEVAL AUGMENTED C ODE G ENERATION AND Q UESTION A NSWERING

Retrieval augmentation has emerged as a practical and effective approach for mitigating the intrinsic
limitations of LLMs by incorporating external documents. In this section, we employ AutoGen
to build a Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) system (Lewis et al., 2020; Parvez et al., 2021)
named Retrieval-augmented Chat. The system consists of two agents: a Retrieval-augmented User
Proxy agent and a Retrieval-augmented Assistant agent, both of which are extended from built-in
agents from AutoGen. The Retrieval-augmented User Proxy includes a vector database (Chroma,
2023) with SentenceTransformers (Reimers & Gurevych, 2019) as the context retriever. A detailed
workflow description of the Retrieval-augmented Chat is provided in Appendix D.
We evaluate Retrieval-augmented Chat in both question-answering and code-generation scenarios.
(Scenario 1) We first perform an evaluation regarding natural questions answering on the Natural
Questions dataset (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019) and report results in Figure 4b. In this evaluation, we
compare our system with DPR (Dense Passage Retrieval) following an existing evaluation5 prac-
tice (Adlakha et al., 2023). Leveraging the conversational design and natural language control,
AutoGen introduces a novel interactive retrieval feature in this application: whenever the retrieved
context does not contain the information, instead of terminating, the LLM-based assistant would
reply “Sorry, I cannot find any information about... UPDATE CONTEXT.” which will invoke more
retrieval attempts. We conduct an ablation study in which we prompt the assistant agent to say “I
don’t know” instead of “UPDATE CONTEXT.” in cases where relevant information is not found,
and report results in Figure 4b. The results show that the interactive retrieval mechanism indeed
plays a non-trivial role in the process. We give a concrete example and results about this appealing
feature in Appendix D. (Scenario 2) We further demonstrate how Retrieval-augmented Chat aids in
generating code based on a given codebase that contains code not included in GPT-4’s training data.
Evaluation and demonstration details for both scenarios are included in Appendix D.

A3: D ECISION M AKING IN T EXT W ORLD E NVIRONMENTS

In this subsection, we demonstrate how AutoGen can be used to develop effective applications that
involve interactive or online decision making. We perform the study using the ALFWorld (Shridhar
et al., 2021) benchmark, which includes a diverse collection of synthetic language-based interactive
decision-making tasks in household environments.
With AutoGen, we implemented a two-agent system to solve tasks from ALFWorld. It consists of
an LLM-backed assistant agent responsible for suggesting plans to conduct a task and an executor
agent responsible for executing actions in the ALFWorld environments. This system integrates Re-
Act prompting (Yao et al., 2022), and is able to achieve similar performance. A common challenge
encountered in both ReAct and the AutoGen-based two-agent system is their occasional inability
to leverage basic commonsense knowledge about the physical world. This deficiency can lead to the
   4
      We did not evaluate ChatGPT on the whole dataset since it requires substantial manual effort and is re-
stricted by its hourly message number limitation. Multi-agent debate and LangChain ReAct were also not
evaluated since they underperformed vanilla GPT-4 on the smaller test set.
    5
      The results of DPR with GPT-3.5 shown in Figure 4b are from (Adlakha et al., 2023).


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


system getting stuck in a loop due to repetitive errors. Fortunately, the modular design of AutoGen
allows us to address this issue effectively: With AutoGen, we are able to introduce a grounding
agent, which supplies crucial commonsense knowledge–such as “You must find and take the object
before you can examine it. You must go to where the target object is before you can use it.”–whenever
the system exhibits early signs of recurring errors. It significantly enhances the system’s ability to
avoid getting entangled in error loops. We compare the task-solving performance of the two variants
of our system with GPT-3.5-turbo and ReAct6 on the 134 unseen tasks from ALFWorld and report
results in Figure 4c. The results show that introducing a grounding agent could bring in a 15%
performance gain on average. Upon examining the systems’ outputs, we observe that the grounding
agent, by delivering background commonsense knowledge at the right junctures, significantly miti-
gated the tendency of the system to persist with a flawed plan, thereby avoiding the creation of error
loops. For an example trajectory comparing the systems see Appendix D, Figure 10.

A4: M ULTI -AGENT C ODING

In this subsection, we use AutoGen to build a multi-agent coding system based on OptiGuide (Li
et al., 2023a), a system that excels at writing code to interpret optimization solutions and answer
users’ questions, such as exploring the implications of changing a supply chain decision or under-
standing why the optimizer made a particular choice. The second sub-figure of Figure 3 shows the
AutoGen-based implementation. The workflow is as follows: the end user sends questions, such as
“What if we prohibit shipping from supplier 1 to roastery 2?” to the Commander agent. The Com-
mander coordinates with two assistant agents, including the Writer and the Safeguard, to answer
the question. The Writer will craft code and send the code to the Commander. After receiving the
code, the Commander checks the code safety with the Safeguard; if cleared, the Commander will
use external tools (e.g., Python) to execute the code, and request the Writer to interpret the execution
results. For instance, the writer may say “if we prohibit shipping from supplier 1 to roastery 2, the
total cost would increase by 10.5%.” The Commander then provides this concluding answer to the
end user. If, at a particular step, there is an exception, e.g., security red flag raised by Safeguard, the
Commander redirects the issue back to the Writer with debugging information. The process might
be repeated multiple times until the user’s question is answered or timed out.
With AutoGen the core workflow code for OptiGuide was reduced from over 430 lines to 100 lines,
leading to significant productivity improvement. We provide a detailed comparison of user experi-
ence with ChatGPT+Code Interpreter and AutoGen-based OptiGuide in Appendix D, where we
show that AutoGen-based OptiGuide could save around 3x of user’s time and reduce user interac-
tions by 3 - 5 times on average. We also conduct an ablation showing the multi-agent abstraction is
necessary. Specifically, we construct a single-agent approach where a single agent conducts both the
code writing and safeguard processes. We tested the single- and multi-agent approaches on a dataset
with 100 coding tasks, which is crafted to include half malicious and half safe tasks7 . Evaluation
results as reported in Figure 4d show that the multi-agent design has 8% (with GPT-4) and 35%
(with GPT-3.5-turbo) better F-1 score in identifying unsafe code.

A5: DYNAMIC G ROUP C HAT

AutoGen provides native support for dynamic group chat communication pattern, in which par-
ticipating agents share the same context and converse with the others in a dynamic manner instead
of following a pre-defined order. Dynamic group chat relies on ongoing conversations to guide the
flow of interaction among agents. These make dynamic group chat ideal for situations where collab-
oration without strict communication order is beneficial. In AutoGen, the GroupChatManager
class serves as the conductor of conversation among agents and repeats the following three steps:
dynamically selecting a speaker, collecting responses from the selected speaker, and broadcasting
the message (Figure 3-A5). For the dynamic speaker selection component, we use a role-play style
prompt. Through a pilot study on 12 manually crafted complex tasks, we observed that compared
to a prompt that is purely based on the task, utilizing a role-play prompt often leads to more effec-
tive consideration of both conversation context and role alignment during the problem-solving and
   6
      Results of ReAct are obtained by directly running its official code with default settings. The code uses
text-davinci-003 as backend LM and does not support GPT-3.5-turbo or GPT-4.
    7
      We believe the dataset crafted in this study is valuable for studying LLM safety issues, and we will release
it upon publication of this paper.


                                                        8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


speaker selection process. Consequently, this leads to a higher success rate and fewer LLM calls.
We include detailed results in Appendix D.

A6: C ONVERSATIONAL C HESS

Using AutoGen, we developed Conversational Chess, a natural language interface game shown in
last sub-figure of Figure 3. It features built-in agents for players, which can be human or LLM,
and a third-party board agent to provide information and validate moves based on standard rules.
With AutoGen, we accomplished two essential features: (1) Natural, flexible, and engaging game
dynamics, enabled by the customizable agent design in AutoGen. Conversational Chess supports a
range of game-play patterns, including AI-AI, AI-human, and human-human, with seamless switch-
ing between these modes during a single game. An illustrative example of these entertaining game
dynamics can be found in Figure 15, Appendix D. (2) Grounding, which is a crucial aspect to main-
tain game integrity. During gameplay, the board agent checks each proposed move for legality;
if a move is invalid, the agent responds with an error, prompting the player agent to re-propose
a legal move before continuing. This process ensures that only valid moves are played and helps
maintain a consistent gaming experience. As an ablation study, we removed the board agent and
instead only relied on a relevant prompt “you should make sure both you and the opponent are
making legal moves” to ground their move. The results highlighted that without the board agent,
illegitimate moves caused game disruptions. The modular design offered flexibility, allowing swift
adjustments to the board agent in response to evolving game rules or varying chess rule variants. A
comprehensive demonstration of this ablation study is in Appendix D.

4   D ISCUSSION
We introduced an open-source library, AutoGen, by focusing on the concepts of conversable agents
and conversation programming. This library utilizes agents that are not only capable but also well-
suited for multi-agent cooperation. It features a unified conversation interface between the agents,
along with auto-reply mechanisms, which help establish an agent interaction interface that leverages
the strengths of chat-optimized LLMs with broad capabilities and accommodates a wide range of
applications. AutoGen serves as a general framework for creating and experimenting with multi-
agent systems that can easily meet several practical requirements, such as reusing, customizing, and
extending existing agents, as well as programming conversations between them.
Our experiments, as detailed in Section 3, demonstrate that this approach offers numerous benefits.
The adoption of AutoGen has resulted in improved performance (in comparison with the state of
the art), reduced development code, and decreased manual burden for existing applications. It offers
flexibility to developers, as demonstrated in A1 (scenario 3), A5, and A6, where AutoGen enables
multi-agent chats to follow a dynamic pattern rather than a fixed back-and-forth. It allows humans
to engage in activities alongside multiple AI agents in a conversational manner. Despite the com-
plexity of these applications (most involving more than two agents or dynamic multi-turn agent co-
operation), the implementation based on AutoGen remains straightforward. Dividing tasks among
separate agents promotes modularity. Furthermore, since each agent can be developed, tested, and
maintained separately, this approach simplifies overall development and code management.
Although this work is still in its early experimental stages, it opens the way for numerous future
directions and research questions. For example, how can we effectively integrate existing agent
implementations into our multi-agent framework? How can we determine the optimal balance be-
tween automation and human control in multi-agent workflows? As we continue to develop and
refine AutoGen, we also aim to explore which strategies (e.g., agent topology and conversation
patterns) will lead to the most effective multi-agent conversations and how to optimize for overall
efficiency, among other considerations. While scaling the number of agents used by an application,
and other “degrees of freedom”, presents opportunities to tackle more complex problems, it may
also give rise to new safety challenges that need to be carefully addressed.
We provide more discussion in Appendix B, including guidelines to use AutoGen and future work.
We also include a discussion on the ethical implications in Appendix 4. We hope AutoGen will
help accelerate building, experimenting with and improving the effectiveness and safety of many
novel LLM applications. We actively welcome contributions from the broader community.


                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E THICS STATEMENT
There are several potential ethical considerations that could arise from the development and use of
the AutoGen framework.
• Privacy and Data Protection: The framework allows for human participation in conversations
  between agents. It is important to ensure that user data and conversations are protected, and that
  developers use appropriate measures to safeguard privacy.
• Bias and Fairness: LLMs have been shown to exhibit biases present in their training data (Navigli
  et al., 2023). When using LLMs in the AutoGen framework, it is crucial to address and mitigate
  any biases that may arise in the conversations between agents. Developers should be aware of
  potential biases and take steps to ensure fairness and inclusivity.
• Accountability and Transparency: As discussed in the future work section, as the framework in-
  volves multiple agents conversing and cooperating, it is important to establish clear accountability
  and transparency mechanisms. Users should be able to understand and trace the decision-making
  process of the agents involved in order to ensure accountability and address any potential issues
  or biases.
• Trust and Reliance: AutoGen leverages human understanding and intelligence while providing
  automation through conversations between agents. It is important to consider the impact of this
  interaction on user experience, trust, and reliance on AI systems. Clear communication and user
  education about the capabilities and limitations of the system will be essential (Cai et al., 2019).
• Unintended Consequences: As discussed before, the use of multi-agent conversations and automa-
  tion in complex tasks may have unintended consequences. Especially, allowing LLM agents to
  make changes in external environments through code execution or function calls, such as install
  packages, could be risky. Developers should carefully consider the potential risks and ensure that
  appropriate safeguards are in place to prevent harm or negative outcomes.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
Following the best practices in the community, we aim to ensure the reproducibility of the results
presented in this paper. The appendices and the accompanying repository are designed to provide
readers and reviewers with comprehensive resources to understand, replicate, and extend our work.
• Detailed descriptions of each application, including their construction and evaluations, are pro-
  vided in Appendix D.
• Example outputs from AutoGen and alternative approaches across different applications are il-
  lustrated in Appendix E.
• An anonymized repository containing the source code of AutoGen and application evaluation
  code is provided, along with instructions for reproducing the experiments reported in this paper:
  https://anonymous.4open.science/r/autogen-iclr2024.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Vaibhav Adlakha, Parishad BehnamGhader, Xing Han Lu, Nicholas Meade, and Siva Reddy. Eval-
  uating correctness and faithfulness of instruction-following models for question answering. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2307.16877, 2023.
Saleema Amershi, Dan Weld, Mihaela Vorvoreanu, Adam Fourney, Besmira Nushi, Penny Col-
  lisson, Jina Suh, Shamsi Iqbal, Paul N Bennett, Kori Inkpen, et al. Guidelines for human-ai
  interaction. In Proceedings of the 2019 chi conference on human factors in computing systems,
  2019.
Dario Amodei, Chris Olah, Jacob Steinhardt, Paul Christiano, John Schulman, and Dan Mané. Con-
  crete problems in ai safety, 2016.
Auto-GPT. Documentation — auto-gpt. https://docs.agpt.co/, 2023.
BabyAGI. Github — babyagi. https://github.com/yoheinakajima/babyagi, 2023.
Carrie J. Cai, Samantha Winter, David F. Steiner, Lauren Wilcox, and Michael Terry. ”hello ai”:
  Uncovering the onboarding needs of medical practitioners for human-ai collaborative decision-
  making. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, 2019.
Tianle Cai, Xuezhi Wang, Tengyu Ma, Xinyun Chen, and Denny Zhou. Large language models as
  tool makers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17126, 2023.
Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Jingwei Zuo, Cheng Yang, Chenfei Yuan, Chen Qian, Chi-Min Chan,
 Yujia Qin, Yaxi Lu, Ruobing Xie, et al. Agentverse: Facilitating multi-agent collaboration and
 exploring emergent behaviors in agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.10848, 2023.
Chroma. Chromadb. https://github.com/chroma-core/chroma, 2023.
Victor Dibia. LIDA: A tool for automatic generation of grammar-agnostic visualizations and info-
  graphics using large language models. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Associ-
  ation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 3: System Demonstrations), Toronto, Canada, July
  2023. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Yihong Dong, Xue Jiang, Zhi Jin, and Ge Li. Self-collaboration code generation via chatgpt. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2304.07590, 2023.
Yilun Du, Shuang Li, Antonio Torralba, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Igor Mordatch. Improv-
  ing factuality and reasoning in language models through multiagent debate. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.14325, 2023.
Atty Eleti, Jeff Harris, and Logan Kilpatrick. Function calling and other api updates. https:
  //openai.com/blog/function-calling-and-other-api-updates, 2023.
Hugging Face. Transformers agent. https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/
  transformers_agents, 2023.
Guidance. Guidance. https://github.com/guidance-ai/guidance, 2023.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang, Dawn Song,
  and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring mathematical problem solving with the math dataset. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2103.03874, 2021.
Sirui Hong, Xiawu Zheng, Jonathan Chen, Yuheng Cheng, Ceyao Zhang, Zili Wang, Steven
  Ka Shing Yau, Zijuan Lin, Liyang Zhou, Chenyu Ran, et al. Metagpt: Meta programming for
  multi-agent collaborative framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.00352, 2023.
Eric Horvitz. Principles of mixed-initiative user interfaces. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference
  on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 1999.
Geunwoo Kim, Pierre Baldi, and Stephen McAleer. Language models can solve computer tasks.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17491, 2023.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Redfield, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh, Chris
  Alberti, Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Jacob Devlin, Kenton Lee, et al. Natural questions: a
  benchmark for question answering research. Transactions of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 2019.

LangChain. Introduction — langchain. https://python.langchain.com/en/latest/
  index.html, 2023.

Mike Lewis, Denis Yarats, Yann N Dauphin, Devi Parikh, and Dhruv Batra. Deal or no deal? end-
 to-end learning for negotiation dialogues. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.05125, 2017.

Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal,
  Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, et al. Retrieval-augmented gen-
  eration for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2020.

Beibin Li, Konstantina Mellou, Bo Zhang, Jeevan Pathuri, and Ishai Menache. Large language
  models for supply chain optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.03875, 2023a.

Guohao Li, Hasan Abed Al Kader Hammoud, Hani Itani, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and Bernard Ghanem.
  Camel: Communicative agents for ”mind” exploration of large scale language model society,
  2023b.

Tian Liang, Zhiwei He, Wenxiang Jiao, Xing Wang, Yan Wang, Rui Wang, Yujiu Yang, Zhaopeng
  Tu, and Shuming Shi. Encouraging divergent thinking in large language models through multi-
  agent debate, 2023.

Evan Zheran Liu, Kelvin Guu, Panupong Pasupat, Tianlin Shi, and Percy Liang. Reinforcement
  learning on web interfaces using workflow-guided exploration. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.08802,
  2018.

Jerry Liu. LlamaIndex, November 2022. URL https://github.com/jerryjliu/llama_
   index.

Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan Wier-
  stra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.5602, 2013.

Roberto Navigli, Simone Conia, and Björn Ross. Biases in large language models: Origins, inven-
  tory and discussion. ACM Journal of Data and Information Quality, 2023.

OpenAI. ChatGPT plugins. https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt-plugins, 2023.

Joon Sung Park, Joseph C O’Brien, Carrie J Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and
  Michael S Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.03442, 2023.

Md Rizwan Parvez, Wasi Uddin Ahmad, Saikat Chakraborty, Baishakhi Ray, and Kai-Wei Chang.
 Retrieval augmented code generation and summarization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.11601,
 2021.

Shishir G. Patil, Tianjun Zhang, Xin Wang, and Joseph E. Gonzalez. Gorilla: Large language model
  connected with massive apis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15334, 2023.

Chen Qian, Xin Cong, Cheng Yang, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Juyuan Xu, Zhiyuan Liu,
  and Maosong Sun.      Communicative agents for software development. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2307.07924, 2023.

Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-
  networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing. Association for Computational Linguistics, 11 2019. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/1908.10084.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Semantic-Kernel.   Semantic            kernel.          https://github.com/microsoft/
  semantic-kernel, 2023.
Bokui Shen, Fei Xia, Chengshu Li, Roberto Martı́n-Martı́n, Linxi Fan, Guanzhi Wang, Claudia
  Pérez-D’Arpino, Shyamal Buch, Sanjana Srivastava, Lyne Tchapmi, et al. igibson 1.0: A simu-
  lation environment for interactive tasks in large realistic scenes. In 2021 IEEE/RSJ International
  Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). IEEE, 2021.
Tianlin Shi, Andrej Karpathy, Linxi Fan, Jonathan Hernandez, and Percy Liang. World of bits: An
  open-domain platform for web-based agents. In International Conference on Machine Learning.
  PMLR, 2017.
Mohit Shridhar, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Côté, Yonatan Bisk, Adam Trischler, and Matthew
 Hausknecht. ALFWorld: Aligning Text and Embodied Environments for Interactive Learning. In
 Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021. URL
 https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.03768.
Oriol Vinyals, Timo Ewalds, Sergey Bartunov, Petko Georgiev, Alexander Sasha Vezhnevets,
  Michelle Yeo, Alireza Makhzani, Heinrich Küttler, John Agapiou, Julian Schrittwieser, et al.
  Starcraft ii: A new challenge for reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.04782, 2017.
Chi Wang, Qingyun Wu, Markus Weimer, and Erkang Zhu. Flaml: A fast and lightweight automl
  library. Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems, 2021.
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan,
  and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291, 2023a.
Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao Yang, Jingsen Zhang, Zhiyuan Chen, Jiakai
  Tang, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, et al. A survey on large language model based autonomous agents.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.11432, 2023b.
Daniel S. Weld and Oren Etzioni. The first law of robotics (a call to arms). In AAAI Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence, 1994.
Max Woolf.     Langchain problem.                     https://minimaxir.com/2023/07/
 langchain-problem/, 2023.
Yiran Wu, Feiran Jia, Shaokun Zhang, Qingyun Wu, Hangyu Li, Erkang Zhu, Yue Wang, Yin Tat
  Lee, Richard Peng, and Chi Wang. An empirical study on challenging math problem solving with
  gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.01337, 2023.
Zhiheng Xi, Wenxiang Chen, Xin Guo, Wei He, Yiwen Ding, Boyang Hong, Ming Zhang, Junzhe
  Wang, Senjie Jin, Enyu Zhou, et al. The rise and potential of large language model based agents:
  A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.07864, 2023.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629,
  2022.


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    R ELATED W ORK
We examine existing LLM-based agent systems or frameworks that can be used to build LLM appli-
cations. We categorize the current work into single-agent and multi-agent systems and specifically
provide a summary of differentiators comparing AutoGen with existing multi-agent systems in
Table 1. Note that many of these systems are evolving open-source projects, so the remarks and
statements about them may only be accurate as of the time this paper was written. We defer inter-
ested readers to detailed LLM-based agent surveys in (Xi et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b).

Single-Agent Systems:
• Auto-GPT: Auto-GPT is an open-source implementation of an AI agent that could autonomously
  achieve a given goal (Auto-GPT, 2023). It follows a single-agent paradigm in which it augments
  the AI model with many useful tools and does not support multi-agent collaboration.
• ChatGPT+ (with code interpreter or plugin): ChatGPT, a conversational AI service or agent,
  can now be used alongside a code interpreter or plugin (currently available only under the pre-
  mium subscription plan ChatGPT Plus) (OpenAI, 2023). The code interpreter enables ChatGPT
  to execute code, while the plugin enhances ChatGPT with a wide range of curated tools.
• LangChain Agents: LangChain is a general framework for developing LLM-based applica-
  tions (LangChain, 2023). LangChain Agents is a subpackage for using an LLM to choose a
  sequence of actions. There are various types of agents in LangChain Agents, with the ReAct
  agent being a notable example that combines reasoning and acting when using LLMs (mainly
  designed for LLMs prior to ChatGPT) (Yao et al., 2022). All agents provided in LangChain
  Agents follow a single-agent paradigm and are not inherently designed for communicative and
  collaborative modes. A significant summary of its limitations can be found in (Woolf, 2023).
  Due to these limitations, even the multi-agent systems in LangChain (e.g., re-implementation of
  CAMEL) are not based on LangChain Agents but are implemented from scratch. Their connec-
  tion to LangChain lies in the use of basic modules provided by LangChain, such as AI models
  wrapped by LangChain and the corresponding interface.
• Transformers Agent: Transformers Agent (Face, 2023) is an experimental natural language API
  on top of transformers. It includes a set of curated tools and an agent to interpret natural language
  and use these tools. Similar to Auto-GPT, it follows a single-agent paradigm and does not support
  agent collaboration.

AutoGen differs from single-agent systems above by enabling building LLM applications with
multi-agent conversation.

Multi-Agent Systems:
• BabyAGI: BabyAGI (BabyAGI, 2023) is an example implementation of an AI-powered task man-
  agement system in a Python script. In this implemented system, multiple LLM-based agents are
  used. For example, there is an agent for creating new tasks based on the objective and the result
  of the previous task, an agent for prioritizing the task list, and an agent for completing tasks/sub-
  tasks. As a multi-agent system, BabyAGI adopts a static agent conversation pattern, i.e., a prede-
  fined order of agent communication, while AutoGen supports both static and dynamic conversa-
  tion pattern and additionally support tool-using and human incorporation.
• CAMEL: CAMEL (Li et al., 2023b) is a communicative agent framework. It demonstrates how
  role-playing can be used to let chat agents communicate with each other for task completion. It
  also records agent conversations for behavior analysis and capability understanding. Inception
  prompting technique is used to achieve autonomous cooperation between agents. Different from
  AutoGen, CAMEL does not natively support tool-using, such as code execution. Although it
  is proposed as an infrastructure for multi-agent conversation, it only supports static conversation
  patterns, while AutoGen additionally supports dynamic conversation patterns.
• Multi-Agent Debate: Two recent works investigate and show that multi-agent debate is an effec-
  tive way to encourage divergent thinking in LLMs (Liang et al., 2023) and to improve the factuality
  and reasoning of LLMs (Du et al., 2023). In both works, multiple LLM inference instances are
  constructed as multiple agents to solve problems with agent debate. Each agent is simply an LLM
  inference instance, while no tool or human is involved, and the inter-agent conversation needs
  to follow a pre-defined order. These works attempt to build LLM applications with multi-agent


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  conversation, while AutoGen, designed as a generic infrastructure, can be used to facilitate this
  development and enable more applications with dynamic conversation patterns.
• MetaGPT/CHATDEV: Both MetaGPT (Hong et al., 2023) and CHATDEV (Qian et al., 2023)
  are specialized LLM applications based on multi-agent conversation framework for automatic
  software development. They assign different roles to GPTs to collaboratively develop software.
  They are different from AutoGen by being specialized solutions to a certain scenario, while
  AutoGen is a generic infrastructure to facilitate building applications for various scenarios.
• AgentVerse: AgentVerse (Chen et al., 2023) is a framework for building LLM applications based
  on multiple LLM agents. It is designed to build LLM applications consisting of four stages
  (Expert Recruitment, Collaborative Decision-Making, Action Execution, and Evaluation), while
  AutoGen facilitates flexible conversation-centric design patterns via conversation programming.
  In addition, AutoGen supports human interfaced by agents to participate in the system.

There are a few other specialized single-agent or multi-agent systems, such as Voyager (Wang et al.,
2023a) and Generative Agents (Park et al., 2023), which we skip due to lower relevance. In Table 1,
we summarize differences of AutoGen and the most relevant multi-agent systems.

Table 1: Summary of differences between AutoGen and other related multi-agent systems. infras-
tructure: whether the system is designed as a generic infrastructure for building LLM applications.
conversation pattern: the types of patterns supported by the implemented systems; with a ‘static’
pattern, agent topology remains unchanged regardless of different inputs; with a ‘dynamic’ pattern,
the topology may change based on varying input instances; execution-capable: whether the sys-
tem can execute LLM-generated code; human involvement: whether (and how) the system allows
human participation during the execution process of the system. AutoGen allows flexible human
involvement in multi-agent conversation with the option for humans to skip providing inputs.

 Aspect                    AutoGen        Multi-agent    CAMEL         BabyAGI       MetaGPT
                                           Debate
 Infrastructure                 ✓             ✗              ✓             ✗             ✗
 Conversation pattern    static/dynamic     static         static        static        static
 Execution-capable              ✓             ✗              ✗             ✗             ✓
 Human involvement          chat/skip         ✗              ✗             ✗             ✗


                                                 15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B     E XPANDED D ISCUSSION
The applications in Section 3 show how AutoGen can not only enable new applications but also
renovate existing ones. For example, in A1 (scenario 3), A5, and A6, AutoGen enabled creating
multi-agent conversations that follow a dynamic pattern instead of a fixed back-and-forth. And, in
both A5 and A6, humans can participate in the activities together with multiple other AI agents
in a conversational manner. Similarly, A1-A4 show how popular applications can be renovated
quickly with AutoGen. Despite the complexity of these applications (most of them involve more
than two agents or dynamic multi-turn agent cooperation), our AutoGen-based implementation
remains simple, demonstrating promising opportunities to build creative applications and a large
space for innovation. We further reflect on why we observed these benefits from AutoGen in these
applications, and we believe there are a few reasons:
• Ease of use: The built-in agents can be used out-of-the-box, presenting a strong performance even
  without any customization. (A1, A3)
• Modularity: The division of tasks into separate agents promotes modularity in the system. Each
  agent can be developed, tested, and maintained independently, simplifying the overall develop-
  ment process and facilitating code management. (A3, A4, and A5)
• Programmability: AutoGen allows users to extend/customize existing agents to develop sys-
  tems satisfying their specific needs with ease. (A1-A6). For example, with AutoGen, the core
  workflow code in A4 is reduced from over 430 lines to 100 lines, bringing in a 4x saving.
• Allowing human involvement: AutoGen provides a native mechanism to achieve human par-
  ticipation and/or human oversight. With AutoGen, humans can seamlessly and optionally coop-
  erate with AI to solve problems or generally participate in the activity. AutoGen also facilitates
  interactive user instructions to ensure the process stays on the desired path. (A1, A2, A5, A6)
• Collaborative/adversarial agent interactions: Like many collaborative agent systems (e.g.,
  (Dong et al., 2023)), agents in AutoGen can share information and knowledge, allowing them
  to complement each other’s abilities and collectively arrive at better solutions. (A1, A2, A3,
  A4). Analogously, in certain scenarios, some agents are required to work in an adversarial way.
  Relevant information is shared between different conversations in a controlled manner, prevent-
  ing distraction or hallucination. (A3, A6). AutoGen supports both patterns, enabling effective
  utilization and augmentation of LLM.

B.1   G ENERAL G UIDELINES FOR U SING A U T O G E N

Below we give some recommendations for using agents in AutoGen to accomplish a task.
1. Consider using built-in agents first. For example, AssistantAgent is pre-configured to
   be backed by GPT-4, with a carefully designed system message for generic problem solving via
   code. The UserProxyAgent is configured to be able to solicit human inputs and perform
   tool execution. When combining these two agents, many problems can be solved already with a
   decent performance. When customizing them for an application, consider the following options:
   (1) human input mode, termination condition, code execution configuration, and LLM configura-
   tion can be specified when constructing an agent; (2) AutoGen supports adding instructions in
   an initial user message, which is an effective way to boost performance without needing to mod-
   ify the system message; (3) UserProxyAgent can be extended to handle different execution
   environments and exceptions, etc.; (4) when system message modification is needed, consider
   leveraging the LLM’s capability to program its conversation flow with natural language.
2. Keep the agent conversation topology as simple as possible, as well as reduce code-based
   extension. Consider using the two-agent chat or the group chat setup first, as they require the
   least code-based extension. Note that even the two-agent chat setup can involve more than two
   agents by using LLM-consumable functions in a dynamic way.
3. Try to reuse built reply methods based on LLM, tool, or human before implementing the cus-
   tom reply methods, because they can often be reused to achieve the goal in a simple way (e.g.,
   the built-in GroupChatManager’s reply method reuses the built-in LLM-based reply when
   selecting the next speaker, ref. A5 in Section 3).
4. When developing a new application with UserProxyAgent, start with humans always in
   the loop, i.e., human input mode=‘ALWAYS’, even if the target operation mode is more au-
   tonomous. This could help understand the effectiveness of AssistantAgent, tuning the


                                                16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   prompt, discovering corner cases, and debugging. When confident with small-scale success, con-
   sider setting human input mode=‘NEVER’. This enables LLM as a backend, and one can either
   use the LLM or manually generate diverse system messages to simulate different use cases.
5. Despite the numerous advantages of AutoGen agents, there could be cases/scenarios where
   other libraries/packages could help. For example: (1) For (sub)tasks that do not have require-
   ments for back-and-forth trouble-shooting, multi-agent interaction, etc., a uni-direction (no back-
   and-forth message exchange) pipeline can be also orchestrated with LangChain (LangChain,
   2023), LlamaIndex (Liu, 2022), Guidance (Guidance, 2023), Semantic Kernel (Semantic-Kernel,
   2023), Gorilla (Patil et al., 2023) or low-level inference API (‘autogen.oai’ provides an enhanced
   LLM inference layer at this level) (Dibia, 2023). (2) When existing tools from LangChain etc.
   are helpful, one can use them as tool-backend for AutoGen agents. For example, one can readily
   use tools, e.g., Wolfram Alpha, from LangChain in AutoGen agent. (3) For specific applica-
   tions, one may want to leverage agents implemented in other libraries/packages. To achieve this,
   one could wrap those agents as conversable agents in AutoGen and then involve them when
   building LLM applications through multi-agent conversation. (4) It can be hard to find an op-
   timal operating point among many tunable choices, such as the LLM inference configuration.
   Blackbox optimization packages like ‘flaml.tune’ (Wang et al., 2021) can be used together with
   AutoGen to automate such tuning.

B.2   F UTURE W ORK

This work raises many ideas for future directions and research questions.
Designing optimal multi-agent workflows: Creating a multi-agent workflow for a given task can
involve many decisions, e.g., how many agents to include, how to assign agent roles and agent
capabilities, how the agents should interact with each other, and whether to automate a particular
part of the workflow. There may not exist a one-fits-all answer and the best solution might depend
on the specific application. This raises important questions: For what types of tasks and applications
are multi-agent workflows most useful? How do multi-agents help in different applications? For a
given task, what is the optimal (e.g., cost-effective) multi-agent workflow?
Creating highly capable agents: AutoGen can enable the development of highly capable agents
that can leverage the strengths of LLMs, tools, and humans. Creating such agents is crucial to ensure
that a multi-agent workflow can effectively troubleshoot and make progress on a task. For example,
we observed that CAMEL, another multi-agent LLM system, cannot effectively solve problems in
most cases primarily because it lacks capability to execute. This failure shows that LLMs and multi-
agent conversations with simple role-play are insufficient and highly capable agents with diverse
‘skill sets’ are essential. We believe that more systematic work will be required to develop guidelines
for application-specific agents; to create a large OSS knowledge base of agents; and to create agents
that can discover and upgrade their skills (Cai et al., 2023).
Enabling scale, safety, and human agency: Section 3 shows how complex multi-agent workflows
can enable new applications and future work will be needed to assess whether scaling further can
help solve extremely complex tasks. However, as these workflows scale and grow more complex,
it may become difficult to log and adjust them. Thus, it will become essential to develop clear
mechanisms and tools to track and debug their behavior. Otherwise, these techniques risk resulting
in incomprehensible, unintelligible chatter among agents (Lewis et al., 2017).
Our work also shows how complex fully autonomous workflows with AutoGen can be useful, how-
ever fully autonomous agent conversations will need to be used with care – while the autonomous
mode AutoGen supports could be desirable in many scenarios, a high level of autonomy can also
pose potential risks, especially in high-risk/stakes applications (Amodei et al., 2016; Weld & Et-
zioni, 1994). As a result, building fail-safes against cascading failures and exploitation, mitigating
reward hacking, out of control and undesired behaviors, maintaining effective human oversight of
applications built with AutoGen agents will become important. While AutoGen provides conve-
nient and seamless involvement of humans through a user proxy agent, developers and stakeholders
still need to understand and determine the appropriate level and pattern of human involvement to
ensure the safe and ethical use of the technology (Horvitz, 1999; Amershi et al., 2019).


                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C    D EFAULT S YSTEM M ESSAGE FOR A SSISTANT AGENT

                                                 System Message
    You are a helpful AI assistant. Solve tasks using your coding and language skills.

    In the following cases, suggest python code (in a python coding block) or shell script (in a sh
    coding block) for the user to execute.

    1. When you need to collect info, use the code to output the info you need, for example, browse or
    search the web, download/read a file, print the content of a webpage or a file, get the current
    date/time. After sufficient info is printed and the task is ready to be solved based on your
    language skill, you can solve the task by yourself.

    2. When you need to perform some task with code, use the code to perform the task and output the
    result. Finish the task smartly.

    Solve the task step by step if you need to. If a plan is not provided, explain your plan first. Be
    clear which step uses code, and which step uses your language skill.

    When using code, you must indicate the script type in the code block. The user cannot provide any
    other feedback or perform any other action beyond executing the code you suggest. The user can’t
    modify your code. So do not suggest incomplete code which requires users to modify. Don’t use a
    code block if it’s not intended to be executed by the user.

    If you want the user to save the code in a file before executing it, put # filename: <filename>
    inside the code block as the first line. Don’t include multiple code blocks in one response. Do not
    ask users to copy and paste the result. Instead, use ’print’ function for the output when relevant.
    Check the execution result returned by the user.

    If the result indicates there is an error, fix the error and output the code again. Suggest the
    full code instead of partial code or code changes. If the error can’t be fixed or if the task is
    not solved even after the code is executed successfully, analyze the problem, revisit your
    assumption, collect additional info you need, and think of a different approach to try.

    When you find an answer, verify the answer carefully. Include verifiable evidence in your response
    if possible.

    Reply “TERMINATE” in the end when everything is done.


        Prompting techniques color code: Role Play; Control Flow; Output Confine; Facilitate Automation; Grounding


Figure 5: Default system message for the built-in assistant agent in AutoGen v0.1.1. This is an
example of conversation programming via natural language. It contains instructions of different
types, including role play, control flow, output confine, facilitate automation, and grounding.

Figure 5 shows the default system message for the built-in assistant agent in AutoGen (v0.1.1),
where we introduce several new prompting techniques and highlight them accordingly. When com-
bining these new prompting techniques together, we can program a fairly complex conversation even
with the simplest two-agent conversation topology. This approach tries to exploit the capability of
LLMs in implicit state inference to a large degree. LLMs do not follow all the instructions perfectly,
so the design of the system needs to have other mechanisms to handle the exceptions and faults.
Some instructions can have ambiguities, and the designer should either reduce them for preciseness
or intentionally keep them for flexibility and address the different situations in other agents. In
general, we observe that GPT-4 follows the instructions better than GPT-3.5-turbo.


                                                            18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D    A PPLICATION D ETAILS
A1: M ATH P ROBLEM S OLVING

Scenario 1: Autonomous Problem Solving. We perform both qualitative and quantitative eval-
uations in this scenario. For all evaluations, we use GPT-4 as the base model, and pre-install the
“sympy” package in the execution environment. We compare AutoGen with the following LLM-
based agent systems:
• Auto-GPT: The out-of-box Auto-GPT is used. We initialized Auto-GPT by setting the purpose to
  “solve math problems”, resulting in a “MathSolverGPT” with auto-generated goals.
• ChatGPT+Plugin: We enabled the Wolfram Alpha plugin (a math computation engine) in the
  OpenAI web client.
• ChatGPT+Code Interpreter: This is a recent feature in OpenAI web client. Note that the above
  two premium features from ChatGPT require a paid subscription to be accessed and are the most
  competitive commercial systems.
• LangChain ReAct+Python: We use Python agent from LangChain. To handle parsing errors, we
  set “handle parsing errors=True”, and we use the default zero-shot ReAct prompt.
• Multi-Agent Debate (Liang et al., 2023): We modified the code of the multi-agent debate to do
  the evaluation. By default, there are three agents: an affirmative agent, a negative agent, and a
  moderator.

We include one multi-agent system Multi-Agent Debate, in this evaluation. Our preliminary test
with BabyAGI, CAMEL, and MetaGPT shows that they can not be used to solve math problems out
of the box because they are configured to perform particular designated tasks. For example, when a
math problem is given to MetaGPT, it starts building a software to solve algebra problems instead
of focusing on getting an answer to the problem. We include the test examples in Appendix E.

Table 2: Qualitative evaluation on two math problems from the MATH dataset under the autonomous
problem solving scenario. Each LLM-based system is tested three times on each of the problems.
We report the problem solving correctness and summarize the failure reasons in this table.

                                 Correctness                             Failure Reason
  AutoGen                            3/3                                       N/A.
  Auto-GPT                           0/3            The LLM gives code without the print function so the
                                                                      result is not printed.
  ChatGPT+Plugin                    1/3             The return from Wolfram Alpha contains 2 simplified
                                                   results, including the correct answer, but GPT-4 always
                                                                  chooses the wrong answer.
  ChatGPT+Code Interpreter          2/3                         Returns a wrong decimal result.
  LangChain ReAct                   0/3                  LangChain gives 3 different wrong answers.
  Multi-Agent Debate                0/3         It gives 3 different wrong answers due to calculation errors.
              (a) Evaluation on the first problem that asks to simplify a square root fraction.



                                 Correctness                         Failure Reason
  AutoGen                            2/3           The final answer from code execution is wrong.
  Auto-GPT                           0/3        The LLM gives code without the print function so the
                                                                  result is not printed.
  ChatGPT+Plugin                  1/3           For one trial, GPT-4 got stuck because it keeps giving
                                              wrong queries and has to be stopped. Another trial simply
                                                                 gives a wrong answer.
  ChatGPT+Code Interpreter        0/3                     It gives 3 different wrong answers.
  LangChain ReAct                 0/3                LangChain gives 3 different wrong answers.
  Multi-Agent Debate              0/3                     It gives 3 different wrong answers.
                         (b) Evaluation on the second number theory problem.


For qualitative evaluation, we use two level-5 problems from the MATH dataset and test each prob-
lem for 3 times. The first problem asks to simplify a square root fraction, and the second problem


                                                      19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


asks to solve a number theory problem. Correctness counts, and failure reasons are detailed in Ta-
ble 2. For the quantitative evaluation, we conduct two sets of experiments on the MATH dataset to
test the correctness of these systems: (1) an experiment on 120 level-5 problems (20 problems from
6 categories excluding geometry) and (2) an experiment on on the whole test set which includes
5000 problems. We do not include Auto-GPT in this evaluation since it cannot access results from
code executions and doesn’t solve any problems in the qualitative evaluation. Our evaluation on
the whole dataset shows that AutoGen has an overall accuracy of 69.48% while GPT-4’s accuracy
is 55.18%. From the two evaluations, we have the following observations on the problem-solving
success rate and user experience of these systems:
• Problem-solving success rate: Results on the quantitative evaluation show that AutoGen can
  help achieve the highest problem-solving success rate among all the compared methods. The
  qualitative evaluations illustrate common failure reasons of several alternative approaches. Chat-
  GPT+Code Interpreter fails to solve the second problem, and ChatGPT+Plugin can hardly solve
  the two problems. Auto-GPT fails on both problems due to code execution issues. LangChain
  agent also fails on both problems. For all trials, it gives code that results in the wrong answer.
• User experience: From the qualitative evaluation, we analyze the user experience regarding the
  verbosity of response and whether the LLM-based system can run without unexpected behav-
  iors. ChatGPT+Plugin is the least verbose mainly because Wolfram queries are much shorter
  than Python code. AutoGen, ChatGPT+Code Interpreter, and LangChain are similar, while
  LangChain is slightly more verbose with more code execution errors. Auto-GPT is the most
  verbose system because of the predefined steps like THOUGHTS, REASONING, and PLAN. It
  will reply with these steps every time. Overall, AutoGen and ChatGPT+Code Interpreter can run
  smoothly without exceptions. We note the occurrences of undesired behaviors from other LLM-
  based systems that could affect user experience: Auto-GPT keeps giving code without the ‘print’
  statement and cannot correct it, so the user needs to run them manually; ChatGPT with Wolfram
  Alpha plugin has the potential to stuck in a loop that needs to be manually stopped; and Langchain
  ReAct could exit with a parse error so a ‘handle parse error’ parameter must be passed.


                                                                               Expert
                                                                              Assistant


                  Student                 Student
                   Proxy                  Assistant
                                                                 Ask for
                                                                 expert


               Enable Autonomous and Human-in-the-loop
                           Problem Solving
                                                                               Expert
                                                                               Proxy


                                     Enable Multi-User Problem Solving Via
                                            Student     and Expert


Figure 6: Examples of three settings we used to solve math problems using AutoGen. (Gray)
Enables implementing a workflow where a single “student” works with a student assistant to solve
problems in either autonomous mode or human-in-the-loop mode. (Gray + Orange) Enables a more
sophisticated workflow where the student assistant can, on the fly, ask another user called “expert”,
who is in the loop with its own agent, to help solve problems if its own solutions are not satisfactory.


Scenario 2: Human-in-the-loop Problem Solving. For challenging problems that these
LLM systems cannot solve autonomously, human feedback during the problem-solving pro-
cess can be helpful.   To incorporate human feedback with AutoGen, one can set


                                                      20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


human input mode=‘ALWAYS’ in the user proxy agent. We select one challenging problem
that cannot be solved by any of these systems autonomously in 3 trials. We follow the process below
to provide human inputs in all the compared methods:
      1. Input the problem: Find the equation of the plane which bisects
         the angle between the planes 3x − 6y + 2z + 5 = 0 and 4x − 12y +
         3z − 3 = 0, and which contains the point (−5, −1, −5). Enter your
         answer in the form
                                           Ax + By + Cz + D = 0,
         where A, B, C, D are integers such that A                              >           0 and
         gcd(|A|, |B|, |C|, |D|) = 1.
      2. The response from the system does not solve the problem correctly. We then give
         a hint to the model: Your idea is not correct. Let’s solve this
         together. Suppose P                  =     (x, y, z) is a point that lies on a
         plane that bisects the angle, the distance from P to the
         two planes is the same. Please set up this equation first.
      3. We expect the system to give the correct distance equation. Since the equation involves an
         absolute sign that is hard to solve, we would give the next hint: Consider the two
         cases to remove the abs sign and get two possible solutions.
      4. If the system returns the two possible solutions and doesn’t continue to the next
         step, we give the last hint: Use point (-5,-1,-5) to determine which is
         correct and give the final answer.
      5. Final answer is 11x+6y+5z+86=0 .

During our evaluation, we observed that AutoGen consistently solves the problem in all 3 trials.
ChatGPT+Code Interpreter, ChatGPT+Plugin managed to solve the problem in 2 out of 3 trials, and
Auto-GPT failed to solve it all 3 times. In its unsuccessful attempt, ChatGPT+Code Interpreter failed
to follow our instructions to walk through the step of removing the absolute sign. ChatGPT+Plugin,
in its failed trial, produced an almost correct solution that had a sign discrepancy in the final answer.
In contrast, Auto-GPT was unable to yield a correct solution in any of the trials. In one trial, it
derived an incorrect distance equation. In the other two trials, it formulated the distance equation
and followed the provided hints, but the final answer was wrong from code execution.

Scenario 3: Multi-User Problem Solving. Next-generation LLM applications may require the
system to involve multiple real users for collectively solving a problem with the assistance of LLMs.
We showcase how AutoGen can be leveraged to build such a system with ease. In particular, built
upon scenario 2 above, we aim for a simple system that involves two human users, including a
student and an expert. In this system, the student interacts with an LLM assistant to solve some
problems, and the LLM would automatically resort to the expert when it is necessary.
The overall workflow is as follows: The student chats with the LLM-based assistant agent through
a student proxy agent to solve problems. When the assistant cannot solve the problem satisfacto-
rily, or the solution does not match the expectation of the student, it would automatically hold the
conversation and call the pre-defined ask for expert function via the function call feature of
GPT in order to resort to the expert. Specifically, it would automatically produce the initial message
for the ask for expert function, which could be the statement of the problem or the request to
verify the solution to a problem, and the expert is supposed to respond to this message with the help
of the expert assistant. After the conversation between the expert and the expert’s assistant, the final
message would be sent back to the student assistant as the response to the initial message. Then, the
student assistant would resume the conversation with the student using the response from the expert
for a better solution. A detailed visualization is shown in Figure 6.
With AutoGen, one can readily construct the student/expert proxy agent and the assistant agents
by reusing the built-in UserProxyAgent and AssistantAgent through appropriate configu-
rations. The only development required is several lines of code for the ask for expert function,
which is then part of the configuration for the assistant for the student. In addition, one can easily
extend such a system to include more than one expert with one specific ask for expert function
for each or include multiple student users with a shared expert to resort to.


                                                   21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A2: R ETRIEVAL AUGMENTED C ODE G ENERATION AND Q UESTION A NSWERING

                                            1. Question and Contexts

                                    2. Satisfied Answers or `Update Context`

                                    3. Terminate, feedbacks or `Update Context`

                                        4. Satisfied Answers or Terminate


              Retrieval-augmented                                           Retrieval-augmented
                   User Proxy                                                     Assistant

Figure 7: Overview of Retrieval-augmented Chat which involves two agents, including a Retrieval-
augmented User Proxy and a Retrieval-augmented Assistant. Given a set of documents, the
Retrieval-augmented User Proxy first automatically processes documents – splits, chunks, and stores
them in a vector database. Then for a given user input, it retrieves relevant chunks as context and
sends it to the Retrieval-augmented Assistant, which uses LLM to generate code or text to answer
questions. Agents converse until they find a satisfactory answer.


Detailed Workflow. The workflow of Retrieval-augmented Chat is sketched in Figure 7. To use
Retrieval-augmented Chat, one needs to initialize two agents including Retrieval-augmented User
Proxy and Retrieval-augmented Assistant. Initializing the Retrieval-augmented User Proxy requires
a path to the document collection. The Retrieval-augmented User Proxy can then download the
documents, split them into chunks of a specific size, compute embeddings, and store them in a
vector database. Then once a chat is initiated, they work together for code generation and question
answering automatically following the procedures below:
1. The Retrieval-augmented User Proxy retrieves document chunks based on the embedding simi-
   larity. It sends them along with the question to the Retrieval-augmented Assistant.
2. The Retrieval-augmented Assistant uses LLM to generate code or text as answers based on
   the question and context. The LLM is instructed to reply “Update Context” to the Retrieval-
   augmented User Proxy if it is unable to produce a satisfactory response.
3. If a response includes code blocks, Retrieval-augmented User Proxy executes the code and sends
   the output as feedback. If there are no code blocks or instructions to update context, it terminates
   the conversation. Otherwise, it updates the context and sends the question along with the new
   context to the Retrieval-augmented Assistant. Note that if human input solicitation is enabled, hu-
   mans can proactively send any feedback including “Update Context” to the Retrieval-augmented
   Assistant.
4. If the Retrieval-augmented Assistant receives “Update Context”, it requests the next most sim-
   ilar chunks of documents as new context from Retrieval-augmented User Proxy. Otherwise, it
   generates new code or text based on the feedback and chat history. If LLM fails to generate the
   answer, it replies “Update Context” again. This process can repeat several times. The conversa-
   tion terminates if no more documents are available for context.

We utilize Retrieval-augmented Chat in two scenarios. The first scenario aids in generating code
based on a given codebase. While LLMs possess strong coding abilities, they are unable to use
packages or APIs that are not included in their training data, e.g., private codebase, or have trouble
using trained ones that are frequently updated after training. Hence, Retrieval-augmented Code
Generation is considered to be highly valuable. The second scenario is to do question-answering
on the Natural Questions dataset (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019). This enables us to obtain comparative
evaluation metrics for the performance of our system.
Scenario 1: Evaluation on Natural Questions QA dataset. In this case, we evaluate
Retrieval-augmented Chat’s end-to-end question answering performance with the Natural Questions
dataset (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019). We collected 5,332 nonredundant context documents and 6,775
queries from HuggingFace. First, we create a document collection based on all the context corpus
and store them in the vector database. Then, we answer the questions with Retrieval-augmented
Chat.


                                                    22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                         Task description
                                               who carried the usa flag in opening ceremony?


               (a) W/O Interactive Retrieval                                         (b) W/ Interactive Retrieval
 Assistant: You’re a retrieve augmented chatbot. You answer user’s        Assistant: You’re a retrieve augmented chatbot. You answer user’s
 questions based on your own knowledge and the context provided by        questions based on your own knowledge and the context provided by
 the user. If you can’t answer the question with or without the           the user. If you can’t answer the question with or without the
 current context, you should reply ‘sorry, I don’t know’. You must        current context, you should reply exactly ‘UPDATE CONTEXT’. You
 give as short an answer as possible.                                     must give as short an answer as possible.
 User’s question is: who carried the usa flag in opening ceremony         User’s question is: who carried the usa flag in opening ceremony
 Context is: < P > On January 17 , 1899 , under ... The Astros            Context is: < P > On January 17 , 1899 , under ... The Astros
 beat the Yankees that night , 2 - 1 . < /P >                             beat the Yankees that night , 2 - 1 . < /P >
 UserProxy: Sorry, I cannot find any information about who carried        UserProxy: Sorry, I cannot find any information about who carried
 the USA flag in the opening ceremony. Sorry, I don’t know.               the USA flag in the opening ceremony. UPDATE CONTEXT.
                                                                          Assistant: You’re a retrieve augmented chatbot. You answer user’s
                                                                          questions based on your own knowledge and the context provided by
                                                                          the user. If you can’t answer the question with or without the
                                                                          current context, you should reply exactly ‘UPDATE CONTEXT’. You
                                                                          must give as short an answer as possible.
                                                                          User’s question is: who carried the usa flag in opening ceremony
                                                                          Context is: < T able > ... Erin Hamlin ... < /T d >
                                                                          UserProxy: Erin Hamlin carried the USA flag in the opening
                                                                          ceremony.


       Figure 8: Retrieval-augmented Chat without (W/O) and with (W/) interactive retrieval.


An example (Figure 8) from the NQ dataset showcases the advantages of interactive retrieval fea-
ture: “who carried the usa flag in opening ceremony”. When answering this question, the context
with the highest similarity to the question embedding does not contain the required information to
answer the question. As a result, the LLM assistant (GPT-3.5-turbo) replies “Sorry, I cannot find
any information about who carried the USA flag in the opening ceremony. UPDATE CONTEXT.”
With the unique and innovative ability to update context in Retrieval-augmented Chat, the user proxy
agent automatically updates the context and sends it to the assistant agent again. After this process,
the agent is able to generate the correct answer to the question.
In addition, we conduct an experiment using the same prompt as illustrated in (Adlakha et al., 2023)
to investigate the advantages of AutoGen W/O interactive retrieval. The F1 score and Recall for
the first 500 questions are 23.40% and 62.60%, respectively, which are nearly identical to the results
reported in Figure 4b. Consequently, we assert that AutoGen W/O interactive retrieval outper-
forms DPR due to differences in the retrievers employed. Specifically, we use a straightforward
vector search retriever with the all-MiniLM-L6-v2 model for embeddings. Furthermore, we conduct
an analysis of the number of LLM calls in experiments involving both AutoGen and AutoGen
W/O interactive retrieval, revealing that approximately 19.4% of questions in the Natural Questions
dataset trigger an “Update Context” operation, resulting in additional LLM calls.
Scenario 2: Code generation leveraging latest APIs from the codebase. In this case, the question
is “How can I use FLAML to perform a classification task and use spark to do parallel training?
Train 30 seconds and force cancel jobs if time limit is reached.”. FLAML (v1) (Wang et al., 2021) is
an open-source Python library for efficient AutoML and tuning. It was open-sourced in December
2020, and is included in the training data of GPT-4. However, the question requires the use of Spark-
related APIs, which were added in December 2022 and are not included in the GPT-4 training data.
As a result, the original GPT-4 model is unable to generate the correct code, as it lacks knowledge
of Spark-related APIs. Instead, it creates a non-existent parameter, spark, and sets it to ‘True’.
However, with Retrieval-augmented Chat, we provide the latest reference documents as context.
Then, GPT-4 generates the correct code blocks by setting use spark and f orce cancel to ‘True’.


                                                                     23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A3: D ECISION M AKING IN T EXT W ORLD E NVIRONMENTS



                                                                                 ALFWorld Executor

                          Action Decision
      Action decision: Pick up pencil 2 from desk 2



               ALFWorld
               Executor
                                            Assistant


                           Reward & State
      Observation: On the desk 2, you see an alarmclock 3,
      a bowl 3, a creditcard 2, a mug 1, and a pencil 2.
                                                                  Assistant                      GroundingAgent

                    ALFChat (two agents)                                      ALFChat (three agents)



Figure 9: We use AutoGen to solve tasks in the ALFWorld benchmark which contains household
tasks described in natural language. We propose two designs: A two-agent design where the assistant
agent suggests the next step and the Executor executes actions and provides feedback. The three-
agent design adds a grounding agent that supplies commonsense facts to the assistant.

ALFWorld (Shridhar et al., 2021) is a synthetic language-based interactive decision-making task. It
comprises textual environments that aim to simulate real-world household scenes. Given the high-
level goal (e.g., putting a hot apple in the fridge) and the description of the household environment,
the agent needs to explore and interact with the simulated household environment through a textual
interface. A typical task environment contains various types of locations and could take more than
40 steps to finish, which highlights the need for agents to decompose the goal into subtasks and track
them down one by one, meanwhile exploring the environments effectively.
Detailed Workflow. We first propose a straightforward design to tackle the benchmark. As il-
lustrated in Figure 9, the system contains two agents. The first assistant agent generates plans to
solve the tasks and make action decisions accordingly. The second executor agent is tailored specifi-
cally for ALFWorld, which performs action according to assistance and provides feedback from the
household environment. Due to the strict format requirements for the output format, we use BLEU
metric to evaluate the similarity of the output to all valid action options. The option with the highest
similarity will be chosen as the action for this round.
One major challenge encompassed in ALFWorld is commonsense reasoning. The agent needs to
extract patterns from the few-shot examples provided and combine them with the agent’s general
knowledge of household environments to fully understand task rules. More often than not, the
assistant tends to neglect some basic knowledge of the household environment. Thanks to the easy-
to-implement multi-agent conversational feature of AutoGen, it is easy to enhance the assistant
agent’s reasoning ability by adding a new grounding agent to provide commonsense facts for the
decision-making agent’s reference. By scrutinizing the failed attempts and summarizing failure rea-
sons, we obtained a holistic understanding of the common sense knowledge that the assistant agent
lacks. Then we set a grounding agent to provide this general knowledge when the task begins and
whenever the assistant outputs the same action three times in a row. This ensures the assistant takes
this commonsense knowledge into consideration and prevents it from getting stuck in outputting the
same content or constantly apologizing.
We compare the system’s performance with ReAct, which viewed ALFWorld as a text-completion
task. ReAct (Yao et al., 2022) is a few-shot prompting technique that interleaves reasoning and
acting, allowing for greater synergy between the two and significantly improved performance on
both language and decision-making tasks. We integrate ReAct into AutoGen by modifying the
prompts in a conversational manner. Following ReAct, we employ a two-shot setting. The few-shot
prompts are from the corresponding repository. As shown in Table 3. The two-agent design levels
the performance of ReAct, while three-agent design significantly outperforms ReAct. We presume


                                                             24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                 Task description
 You are in the middle of a room. Looking quickly around you, you see a bed 1, a desk 2, a desk 1, a safe 1, a drawer 2, a drawer 1, a
 shelf 3, a shelf 2, and a shelf 1.
 Your task is to: look at bowl under the desklamp.


                           (a) Two agents                                                         (b) Three agents
 Assistant(to Executor): THOUGHT [First, I need to find a bowl. A          Assistant(to Executor): THOUGHT [First, I need to find a bowl. A
 bowl is more likely to appear in desk (1-2), drawer (1-2), shelf          bowl is more likely to appear in desk (1-2), drawer (1-2), shelf
 (1-3), bed (1). Then I need to find and use a desklamp.] ACTION           (1-3), bed (1). Then I need to find and use a desklamp.] ACTION
 [go to desk 1]                                                            [go to desk 1]
     (Assistant finds the desklamp at desk 1, then goes to desk 2.)            (Assistant finds the desklamp at desk 1, then goes to desk 2.)
 Executor(to Assistant): On the desk 2, you see a bowl 1, and a                          (Assistant falls into the same loop as (a))
 cd 3...                                                                   GroundingAgent(to Executor): You must find and take the object
 Assistant(to Executor): THOUGHT [Now I find a bowl (1). I need            before you can examine it. You must go to where the target
 to use the desklamp to look at the bowl. I'll go to the desklamp          object is before you can use it.
 now.] ACTION [go to desk 1]                                               Executor(to Assistant): You turn on the desklamp 1. Hint: You must
 Executor(to Assistant): On the desk 1, you see a desklamp 1, a            find and take the object before you can examine it.
 pencil 2...                                                               Assistant(to Executor): THOUGHT [I need to find and take the
 Assistant: ACTION [use desklamp 1]                                        bowl (1) before I can examine it. Let me find the bowl first.]
 Executor(to Assistant): You turn on the desklamp 1.                       ACTION [go to desk 2]
 Assistant(to Executor): THOUGHT [Now that the desklamp is turned          Executor(to Assistant): On the desk 2, you see a bowl 1, a cd
 on, I can use it to look at the bowl (1) that I found earlier.]           3...
 ACTION [look at bowl 1 under the desklamp 1]                              Assistant(to Executor): ACTION [take bowl 1 from desk 2]
 Executor(to Assistant): You turn on the desklamp 1.                       Executor(to Assistant): You pick up bowl 1 from desk 2.
      (Assistant falls into an infinite loop turning on desklamp.)         Assistant(to Executor): ACTION [go to desk 1]
 Executor(to Assistant): Task failed. Reply TERMINATE.                     Assistant(to Executor): ACTION [use desklamp 1]
 Assistant(to Executor): TERMINATE                                         Executor(to Assistant): Task success. Reply TERMINATE.
                                                                           Assistant(to Executor): TERMINATE


Figure 10: Comparison of two designs, (a) Two-agent design that incorporates interaction
between AssistantAgent and UserProxyAgent, (b) Three-agent design that adds a
GroundingAgent that serves as a knowledge source. For simplicity, we omit the in-context
examples and part of the exploration trajectory and only show parts contributing to the failure/suc-
cess of the attempt.

                Method                                      Pick      Clean       Heat        Cool         Look         Pick 2         All
             ReAct (avg)                                     63        52          48          71           61            24           54
         ALFChat (2 agents)(avg)                             61        58          57          67           50            19           54
         ALFChat (3 agents)(avg)                             79        64          70          76           78            41           69
           ReAct (best of 3)                                 75        62          61          81           78            35           66
       ALFChat (2 agents)(best of 3)                         71        61          65          76           67            35           63
       AFLChat (3 agents)(best of 3)                         92        74          78          86           83            41           77

Table 3: Comparisons between ReAct and ALFChat on ALFWorld benchmark. For each task, we
report the success rate out of 3 attempts. Success rate stands for the number of tasks successfully
completed by the agent divided by the total number of tasks. The results show that by adding a
grounding agent, the assistant agent leverages necessary commonsense knowledge into reasoning
and improves task success rate significantly.


that the performance discrepancy is caused by the inherent difference between dialogue-completion
and text-completion tasks. On the other hand, introducing a grounding agent as a knowledge source
remarkably advances performance on all types of tasks.
Case study. Figure 10 exemplifies how a three-agent design eliminates one root cause for failure
cases. Most of the tasks involve taking an object and then doing something to it (e.g. finding a
vase and putting it in a safe place). When there is no grounding agent, the assistant frequently links
finding an object and taking it away as equivalent Figure 10a). This leads to most of the failure cases
in ‘pick’ and ‘look’ type tasks. With the introduction of a grounding agent, the assistant can jump
out of the loop and successfully complete the task.
Takeaways. By decoupling ALFWorld agent-text interaction into assistant and executor, our design
offered both simplicity and modularity. We introduced a grounding agent to serve as an exter-
nal commonsense knowledge source, which significantly enhanced the assistant’s ability to make
informed decisions. This proves providing necessary commonsense facts to the decision-making
agent can assist it in making more informed decisions, thus boosting task success rate effectively.


                                                                      25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A4: M ULTI -AGENT C ODING


                                                          User
                                  ① User Question         ⑧ Final Answer


                                               g
                                            Lo                         ❺
                                       ,❻                                    Cle
                                     on                          ❹               a
                                 sti                  s                              ra
                             Qu
                               e                    An               Co                 nc
                                                                                           e
                                                                        de
                         ②                     ,⑦
                                          de        Commander                                     Repeat until
                                       Co                                                        answering the
                                   ❸
                                                                                               user’s question or
                                                                                                    timeout



                         Writer                                         Safeguard


Figure 11: Our re-implementation of OptiGuide with AutoGen streamlining agents’ interactions.
The Commander receives user questions (e.g., What if we prohibit shipping from supplier 1 to roast-
ery 2?) and coordinates with the Writer and Safeguard. The Writer crafts the code and interpretation,
the Safeguard ensures safety (e.g., not leaking information, no malicious code), and the Commander
executes the code. If issues arise, the process can repeat until resolved. Shaded circles represent
steps that may be repeated multiple times.


Detailed Workflow. The workflow can be described as follows. The user agent initiates the in-
teraction by posing the user’s question, such as “What if we prohibit shipping from supplier 1 to
roastery 2?”, marked by 1 to the Commander agent. The Commander manages and coordinates
with two LLM-based assistant agents: the Writer and the Safeguard. Apart from directing the flow
of communication, the Commander has the responsibility of handling memory tied to user interac-
tions. This capability enables the Commander to capture and retain valuable context regarding the
user’s questions and their corresponding responses. Such memory is subsequently shared across the
system, empowering the other agents with context from prior user interactions and ensuring more
informed and relevant responses.
In this orchestrated process, the Writer, who combines the functions of a “Coder” and an “Inter-
preter” as defined in (Li et al., 2023a), will craft code and also interpret execution output logs. For in-
stance, during code writing ( 2 and 3 ), the Writer may craft code “model.addConstr(x[‘supplier1’,
‘roastery2’] == 0, ‘prohibit’)” to add an additional constraint to answer the user’s question.
After receiving code, the Commander will communicate with the Safeguard to screen the code
and ascertain its safety ( 4 ); once the code obtains the Safeguard’s clearance, marked by 5 , the
Commander will use external tools (e.g., Python) to execute the code, and request the Writer to
interpret the execution results for the user’s question ( 6 and 7 ). For instance, the writer may
say “if we prohibit shipping from supplier 1 to roastery 2, the total cost would increase by 10.5%.”
Bringing this intricate process full circle, the Commander furnishes the user with the concluding
answer ( 8 ).
However, if at a point there is an exception - either a security red flag raised by Safeguard (in 5 ) or
code execution failures within Commander, the Commander redirects the issue back to the Writer
with essential information in logs ( 6 ). So, the process from 3 to 6 might be repeated multiple
times, until each user query receives a thorough and satisfactory resolution or until the timeout. This
entire complex workflow of multi-agent interaction is elegantly automated via AutoGen agent chat.
The core workflow code for OptiGuide was reduced from over 430 lines to 100 lines using
AutoGen, leading to significant productivity improvement. The new agents are customizable, con-
versable, and can autonomously manage their chat memories. This consolidation allows the coder
and interpreter roles to merge into a single “Writer” agent, resulting in a clean, concise, and intuitive
implementation that is easier to maintain.


                                                          26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Manual Evaluation Comparing ChatGPT + Code Interpreter and OptiGuide. ChatGPT +
Code Interpreter is unable to run code with private or customized dependencies (e.g., Gurobi), which
means users need to have engineering expertise and manually handle multiple steps, disrupting the
workflow and increasing the chance for mistakes. If users lack access or expertise, the burden falls
on supporting engineers, increasing their on-call time.
We carried out a user study that juxtaposed OpenAI’s ChatGPT coupled with a Code Interpreter
against AutoGen-based OptiGuide. The study focused on a coffee supply chain scenario, and an
expert Python programmer with proficiency in Gurobi participated in the test. We evaluated both
systems based on 10 randomly selected questions, measuring time and accuracy. While both sys-
tems answered 8 questions correctly, the Code Interpreter was significantly slower than OptiGuide
because the former requires more manual intervention. On average, users need to spend 4 minutes
and 35 seconds to solve problems with the Code Interpreter, with a standard deviation of approxi-
mately 2.5 minutes. In contrast, OptiGuide’s average problem-solving time was around 1.5 minutes,
most of which was spent waiting for responses from the GPT-4 model. This indicates a 3x saving
on the user’s time with OptiGuide.
While using ChatGPT + Code Intepreter, users had to read through code and instructions to know
where to paste the code snippets. Additionally, running the code involves downloading it and exe-
cuting it in a terminal, a process that was both time-consuming and prone to errors. The response
time from Code Interpreter is also slower, because it generates lots of tokens to read the code, read
the variables line-by-line, perform chains of thought analysis, and then produce the final answer
code. In contrast, AutoGen integrates multiple agents to reduce user interactions by 3 - 5 times
on average as reported in Table 4, where we evaluated our system with 2000 questions across five
OptiGuide applications and measured how many prompts the user need to type.

Table 4: Manual effort saving in OptiGuide (W/ GPT-4), while preserving the same coding perfor-
mance. Data displayed include both the mean and standard deviations (indicated in parentheses).

    Dataset            netflow         facility             tsp          coffee           diet
    Saving Ratio     3.14x (0.65)   3.14x (0.64)        4.88x (1.71)   3.38x (0.86)   3.03x (0.31)

Table 13 and 15 provide a detailed comparison of user experience with ChatGPT+Code Interpreter
and AutoGen-based OptiGuide. ChatGPT+Code Interpreter is unable to run code with private
packages or customized dependencies (such as Gurobi); as a consequence ChatGPT+Code Inter-
preter requires users to have engineering expertise and manually handle multiple steps, disrupting
the workflow and increasing the chance for mistakes. If customers lack access or expertise, the
burden falls on supporting engineers, increasing their on-call time. In contrast, the automated chat
by AutoGen is more streamlined and autonomous, integrating multiple agents to solve problems
and address concerns. This results in a 5x reduction in interaction and fundamentally changes the
overall usability of the system. A stable workflow can be potentially reused for other applications
or to compose a bigger one.

Takeaways: The implementation of the multi-agent design with AutoGen in the OptiGuide ap-
plication offers several advantages. It simplified the Python implementation. It fostered a mixture of
collaborative and adversarial problem-solving environment, with the Commander and Writer work-
ing together while the Safeguard acts as a virtual adversarial checker. This setup allows for proper
memory management, as the Commander maintains memory related to user interactions, provid-
ing context-aware decision-making. Additionally, role-playing ensures that each agent’s memory
remains isolated, preventing shortcuts and hallucinations.


                                                   27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A5: DYNAMIC G ROUP C HAT


                                                                      Manager



                       Alice     User Proxy     Bob

                            1. Select a Speaker


                                Response
                                                            Alice    User Proxy    Bob
                       Bob                 Manager
                                                                    3. Broadcast
                     2. Ask the Speaker to Respond


Figure 12: A5: Dynamic Group Chat: Overview of how AutoGen enables dynamic group chats to
solve tasks. We use a special agent called the Manager that repeats the following three steps– select
a single speaker (in this case Bob), ask the speaker to respond, and broadcast the selected speaker’s
message to all the other agents.

To validate the necessity of multi-agent dynamic group chat and the effectiveness of the role-play
speaker selection policy, we conduct a pilot study comparing a four-agent dynamic group chat sys-
tem with two possible alternatives across 12 manually crafted complex tasks. An example task is
“How much money would I earn if I bought 200 $AAPL stocks at the lowest price in the last 30 days
and sold them at the highest price? Save the results into a file.” The four-agent group chat system
was composed of the following group members: a user proxy to take human inputs, an engineer to
write code and fix bugs, a critic to review code and provide feedback, and a code executor for execut-
ing code. One of the possible alternatives is a two-agent system involving an LLM-based assistant
and a user proxy agent, and another alternative is another group chat system with the same group
members but a task-based speaker selection policy. In the task-based speaker selection policy, we
just append role information, chat history, and the next speaker’s task into a single prompt. Through
the pilot study, we observe that compared with a task-style prompt, utilizing a role-play prompt
in dynamic speaker selection often leads to more effective consideration of both conversation con-
text and role alignment during the process of generating the subsequent speaker and consequently a
higher success rate and fewer LLM calls.

                 Table 5: Number of successes on the 12 tasks (higher the better).

 Model             Two Agent         Group Chat       Group Chat with a task-based speaker selection policy
 GPT-3.5-turbo          8                  9                                        7
 GPT-4                  9                  11                                       8


 Table 6: Average # LLM calls and number of termination failure for each task (lower the better).

 Model             Two Agent         Group Chat       Group Chat with a task-based speaker selection policy
 GPT-3.5-turbo        9.9, 9            5.3, 0                                     4, 0
 GPT-4                6.8, 3            4.5, 0                                     4, 0


                                                      28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 13: Comparison of two-agent chat (a) and group chat (b) on a given task. Group chat resolves
the task successfully with a smoother conversation, while the two-agent chat fails on the same task
and ends with repeated conversation.


                                                29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A6: C ONVERSATIONAL C HESS



                                                        Chess Board



           Human/AI Chess Player A                                                Human/AI Chess Player B
                                                    e                 Valid
                                      at e   m ov                           a   te mo
                                                                                        ve
                                Valid

                                                              Developing my knight to a
                                                              good square. Your move.
                       Challenging your pawn in
                       the center. Your move.


Figure 14: A6: Conversational Chess: Our conversational chess application can support various
scenarios, as each player can be an LLM-empowered AI, a human, or a hybrid of them. Here, the
board agent maintains the rules of the game and supports the players with information about the
board. Players and the board agent all use natural language for communication.

In Conversational Chess, each player is an AutoGen agent and can be either powered by a human
or an AI. A third party that is a board agent is built to support players with information about the
board and ground players’ moves to a legal chess move. Figure 14 shows the scenarios supported
by Conversational Chess: AI/human vs. AI/human, and how players and a board agent interact. It
opens up opportunities for social interaction and allows players to express their moves creatively,
such as using jokes, meme references, and character-playing, therefore making chess games more
entertaining to players as well as observers (Figure 15 shows an example of conversational chess).
To realize these scenarios, we constructed a player agent with LLM and human as back-end options.
When human input is enabled, before sending the input to the board agent, it first asks the human
player to input the message that contains the move and anything else the player wants to say (such
as a witty comment). If human input is skipped or disabled, LLM is used to generate the message.
The board agent is implemented with a custom reply function, which uses an LLM to parse the
natural language input into a legal move in a structured format (e.g., UCI), and then pushes the
move to the board. If the move is not legitimate, the board agent will reply with an error. Then the
player agent needs to resend a message to the board agent until the move is legal. Once the move
is successfully pushed, the player agent sends the message to the opponent. As in Figure 15, the
conversation between AI players can be natural and entertaining. When the player agents use LLM
to generate a message, it makes use of the board state and the error message from the board agent.
That helps reduce the chance of hallucinating an invalid move. The chat between one player agent
and the board agent is invisible to the other player agent, which keeps the messages used in chat
completion well managed.
There are two notable benefits of using AutoGen to implement Conversational Chess. Firstly, the
agent design in AutoGen enables the natural creation of objects and their interactions needed in
our chess game. This makes development easy and intuitive. For example, the isolation of chat
messages makes it easy to make a proper LLM chat completion inference call. Secondly, AutoGen
greatly simplifies the implementation of agent behaviors using composition. Specifically, we used
the register reply method supported by AutoGen agents to instantiate player agents and a
board agent with custom reply functions. Restricting the extension work needed in a single point
(the reply function) simplifies the reasoning, development, and maintenance.


                                                             30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 Alright, let's kick things off. I'll
                                 move my pawn from e2 to e4. The
                                 center of the board is the heart of
                                 the battle, isn't it?

                                      Ah, the King's Pawn Opening, a
                                     classic. Let's see how this plays
                                   out. I'll move my pawn from e7 to                        Indeed, the king's safety is paramount in the early
                                    e5.You know, I've always admired
                                                                                            game. Now, let's stir things up a bit. I'll move my
                                       how chess reflects life. It's all
                                                                                            pawn from e4 to e5, attacking your knight.
                                    about making strategic decisions,
                                                   isn't it? Your move.
                                                                                                                 Error: illegal uci: 'e4e5' in ...
                                 Indeed, chess is a mirror of life in
                                 many ways. Every move matters,
                                 just like every decision in life. I'll                         I'll move my pawn from d2 to d4, opening up
                                 move my knight from g1 to f3,                                                lines for my queen and bishop.
                                 aiming to control the center.

                                                                                        (b) Conversation between AI player (player
                                                   …


                                                                                        white shown in blue) and board agent for
                     (a) Conversation between AI players                                making a new move.

                     Figure 15: Example conversations during a game between two AI players.


To show the effect brought by this board agent, we provide a demonstration of conversational chess
without a board agent Figure 16. In this demonstration, instead of using an additional board agent
to do grounding, the system uses prompting to do grounding by including this sentence “You should
make sure both you and the opponent are making legal moves.” to the system message of both
players.

                                                                           Conversational Chess
  System message to the player agents: Your name is {name} and you are a chess player. You are playing against{opponent_name}. You are playing as {color}. You
  communicate your move using universal chess interface language. You also chit-chat with your opponent when you communicate a move to light up the mood. You should
  make sure both you and the opponent are making legal moves...


                          (a) W/O Board Agent                                                                    (b) W/ Board Agent
 Player White: Your move                                                                   Player White: Your move
 Player black: Alright, let's start. I'll move my pawn from e7                             Player black: Alright, let's start. I'll move my pawn from e7 to e5.
 to e5.                                                                                    Here's how the board looks now:
                                                                                           r n b q k b n r
 Here's how the board looks now:
                                                                                           p p p p . p p p
 r n b q k b n r
                                                                                           . . . . . . . .
 p p p p . p p p
 . . . . . . . .                                                                           . . . . p . . .
 . . . . p . . .                                                                           . . . . . . . .
 . . . . . . . .                                                                           . . . . . . . .
 . . . . . . . .                                                                           P P P P P P P P
 P P P P P P P P                                                                           R N B Q K B N R
 R N B Q K B N R                                                                           Your turn!
 Your turn!
                                                                                           Player White: Yes, it certainly is! Let's keep this up. I'll move my
                                                                                           knight from b8 to c6. Here's the updated board:
                                                                                           . n b q k b . r
                                                                                           p p p p . p p p
                                                                                           . . n . . n . .
 Player White: Yes, it certainly is! Let's keep this up.                                   . . . . p . . .
 I'll move my knight from b8 to c6. Here's the updated board:                              . . . . P . . .
 . n b q k b . r                                                                           . . . . N . . .
 p p p p . p p p                                                                           P P P P . P P P
 . . n . . n . .                                                                           R N B Q K B . R
 . . . . p . . .                                                                           Your move! You're giving me a tough time here.
 . . . . P . . .                                                                           Board Agent: Your move is illegal. You changed the rock at a8 to knight
 . . . . N . . .                                                                           and move it to c6. Please check your decision and re-make your move.
 P P P P . P P P                                                                           Player White: Sorry for the mistakes. I'll move my knight from b8 to c6.
 R N B Q K B . R                                                                           Here's the updated board:
 Your move! You're giving me a tough time here.                                            r . b q k b . r
                                                                                           p p p p . p p p
                                                                                           . . n . . n . .
                                                                                           . . . . p . . .
                                                                                           . . . . P . . .
                                                                                           . . . . N . . .
                                                                                           P P P P . P P P
                                                                                           R N B Q K B . R


Figure 16: Comparison of two designs–(a) without a broad agent, and (b) without a board agent–in
Conversational Chess


                                                                                     31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A7: O NLINE D ECISION M AKING FOR B ROWSER INTERACTIONS


           Action decision: Next action to perform on a web page        Action decision = “Click the button
                                                                        with xpath ’//button[id =
                                Action Decision                         ‘subbtn’]’“


              Executor                                 Assistant        Environment State =

                                                                        “<div id="wrap" data-wob_ref="2" data-wob_eps="e0">
                                                                          <div id="query">Click button ONE, then click button
                                                                        TWO.</div>
                                                                          <div id="area" data-wob_ref="3" data-wob_eps="e0">
                                                                            <button id="subbtn" style="position:absolute;
                                                                        left:50px; top:74px" data-wob_ref="4" data-
                                                                        wob_eps="e0">ONE</button>
                                                                            <button id="subbtn2" style="position:absolute;
                                                                        left:98px; top:167px" data-wob_ref="5" data-
                                                                        wob_eps="e0">TWO</button>
                                                                          </div>
                                 Reward & State                         </div>“

              Environment State: HTML code for current web pages
                                                                        Reward = ”0” (Ongoing)
              Reward: Success/Fail/Ongoing


Figure 17: We use AutoGen to build MiniWobChat to solve tasks in the MiniWob++ benchmark.
MiniWobChat consists of two agents: An assistant agent and an executor agent. The assistant agent
suggests actions to manipulate the browser, and the executor executes the suggested action and
returns reward/feedback. The assistant agent records feedback and continues until the feedback
indicates task success/failure.

In practice, many applications demand the presence of agents capable of interacting with environ-
ments and making decisions in an online context, such as game playing (Mnih et al., 2013; Vinyals
et al., 2017), web interactions (Liu et al., 2018; Shi et al., 2017) and robot manipulations (Shen
et al., 2021). With the multi-agent conversational framework in AutoGen, it is easy to decom-
pose the automatic agent-environment interactions and the development of a decision-making agent
by constructing an executor agent responsible for handling the interaction with the environment,
therefore splitting out the decision-making part to other agents. Such a decomposition allows devel-
opers to reuse the decision-making agent for new tasks with minimal effort rather than building a
specialized decision-making agent for every new environment.

Workflow. We demonstrate how to use AutoGen to build a working system to handle such scenar-
ios with the MiniWoB++ benchmark (Shi et al., 2017). MiniWoB++ comprises browser interaction
tasks that involve utilizing mouse and keyboard actions to interact with browsers. The ultimate ob-
jective of each task is to complete tasks described concisely in natural language, such as “expand the
web section below and click the submit button.” Solving these tasks typically requires a sequence
of web manipulation actions rather than one single action, and making action decisions at each time
step requires access to the web status (in the form of HTML code) online. For the example above,
clicking the submit button requires getting the status of the web status after expanding the web sec-
tion. We designed a straightforward two-agent system named MiniWobChat using AutoGen as
shown in Figure 17. The assistant agent is an instance of the built-in AssistantAgent and is
responsible for making action decisions for the given task. The second agent, the executor agent,
is a customized UserProxyAgent, which is responsible for interacting with the benchmark by
executing the actions suggested by the AssistantAgent and returning feedback.
To assess the developed working system’s performance, we make a comparison with RCI (Kim
et al., 2023), a recent solution for MiniWoB++ benchmark that employs a set of self-critiquing
prompts and has achieved the state-of-the-art performance. In our evaluation, we use all available
tasks in RCI official code with varying degrees of difficulty to conduct a comprehensive analysis
against MiniWobChat. Figure 18 illustrates that MiniWobChat achieves competitive performance in
this evaluation8 . Specifically, among the 49 available tasks, MiniWobChat achieves a success rate
of 52.8%, which is only 3.6% lower than RCI, a method specifically designed for the MiniWob++
benchmark. It is worth noting that in most tasks, the difference between the two methods is mirrored
as shown in Figure 18. If we consider 0.1 as a success rate tolerance for each task, i.e., two methods
that differ within 0.1 are considered to have the same performance, both two methods achieve better
   8
       We report the results of RCI by running its official code with default settings.


                                                           32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


performance than the other on the same number of tasks. For illustration purpose, we provide a case
analysis in Table 7 on four typical tasks.
Additionally, we also explored the feasibility of using Auto-GPT for handling the same tasks. Auto-
GPT faces challenges in handling tasks that involve complex rules due to its limited extensibility.
It provides an interface for setting task goals using natural language. However, when dealing with
the MiniWob++ benchmark, accurately instructing Auto-GPT to follow the instructions for using
Miniwob++ is challenging. There is no clear path to extend it like the two-agent chat by AutoGen.

Takeaways: For this application, AutoGen stood out as a more user-friendly option, offering
modularity and programmability: It streamlined the process with autonomous conversations be-
tween the assistant and the executor and provided readily available solutions for agent-environment
interactions. The built-in AssistantAgent was directly reusable and presented strong perfor-
mance without customization. Moreover, the decoupling of the execution and assistant agent en-
sures that modifications to one component do not adversely impact the other. This convenience
makes maintenance and future updates straightforward.


                                                       RCI        MiniWobChat
                   1.0
    success rate


                   0.5


                   0.0
                         foecnteer-tme ic
                           clicclic-tabr-d


                          e ox ar urk
             en en me a-ilnl-tdu-nl


                logrid- foc -tetimet


                     sim rc ate us p
                ter ter nt -in rk

                             endynwa orde


                      seaavioggin-opute
             he chekbo k-b enist
                c kbo kb es tt e
               clilcick-xeso-xe-slargon
                          c t - e
                  clkic-cohl ecrkanssoft


                          clic-dia-coblole
                                k-dlog r
                           cl clic ialo-2
                      clicclicick-mk-ling
                                k k
                         clk-sc-openu
                  clic cilck-srollt-ion


                      -te -paer- box



                      in- coo us-xt-2
                       n l r-pina t
              socsoc pleh-e -tr er


                                       ne l
                        k-clap boxfer
                       clicclilclapbsle-2s


                         k-t ick-hadlist
                            clibc-2-hapees

                                 k k- 2
         eminbox cli clic-testab
             ail -fo co ck-wk-t t-2
             em-inborwaunt- idgest
                  ail x-f rd-nsha et
                       -in or l- pe


                   ial ial- -al ngiee
                       -m me ge ne
                        soecdiadiabra
                              ial -so-all
                          us te-rmemd e
                             e-s m ia
                                         r
                                   pinina
                                   r- x

                               e x
                             o si e
                c c x uc


                          xt- ss dat



                          us rd te
                                  k ha
         k-cick- ec cliceque-l


                                  k i


                           b wt
     clic cl k-ch on-hs oos


                             a s


                                 t
                               u s
                            k
         clic -butt c


                    g
              k
         clic


          -
       ail
    em


Figure 18: Comparisons between RCI (state-of-the-art prior work) and MiniWobChat on the Mini-
Wob++ benchmark. we use all available tasks in RCI official code with varying degrees of difficulty
to conduct comprehensive comparisons. For each task, we reported the success rate for ten different
instances. The results show that MiniWobChat achieves comparable performance with RCI. If we
consider 0.1 as a success rate tolerance for each task, both methods achieve better performance than
the other on the same number of tasks.

                         Table 7: Cases analysis on four typical tasks from MiniWob++ benchmark.

                                        Correctness                             Main failure reason
                                      AutoGen: 10/10                                   N/A.
 click-dialog
                                        RCI: 10/10                                     N/A.
                                      AutoGen: 5/10           AssistantAgent provides actions with infeasible
 click-checkboxes-large
                                                                                    characters.
                                         RCI: 0/10                RCI performs actions that are out of its plan.
                                       AutoGen: 2/10           AssistantAgent provide actions with redundant
 count-shape
                                                             content that can not convert to actions in the benchmark.
                                         RCI: 0/10                  RCI provides a wrong plan in most cases.
                                       AutoGen: 0/10            AssistantAgent return actions out of its plan.
 use-spinner
                                         RCI: 1/10                  RCI provides a wrong plan in most cases.


                                                             33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E       E XAMPLE OUTPUTS FROM APPLICATIONS
In this section, we include example outputs from the following applications and systems:
• Application A1: autonomous solving process of one problem on: ChatGPT + Plugin (Table 8),
  AutoGen (Table 9), LangChain ReAct (Table 10), Auto-GPT (Table 11), Multi-Agent Debate
  (Table 12), ChatGPT + Code Interpreter (Table 14).
• Application A4: an OptiGuide problem with AutoGen (Table 15) and ChatGPT + Code Inter-
  preter (Table 13).
• Application A1: Preliminary evaluation on several alternative multi-agent frameworks which
  shows that they should be excluded from quantitative comparison: BabyAGI (Table 16), CAMEL
  (Table 17), MetaGPT (Table 18).

Table 8: Application A1. Scenario 1: autonomous math solving. ChatGPT+ Plugin (Wolfram
Alpha) on the first qualitative example. The response from Wolfram contains the correct answer but
ChatGPT chose the wrong answer.

         Action   ChatGPT + Plugin
    g     Input   Completely simplify and rationalize the denominator:
                                                     √        √
                                                       160      245
                                                     √      ×√
                                                       252      108

    ð             REQUEST TO WOLFRAM:
                    1 {
                    2   "input": "simplify (sqrt(160)/sqrt(252))*
                    3   (sqrt(245)/sqrt(108))"
                    4 }

                  RESPONSE FROM WOLFRAM
                    1   Query:
                    2   "simplify (sqrt(160)/sqrt(252))*(sqrt(245)/sqrt(108))"
                    3
                    4   Input interpretation:
                    5   simplify | sqrt(160)/sqrt(252)x sqrt(245)/sqrt(108)
                    6
                    7   Results:
                    8   (5 sqrt(42))/27
                    9
                   10   (5 sqrt(14/3))/9
                   11
                   12   Decimal approximation:
                   13   1.2001371663718259686974013770533327143898526494552...
                   14
                   15   Wolfram|Alpha website result for "simplify
                   16   (sqrt(160)/sqrt(252))*(sqrt(245)/sqrt(108))":
                   17   [link]



    ð             The completely simplified and rationalized form of the given expression is:
                                                           p
                                                          5 14/3
                                                             9
                  In decimal form, this is approximately 1.200137166371825968697401377053332714...


                                                      34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 9: Application A1. Scenario 1: autonomous math solving. AutoGen on the first qualitative
example. AutoGen solves the problem correctly.

       Action            AutoGen
 g     Init chat         Completely simplify and rationalize the denominator:
                                                            √        √
                                                              160      245
                                                            √      ×√
                                                              252      108

 ð                       We can simplify and rationalize this denominator using Python’s symbolic mathematics
                         library ‘sympy‘. Here is the Python code to resolve this:
                           1   from sympy import sqrt, Rational
                           2
                           3   # Define the entire fraction as a rational number
                           4   fraction = (sqrt(160)/sqrt(252))*(sqrt(245)/sqrt(108))
                           5
                           6   # Simplify the fraction
                           7   simplified = fraction.simplify()
                           8
                           9   # Print the simplified fraction
                          10   print(simplified)

                         This code performs the requested simplification by constructing the fraction using the
                         ‘Rational()‘ function from the ‘sympy‘ module, which automatically simplifies frac-
                         tions when possible. The ‘sqrt()‘ function from the ‘sympy‘ module enables square root
                         calculations. Finally, the ‘simplify()‘ function simplifies expressions when possible.
 g    Auto Reply         exitcode: 0 (execution succeeded) Code output: 5*sqrt(42)/27
 ð                       TERMINATE


Table 10: Application A1. Scenario 1: autonomous math solving. LangChain ReAct on the first
qualitative example. The code generated does not match the reasoned plan. The code returns a
decimal number.

      Action       LangChain ReAct
 g    Input        Completely simplify and rationalize the denominator:
                                                          √       √
                                                            160     245
                                                          √     ×√
                                                            252     108

 ð                 Entering new AgentExecutor chain...
                   To simplify this expression, I will first simplify each square root individually, then multiply
                   the fractions as normal. The result should be a rational number. Action: Python REPL Action
                   Input:
                     1   import math
                     2
                     3   # Calculate square roots
                     4   sqrt_160 = math.sqrt(160)
                     5   sqrt_252 = math.sqrt(252)
                     6   sqrt_245 = math.sqrt(245)
                     7   sqrt_108 = math.sqrt(108)
                     8
                     9   # Multiply fractions
                    10   numerator = sqrt_160 * sqrt_245
                    11   denominator = sqrt_252 * sqrt_108
                    12   result = numerator / denominator
                    13
                    14   print(result)

                   Observation: 1.200137166371826
                   Thought: I now know the final answer Final Answer: The simplified and rationalized form of
                   the expression is approximately 1.200137166371826.
                   Finished chain.


                                                         35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 11: Application A1. Scenario 1: autonomous math solving. Auto-GPT on the first qualitative
example. We abort since the code never prints the result and the system does not fix it after 2 turns.
Auto-GPT is much more verbose than other frameworks. We shorten some unnecessary content.

      Action   Auto-GPT

     System    Welcome back! Would you like me to return to being MathSolverGPT? Asking user via keyboard... Continue with the last settings?
               Name: MathSolverGPT
               Role: an intelligent math-solving AI that assists students, professionals,...
               Goals: [’Provide step-by-step solutions to math problems, ensuring clarity and understanding for the user...
               Continue (y/n):

 g   Human     y

     System    MathSolverGPT has been created with the following details: Name: MathSolverGPT
               Role: an intelligent math-solving AI that assists students, professionals, and enthusiasts in solving a wide range of math problems, from basic
               arithmetic to advanced calculus and beyond.
               Goals: - Provide step-by-step solutions to math problems, ensuring clarity and understanding for the user. - Offer explanations and insights
               into the underlying concepts and principles behind the solutions, fostering a deeper understanding of mathematics. - Handle a variety of math
               problem types, including algebra, geometry, trigonometry, calculus, and more. ...

 ð             MATHSOLVERGPT THOUGHTS: Without a specific task or question, it’s difficult to determine exactly one command to use. The user hasn’t
               provided any context or problem to solve.
               REASONING: The user’s request is too vague. They haven’t specified what they want me to do or what problem they want me to solve.
               PLAN: - Ask the user for more information or a specific task.
               CRITICISM: I should have asked the user for more information or a specific task in the first place.
               SPEAK: Could you please provide more information or specify a task?
               NEXT ACTION: COMMAND = ARGUMENTS = {}

     System    Enter ’y’ to authorise command, ’y -N’ to run N continuous commands, ’n’ to exit program, or enter feedback for MathSolverGPT... Asking
               user via keyboard...

 g   Human     Completely simplify and rationalize the denominator:                  √      √
                                                                                      160    245
                                                                                     √    × √
                                                                                      252    108

 ð             MATHSOLVERGPT THOUGHTS: To solve this problem, I need to simplify and rationalize the denominator of the given expression. This
               involves simplifying the square roots and then multiplying the fractions. I can use Python’s math library to calculate the square roots and
               perform the multiplication.
               REASONING: The problem involves simplifying square roots and multiplying fractions. Python’s math library provides functions for these
               operations.
               PLAN: - Write a Python script to calculate the square roots and multiply the fractions. - Execute the script to get the simplified expression.
               CRITICISM: I need to ensure that I correctly calculate the square roots and perform the multiplication. I should also make sure to rationalize
               the denominator, as the problem specifies.
               SPEAK: Let’s simplify and rationalize the denominator of the given expression.
               NEXT ACTION: COMMAND = execute python code ARGUMENTS =

                   1 { ’ c o d e ’ : ’ i m p o r t math\n\n# C a l c u l a t e t h e s q u a r e r o o t s \ n s q r t 1 6 0 = math . s q r t ( 1 6 0 ) \
                                n s q r t 2 5 2 = math . s q r t ( 2 5 2 ) \ n s q r t 2 4 5 = math . s q r t ( 2 4 5 ) \ n s q r t 1 0 8 = math . s q r t
                                ( 1 0 8 ) \n\n# M u l t i p l y t h e f r a c t i o n s \ n r e s u l t = ( s q r t 1 6 0 / s q r t 2 5 2 ) * ( s q r t 2 4 5
                                / s q r t 1 0 8 ) \n\n# S i m p l i f y t h e r e s u l t \ n s i m p l i f i e d r e s u l t = math . s i m p l i f y ( r e s u l t
                                ) \n\ n s i m p l i f i e d r e s u l t ’ , ’ name ’ : ’ s i m p l i f y e x p r e s s i o n ’}



 g   Human     y

     System    -=-=-=-=-=-=-= COMMAND AUTHORISED BY USER -=-=-=-=-=-=-=
               Executing python file ’/app/autogpt/workspa...
               SYSTEM: Command execute python code returned: Error: Traceback (most recent call last): File ”...”, line 13, in ¡module¿ simplified result
               = math.simplify(result) AttributeError: module ’math’ has no attribute ’simplify’

 ð             MATHSOLVERGPT THOUGHTS: The error message indicates that the ’math’ module in Python does not have a ’simplify’ function. I need
               to use the ’sympy’ library instead, which provides a function for simplifying expressions.
               REASONING: The ’math’ module in Python does not provide a function for simplifying expressions. The ’sympy’ library, on the other hand,
               does provide such a function.
               PLAN: - Rewrite the Python script to use the ’sympy’ library instead of the ’math’ module. - Execute the script to get the simplified expression.
               CRITICISM: I should have known that the ’math’ module does not provide a function for simplifying expressions. I should have used the
               ’sympy’ library from the start. SPEAK: Let’s try again using the ’sympy’ library to simplify the expression.

               NEXT ACTION: COMMAND = execute python code ARGUMENTS =

                   1 { ’ c o d e ’ : ’ i m p o r t sympy a s s p\n\n# C a l c u l a t e t h e s q u a r e r o o t s \ n s q r t 1 6 0 = s p . s q r t
                                ( 1 6 0 )\ n s q r t 2 5 2 = sp . s q r t ( 2 5 2 )\ n s q r t 2 4 5 = sp . s q r t ( 2 4 5 )\ n s q r t 1 0 8 = sp . s q r t
                                ( 1 0 8 ) \n\n# M u l t i p l y t h e f r a c t i o n s \ n r e s u l t = ( s q r t 1 6 0 / s q r t 2 5 2 ) * ( s q r t 2 4 5
                                / s q r t 1 0 8 ) \n\n# S i m p l i f y t h e r e s u l t \ n s i m p l i f i e d r e s u l t = s p . s i m p l i f y ( r e s u l t ) \
                                n\ n s i m p l i f i e d r e s u l t ’ , ’ name ’ : ’ s i m p l i f y e x p r e s s i o n ’}



 g   Human     y

     System    SYSTEM: Command execute python code returned:

 ð             MATHSOLVERGPT THOUGHTS: The command execution didn’t return any output, which is unusual. It seems there might be an issue with
               the execution of the Python code. I need to debug this.
               REASONING: The Python code execution should have returned a result. The absence of a result suggests that there might be an issue with the
               code or its execution.
               PLAN: - Review the Python code to identify any potential issues. - If necessary, modify the code and execute it again. CRITICISM: I should
               have ensured that the Python code was correct and would produce a result before executing it. SPEAK: It seems there was an issue with the
               execution of the Python code. Let’s try again.
               NEXT ACTION: COMMAND = execute python code ARGUMENTS = ... (Exact same code as last)

     System    SYSTEM: Command execute python code returned:

 ð             MATHSOLVERGPT THOUGHTS: The Python code execution still isn’t returning any output. It’s possible that the issue lies with the calcu-
               lation of the square roots ...

 g   Human     control + C (Aborted)
                                                                                  36
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 12: Application A1. Scenario 1: autonomous math solving. Multi-Agent Debate on the first
qualitative problem. It gives a wrong final answer.

        Action   AutoGen

    g   Topic    Completely simplify and rationalize the denominator:
                                                                               √      √
                                                                                160    245
                                                                               √    × √
                                                                                252    108


    ð            ===== Debate Round-1 =====
                 —– Affirmative side —–
                 Ok,√let’s simplify each square root separately. We want to find the simplest square
                                                                                                 √ root that
                                                                                                          √can divide 160,
                                                                                                                        √ 252, 245,
                                                                                                                                √ and 108.
                                                                                                                                        √
                 1. √160: 160 can be decomposed as 16*10, where 16 is a perfect square, so√ 160 = √ 16 ∗ 10 = √ 16 ∗ 10 = 4 10
                 2. √252 : 252 √  can be decomposed   as 36*7,  where 36 is a
                                                                            √ perfect square,
                                                                                            √ so  252 =      36 ∗ 7 = 6   7
                 3. √245 = 49 ∗ 5, where 49 is a perfect square, so 245 = 7 ∗ 5 √                        √             √
                 4. 108 : 108 can be decomposed as 36*3, where 36 is a perfect square, so 108 = 36 ∗ 3 = 6 3
                 Then we substitute the simplified square roots back into the expression, we have:
                                         √            √                √ √        s              s
                                             160       245         4 10 7 5 4∗7     10 ∗ 5   7     50
                                         √         × √         =    √ × √ =     ·          =   ·
                                             252         108       6 7  6 3 6∗6      7∗3     9     21
                                                                                                                                                   √
                 We are almost done, but we still need to rationalize the square root part of expression. Let’s multiply the square root part by       21
                 at both the top and bottom to get rid of the square root at the denominator:
                                                                           s                      √
                                                                   7           50 ∗ 21           7 1050
                                                                       ·                     =            .
                                                                   9           21 ∗ 21            189

                 Then this is the final answer! The expression                 √      √
                                                                                160    245
                                                                               √    × √
                                                                                252    108
                                       √
                                          1050
                 can be simplified to 7 189     .
                 —– Negative side —–
                 I do disagree with your final answer, but I think we mostly agree on the steps. Your simplifications of the square roots are correct,
                 but you made a mistake in the final simplification part. Let me explain how I would complete the problem:
                 As stated,                                   √           √             √          √
                                                                 160         245      4 10        7 5
                                                              √       × √         = √ × √ .
                                                                 252         108       6 7        6 3
                 This should then simplify to:                                      √             √
                                                                               28       50       7 50
                                                                           =        √        =    √ .
                                                                               36       21       9 21
                 You made a mistake in your calculation because you considered square root of 50/21, and you should have considered the
                 simplified square root of 50 over the simplified square root of 21. The rationalization would become:
                                                                      √        √           √
                                                                    7 50          21     7 1050
                                                                 = √         · √      =             .
                                                                    9 21          21         189
                 This
                  √
                      seems to coincide with your final answer, but it’s in fact a very different number, So, the original expression simplifies to
                  7 1050
                    189
                            .
                 Let’s now see if we disagree on this final answer.
                 —– Moderator —–
                 ”Whether there is a preference”: ”Yes”, ”Supported Side”: ”Negative”, ”Reason”: ”Both sides of the debate came to the same
                 final answer. However, the negative side correctly identified a mistake in the affirmative side’s calculation, pointing out that the
                 simplification should have been the square root of 50 over the square
                                                                                    √
                                                                                       root of 21, not 50 over 21. The negative side shows a better
                 understanding of the simplification process.”, ”debate answer”: ” 7 1891050
                                                                                               ”
                 ===== Debate Done! =====
                 —– Base Answer —–
                 Ok,√let’s simplify each square root separately. We want to find the simplest square
                                                                                                 √ root that
                                                                                                          √can divide 160,
                                                                                                                        √ 252, 245,
                                                                                                                                √ and 108.
                                                                                                                                        √
                 1. √160: 160 can be decomposed as 16*10, where 16 is a perfect square, so√ 160 = √ 16 ∗ 10 = √ 16 ∗ 10 = 4 10
                 2. √252 : 252 √  can be decomposed   as 36*7,  where 36 is a
                                                                            √ perfect square,
                                                                                            √ so  252 =      36 ∗ 7 = 6   7
                 3. √245 = 49 ∗ 5, where 49 is a perfect square, so 245 = 7 ∗ 5 √                        √             √
                 4. 108 : 108 can be decomposed as 36*3, where 36 is a perfect square, so 108 = 36 ∗ 3 = 6 3
                 Then we substitute the simplified square roots back into the expression, we have:
                                         √            √                √ √        s              s
                                             160       245         4 10 7 5 4∗7     10 ∗ 5   7     50
                                         √         × √         =    √ × √ =     ·          =   ·
                                             252         108       6 7  6 3 6∗6      7∗3     9     21
                                                                                                                                                   √
                 We are almost done, but we still need to rationalize the square root part of expression. Let’s multiply the square root part by       21
                 at both the top and bottom to get rid of the square root at the denominator:
                                                                           s                      √
                                                                   7           50 ∗ 21           7 1050
                                                                       ·                     =            .
                                                                   9           21 ∗ 21            189

                 Then this is the final answer! The expression                 √      √
                                                                                160    245
                                                                               √    × √
                                                                                252    108
                                       √
                 can be simplified to 7 189
                                         1050
                                              .
                 —– Debate Answer —–
                                                                                     √
                                                                                    7 1050
                                                                                        189
                 —– Debate Reason —–
                 Both sides of the debate came to the same final answer. However, the negative side correctly identified a mistake in the affirmative
                 side’s calculation, pointing out that the simplification should have been the square root of 50 over the square root of 21, not 50 over
                                                                           37
                 21. The negative side shows a better understanding of the simplification process.
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 13: Application A3. ChatGPT+ Code Interpreter for OptiGuide. A sample question “What if
the roasting cost is increased by 5% because of the potential salary increase?” is asked.

         Action         ChatGPT+ Code Interpreter

 g    Prompt Writer       Customer open Web browser.
                          For the source code “coffee.py”,
                          Can you tell me:
                          What if the roasting cost is increased by 5% because of the potential salary increase?

 ð                        Sure! Let’s first take a look at the contents of the ”coffee.py” file to understand the code and how the roasting cost is calculated.
                          This will allow us to determine the effect of a 5% increase in the roasting cost.
                          ...several lines omitted
                          Would you like me to modify the code to reflect the 5% increase in roasting costs and run the modified code to observe the impact?
                          If the code requires any specific input or parameters, please let me know!

 g    Prompt Writer     Yes

 ð                        Great! Before proceeding, I’ll need to ensure that the Gurobi solver is not being used in this code, as my current environment
                          does not have access to Gurobi. If the code does indeed use Gurobi, we can still analyze the effect of the change in roasting
                          costs by understanding the structure of the code.
                          ...several lines omitted
                          Alternatively, if you have access to a Gurobi license, you can make the necessary changes in the code and run it
                          on your local machine.
                          I can guide you through the process of making the necessary modifications to the code.
                          Would you like me to proceed with the code analysis and explanation, or would you like guidance on making the changes yourself?

 g    Prompt Writer     You can give me the full code, and I can run the code locally myself.

 ð                        Certainly! I’ll modify the code to reflect a 5% increase in both the light and dark roasting costs, and then provide the full
                          code for you to run locally.
                          ...
                          Download Modified Coffee.py
                          If you have any questions or need further assistance, please feel free to ask!

 g   Prompt Safeguard     Hi GPT, can you safecheck the generated code for me?
                          Upload the generated code.

 ð                      DANGER

 g    Prompt Writer     I have tried to run your code. However, the code triggered our safeguard, and it is not safe to run. Try again. Hint: don’t change
                        roasting cost light or roasting cost light variables.

 ð                        I apologize for the oversight. It appears I made direct changes to the variables that could have led to issues with the code. Let’s
                          take a different approach by analyzing the code to identify the appropriate place to apply the 5% increase in roasting costs.
                          ...
                          Download Modified Safe Coffee.py
                          ...

 g   Prompt Safeguard     Hi GPT, can you safecheck the generated code for me one more time?
                          Upload the generated code.

 ð                      DANGER

 g    Prompt Writer     I have tried to run your code again. However, the code triggered our safeguard, and it is not safe to run. Try again. Hint: don’t
                        change roasting cost light or roasting cost light variables.

 ð                        I apologize for the continued confusion.
                          ...
                          Download Final Modified Safe Coffee.py
                          ...

 g   Prompt Safeguard     Hi GPT, can you safecheck the generated code for me one more time?
                          Upload the generated code.

 ð                      SAFE

 g      Run Code          Obtain the terminal results:
                          Optimizer version 9.5.1 build v9.5.1rc2 (linux64)
                          Thread count: 64 physical cores, 128 logical processors, using up to 32
                          threads
                          [63 lines of output ignored]
                          Optimal cost: 2526.5

 g    Prompt Writer     Here is the execution result. [Copy + Paste the terminal output here.] Can you extract the final answer to me? Remember to
                        compare with the original cost of 2470.

 ð                        Certainly! The execution result you’ve provided indicates the optimal cost for
                          the modified scenario, where the roasting costs were increased by 5%. Here’s
                          the comparison:
                          Original Cost: 2470
                          Modified Cost (with 5% increase in roasting costs): 2526.5
                          The increase in roasting costs has led to an increase in the overall cost by 56.5,
                          reflecting the impact of the potential salary increase on the roasting cost.
                          If you need any further insights or assistance, please let me know!


                                                                          38
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 14: Application A1. Scenario 1: autonomous math solving. ChatGPT+ Code Interpreter on
the first qualitative example. The code generated does not match the reasoned plan. The code returns
a decimal number.

         Action    ChatGPT+ Code Interpreter
 g       Input     Completely simplify and rationalize the denominator:
                                                          √       √
                                                            160     245
                                                          √     ×√
                                                            252     108

 ð                 To simplify and rationalize the expression, we first simplify the radicals in the numerator and
                   denominator by factoring out the largest perfect squares from the numbers under the square
                   root.
                   The perfect square factors of 160, 252, 245, and 108 are 16, 4, 1, and 36, respectively. Let’s
                   factorize and simplify:
                                             √        √          √               √
                                               160       245       16 × 10         245
                                             √      ×√        = √           ×√
                                               252       108        4 × 63        36 × 3
                                                                          √       √ √
                   We can simplify this further by applying the property ab = a b and ab × dc = a×c     b×d
                                                                                                            .
 ð                 Python
                     1   import math
                     2
                     3   # factoring the square roots
                     4   sqrt_160 = math.sqrt(16) * math.sqrt(10)
                     5   sqrt_252 = math.sqrt(4) * math.sqrt(63)
                     6   sqrt_245 = math.sqrt(245)
                     7   sqrt_108 = math.sqrt(36) * math.sqrt(3)
                     8
                     9   # simplify the fraction
                    10   numerator = sqrt_160 * sqrt_245
                    11   denominator = sqrt_252 * sqrt_108
                    12   simplified_fraction = numerator / denominator
                    13
                    14   simplified_fraction

                   Result:
                     1 1.200137166371826



 ð                 The completely simplified and rationalized form of the given expression is approximately 1.200.


Table 15: Application A3. AutoGen with OptiGuide. The same question “What if the roasting cost
is increased by 5% because of the potential salary increase?” is asked.

          Action     AutoGen
     g    Prompt     What if the roasting cost is increased by 5% because of the potential salary increase?
     ð               After increasing the roasting costs by 5%, I’ve re-calculated the optimal coffee distri-
                     bution solution for the supply chain. As a result, the new optimal total cost has become
                     2526.5, compared to the initial cost of 2470.0. This indicates that the increased roasting
                     costs have caused the overall distribution cost to rise by 56.5 units.


                                                        39
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 16: Application A1. Scenario 1: autonomous math solving. Preliminary Test Multi-Agent
BabyAGI

        Action     BabyAGI

    g   Set .env   OBJECTIVE=Solve math problems
                   INITIAL TASK=Completely simplify and rationalize the denominator:
                                                                            √      √
                                                                             160     245
                                                                            √    × √
                                                                             252     108


    ð              Solve math problems                                                 √           √
                   Initial task: Completely simplify and rationalize the denominator: √160 × √245
                                                                                    252                108
                   *****TASK LIST*****                                    √       √
                                                                            160
                   • Completely simplify and rationalize the denominator: √     × √245
                                                                            252      108
                   *****NEXT TASK*****                                   √       √
                   Completely simplify and rationalize the denominator: √160 × √245
                                                                           252     108
                   *****TASK RESULT*****
                   First, let’s simplify each square root separately:
                   -                                       √          √     √    √        √
                                                             160 = 16 ∗ 10 = 16 ∗ 10 = 4 ∗ 10
                   -                                        √     √        √   √      √
                                                             252 = 4 ∗ 63 = 4 × 63 = 2 63
                   -                                         √           √        √    √     √
                                                                 245 =    49 ∗ 5 = 49 × 5 = 7 5
                   -                                         √           √        √    √     √
                                                                 108 =    36 ∗ 3 = 36 × 3 = 6 3
                   Now, substitute these values into the original expression which gives:
                                                                   √          √           √     √
                                                              4 ∗ 10         7 5       2 ∗ 10  7 5
                                                                  √       × √ = √             × √
                                                                2 63         6 3          63   2 3
                   We get rid of the square root in the denominator by multiplying the fractions which gives:
                                                      √                √                 √                           √
                                               2 ∗ 7 10 ∗ 5         14 50        14 ∗ 5 2          √        10     20 2
                                           =         √          = √          =       √         =2 2∗ √           = √    .
                                               2 ∗ 63 ∗ 3              189          7 27                      27     27
                                                                                         √
                   To simplify further and rationalize the denominator, we multiply by √27 which gives:
                       √   √       √         √      √                                       27
                   = 20
                     √ 2 ∗ √27 = 20 54 = 20∗3 6 = 60 6 .
                                   27      27      27
                        27  27
                   Simplifying
                         √
                               further gives:
                   = 209 6 .
                   *****TASK CREATION AGENT PROMPT****
                   You are to use the result from an execution agent to create new tasks with the following objective: Solve math problems. The last
                   completed task has the result: First, let’s simplify each square root separately:
                   -                                       √           √              √        √          √
                                                              160 = 16 ∗ 10 = 16 ∗ 10 = 4 ∗ 10
                                                          ...Repeat after ”First, let’s simplify each square..”
                   Now, substitute these values into the original expression which gives:
                                                                   √          √           √     √
                                                              4 ∗ 10         7 5       2 ∗ 10  7 5
                                                                  √       × √ = √             × √
                                                                2 63         6 3          63   2 3
                   We get rid of the square root in the denominator by multiplying the fractions which gives:
                                                      √                √                 √                           √
                                               2 ∗ 7 10 ∗ 5         14 50        14 ∗ 5 2          √        10     20 2
                                           =         √          = √          =       √         =2 2∗ √           = √    .
                                               2 ∗ 63 ∗ 3              189          7 27                      27     27
                                                                                         √
                   To simplify further and rationalize the denominator, we multiply by √27 which gives:
                                                                                         27
                                                            √     √             √               √         √
                                                         20 2        27     20 54         20 ∗ 3 6      60 6
                                                     = √        ∗ √      =             =            =        .
                                                            27       27         27           27          27
                   Simplifying
                         √
                               further gives:                                                                                         √          √
                   = 209 6 . This result was based on this task description: Completely simplify and rationalize the denominator: √160 × √245 .
                                                                                                                                          252      108
                   Based on the result, return a list of tasks to be completed in order to meet the objective. Return one task per line in your response.
                   The result must be a numbered list in the format:
                   # First task # Second task
                   The number of each entry must be followed by a period. If your list is empty, write ”There are no tasks to add at this time.” Unless
                   your list is empty, do not include any headers before your numbered list or follow your numbered list with any other output.
                   ****TASK CREATION AGENT RESPONSE****                              √           √
                   1. Simplify and rationalize the denominator for the expression √225 × √200 2. Simplify and rationalize the denominator for
                                  √             √                                      45         125
                   the expression √289 × √100 ...Until 10
                                     361            72
                   Adding new tasks to task storage ’task name’: ’Simplify and rationalize the denominator for the expression frac-
                   sqrt225sqrt45timesfracsqrt200sqrt125’, ’task id’: 2
                   ’task name’: ’Simplify and rationalize the denominator for the expression fracsqrt289sqrt361timesfracsqrt100sqrt72’, ’task id’: 3
                   ...Until task id 11
                   ****TASK PRIORITIZATION AGENT PROMPT****
                   You are tasked with prioritizing the following tasks:             Simplify and rationalize the denominator for the ex-
                   pression fracsqrt225sqrt45timesfracsqrt200sqrt125 Simplify and rationalize the denominator for the expression frac-
                   sqrt289sqrt361timesfracsqrt100sqrt72
                   ...Aborted


                                                                         40
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 17: Application A1. Scenario 1: autonomous math solving. Preliminary test with CAMEL.
We constructed two roles: ”Math Solver” and ”Python Programmer”. The code is given by the
assistant, but it can not be executed. The conversation continues and the roles are not keen on
solving the problem and give an answer.

         Action        CAMEL

 g   Set task prompt   Completely simplify and rationalize the denominator:
                                                                                   √            √
                                                                                       160          245
                                                                                   √         × √
                                                                                       252          108


 ð      System         **************Assistant          sys    message*************           AI     SystemMessage(role name=’Python          Programmer’,
                       role type=¡RoleType.ASSISTANT: ’assistant’¿, meta dict=’task’: ’Using Python programming language, write a program
                       that accepts four integers as input, applies square root√function to√each, simplifies and rationalizes the denominator of the fraction
                       resulting from the multiplication of two fractions: √160 × √245 , and returns the simplified expression.’, ’assistant role’:
                                                                                   252          108
                       ’Python Programmer’, ’user role’: ’Math Solver’, role=’system’, content=’Never forget you are a Python Programmer and I am a
                       Math Solver. Never flip roles! ...)
                       **************AI User sys message*************
                       SystemMessage(role name=’Math Solver’, role type=¡RoleType.USER: ’user’¿, meta dict=’task’: ’Using Python programming
                       language, write a program that accepts four integers as input, applies square root√
                                                                                                         function to√each, simplifies and rationalizes
                       the denominator of the fraction resulting from the multiplication of two fractions: √160 × √245 , and returns the simplified
                                                                                                                     252          108
                       expression.’, ’assistant role’: ’Python Programmer’, ’user role’: ’Math Solver’, role=’system’, content=’Never forget you are a
                       Math Solver and I am a Python Programmer. Never flip roles! You will always instruct me.We share a common interest in
                       collaborating to successfully complete a task.I must help you to complete the task.Here is the task: Using Python programming
                       language, write a program that accepts four integers as input, applies square root√ function to√each, simplifies and rationalizes
                       the denominator of the fraction resulting from the multiplication of two fractions: √160 × √245 , and returns the simplified
                                                                                                                     252          108
                       expression.. ...)
                       **************Original task prompt************* √                       √
                       Completely simplify and rationalize the denominator: √160 × √245
                                                                                     252           108
                       **************Specified task prompt*************
                       Using Python programming language, write a program that accepts four integers as input, applies square root√function to
                                                                                                                                            √
                                                                                                                                               each,
                       simplifies and rationalizes the denominator of the fraction resulting from the multiplication of two fractions: √160 × √245 ,
                                                                                                                                                  252          108
                       and returns the simplified expression.
                       **************Final task prompt*************
                       Using Python programming language, write a program that accepts ...

 g      AI User        Instruction: Import the necessary libraries for the task. Input: None

 ð    AI Assistant     Solution: To solve this task, we will need the ‘math‘ library for the square root function and the ‘fractions‘ library to simplify the
                       resulting fraction. Here is how to import these libraries:

                           1 i m p o r t math
                           2 from f r a c t i o n s i m p o r t F r a c t i o n

                       The ‘math‘ library provides functions that deal with mathematical operations. The ‘sqrt‘ function, which we will use in this task, is
                       part of this library.
                       The ‘fractions‘ library provides functions for creating and manipulating rational numbers. The ‘Fraction‘ function, which we will
                       use to simplify the resulting fraction, is part of this library.
                       Next request.

 g      AI User        Instruction: Define a function that accepts four integers as input. Input: None

 ð    AI Assistant     Solution: Let’s define a function named ‘simplify fraction‘ that accepts four integers as input. These integers will represent the
                       numbers under the square root in the fractions.

                           1 def s i m p l i f y f r a c t i o n ( a , b , c , d ) :
                           2     pass

                       In this function, ‘a‘, ‘b‘, ‘c‘, and ‘d‘ are the parameters that will accept the four integers as input. The ‘pass‘ statement is a
                       placeholder and will be replaced with actual code in the next steps.
                       Next request.

 g      AI User        Instruction: Inside the function, apply the square root function to each of the input integers. Input: None

 ð    AI Assistant     Solution: We will use the ‘math.sqrt‘ function from the ‘math‘ library to apply the square root to each of the input integers. Here is
                       how to do it:

                           1 def     simplify fraction (a , b , c , d) :
                           2         s q r t a = math . s q r t ( a )
                           3         s q r t b = math . s q r t ( b )
                           4         s q r t c = math . s q r t ( c )
                           5         s q r t d = math . s q r t ( d )

                       In this code, ‘sqrt a‘, ‘sqrt b‘, ‘sqrt c‘, and ‘sqrt d‘ are variables that store the square root of the input integers ‘a‘, ‘b‘, ‘c‘, and ‘d‘
                       respectively.
                       Next request.

 g      Human          Abort


                                                                             41
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 18: Application A1. Scenario 1: autonomous math solving. Preliminary test on MetaGPT. It
does not solve the problem but gives a product solution.

       Action   MetaGPT
  g    Prompt   Completely simplify and rationalize the denominator:
                                                   √        √
                                                     160      245
                                                   √      ×√
                                                     252      108

  ð             The boss has tasked me with creating a successful product that is efficient.
                ## Product Goals
                  1 [
                  2      ” Create a product t h a t meets th e needs of t he t a r g e t market ” ,
                  3      ” E n s u r e t h e p r o d u c t i s e f f i c i e n t and e a s y t o u s e ” ,
                  4      ” Achieve a high l e v e l of customer s a t i s f a c t i o n ”
                  5 ]

                ## User Stories
                  1 [
                  2      ” As a u s e r , I want a p r o d u c t t h a t        i s e a s y t o n a v i g a t e s o t h a t I c a n f i n d what I
                              need q u i c k l y ” ,
                  3      ” As a u s e r , I want a p r o d u c t t h a t        i s r e l i a b l e and e f f i c i e n t s o t h a t I c a n
                            d e p e n d on i t ” ,
                  4      ” As a u s e r , I want a p r o d u c t t h a t        m e e t s my n e e d s s o t h a t I c a n g e t v a l u e f o r my
                             money ” ,
                  5      ” As a u s e r , I want a p r o d u c t t h a t        i s c o n s t a n t l y u p d a t e d and i m p r o v e d s o t h a t I
                            can enjoy t h e b e s t f e a t u r e s ” ,
                  6      ” As a u s e r , I want a p r o d u c t t h a t        o f f e r s good c u s t o m e r s u p p o r t s o t h a t I c a n
                            g e t h e l p when I n e e d i t ”
                  7 ]

                ## Competitive Analysis
                  1 [
                  2      ” P r o d u c t A: O f f e r s s i m i l a r f e a t u r e s b u t l a c k s e f f i c i e n c y ” ,
                  3      ” P r o d u c t B : H i g h l y e f f i c i e n t b u t d o e s n o t meet a l l t h e n e e d s o f t h e t a r g e t
                            market ” ,
                  4      ” P r o d u c t C : Has a h i g h l e v e l o f c u s t o m e r s a t i s f a c t i o n b u t i s n o t e a s y t o
                            navigate ” ,
                  5      ” P r o d u c t D: I s c o n s t a n t l y u p d a t e d and i m p r o v e d b u t l a c k s r e l i a b i l i t y ” ,
                  6      ” P r o d u c t E : O f f e r s good c u s t o m e r s u p p o r t b u t i s n o t e f f i c i e n t ” ,
                  7      ” P r o d u c t F : I s r e l i a b l e and e f f i c i e n t b u t d o e s n o t o f f e r good c u s t o m e r s u p p o r t ”
                            ,
                  8      ” Our T a r g e t P r o d u c t : Aims t o combine a l l t h e b e s t f e a t u r e s o f t h e c o m p e t i t o r s
                            w h i l e i m p r o v i n g on t h e i r w e a k n e s s e s ”
                  9 ]

                ## Competitive Quadrant Chart

  g    Human    Abort


                                                                  42
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 19: Application A7. Example output of MiniWobChat on one web manipulation task ”click-
button-sequence.”

     Action      AutoGen

 g   Init chat   Executor agent to AssistantAgent:
                 We have an autonomous computer control agent that can perform atomic instructions specified by natural language to control
                 computers. There are two types of instructions it can execute.
                 First, given the instruction that matches the regular expression "ˆtype\s.{1,}$", it can type a list of characters via the key-
                 board. This instruction should specify the target keyboard input for the agent to type. Before this typing instruction, you should
                 first locate the cursor by clicking the input box with click instruction.
                 Second, given the instruction that matches the regular expression, "ˆclickxpath\s.{1,}$", it can click an HTML element
                 with an xpath that is visible on the webpage. The target of this instruction should be a valid xpath. Below is the HTML code of the
                 webpage where the agent should solve a task.

                    1 <div id="wrap" data-wob_ref="2" data-wob_eps="e0">
                    2   <div id="query">Click button ONE, then click button TWO.</div>
                    3   <div id="area" data-wob_ref="3" data-wob_eps="e0">
                    4     <button id="subbtn" style="position:absolute; left:103px; top:87px" data-
                            wob_ref="4" data-wob_eps="e0">ONE</button>
                    5     <button id="subbtn2" style="position:absolute; left:44px; top:97px" data-
                            wob_ref="5" data-wob_eps="e0">TWO</button>
                    6   </div>
                    7 </div>

                 task: Click button ONE, then click button TWO.
                 plan:
                 1. Click the button with xpath ”//button[@id=’subbtn’]”.
                 2. Click the button with xpath ”//button[@id=’subbtn2’]”.
                 Current task: Click button ONE, then click button TWO.
                 plan:

 ð               ***************************************************************
                 AssistantAgent to Executor agent:
                 1. Click the button with xpath ”//button[@id=’subbtn’]”.
                 2. Click the button with xpath ”//button[@id=’subbtn2’]”.
                 ***************************************************************
                 Executor agent to AssistantAgent:
                 Below is the HTML code of the webpage where the agent should solve a task.

                    1 <div id="wrap" data-wob_ref="2" data-wob_eps="e0">
                    2   <div id="query">Click button ONE, then click button TWO.</div>
                    3   <div id="area" data-wob_ref="3" data-wob_eps="e0">
                    4     <button id="subbtn" style="position:absolute; left:103px; top:87px" data-
                            wob_ref="4" data-wob_eps="e0">ONE</button>
                    5     <button id="subbtn2" style="position:absolute; left:44px; top:97px" data-
                            wob_ref="5" data-wob_eps="e0">TWO</button>
                    6   </div>
                    7 </div>

                 Current task: Click button ONE, then click button TWO.
                 Here is a plan you are following now.
                 1. Click the button with xpath ”//button[@id=’subbtn’]”.
                 2. Click the button with xpath ”//button[@id=’subbtn2’]”.
                 We have a history of instructions that have been already executed by the autonomous agent so far.
                 No instruction has been executed yet.
                 Based on the plan and the history of instructions executed so far, the first instruction should be ‘
                 ***************************************************************
                 AssistantAgent to Executor agent:
                 clickxpath //button[@id=’subbtn’]
                 ***************************************************************
                 Executor agent to AssistantAgent:
                 Hold on, please wait for my next instruction.
                 ***************************************************************
                 AssistantAgent to Executor agent:
                 Sure, I’ll be here when you’re ready with your next instruction.
                 ***************************************************************
                 Executor agent to AssistantAgent:
                 Below is the HTML code of the webpage where the agent should solve a task.

                    1 <div id="wrap" data-wob_ref="2" data-wob_eps="e0">
                    2   <div id="query">Click button ONE, then click button TWO.</div>
                    3   <div id="area" data-wob_ref="3" data-wob_eps="e0">
                    4     <button id="subbtn" style="position:absolute; left:103px; top:87px" data-
                            wob_ref="4" data-wob_eps="e0" data-tampered="e0">ONE</button>
                    5     <button id="subbtn2" style="position:absolute; left:44px; top:97px" data-
                            wob_ref="5" data-wob_eps="e0">TWO</button>
                    6   </div>
                    7 </div>

                 Current task: Click button ONE, then click button TWO.
                 Here is a plan you are following now.
                 1. Click the button with xpath ”//button[@id=’subbtn’]”.
                 2. Click the button with xpath ”//button[@id=’subbtn2’]”.
                 We have a history of instructions that have been already executed by the autonomous agent so far.
                 1: clickxpath //button[@id=’subbtn’]
                 Based on the plan and the history of instructions executed so far, the next proper instruction should be ‘
                 ***************************************************************
                 AssistantAgent to Executor agent:
                 clickxpath //button[@id=’subbtn2’]
                 ***************************************************************
                 Executor agent to AssistantAgent:
                 SUCCESS!!!!

 ð               TERMINATE

                                                                            43
