Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


W HO SAID THAT ? B ENCHMARKING S OCIAL M EDIA
AI D ETECTION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         AI-generated text has proliferated across various online platforms, offering both
         transformative prospects and posing significant risks related to misinformation
         and manipulation. Addressing these challenges, this paper introduces SAID
         (Social media AI Detection), a novel benchmark developed to assess AI-text de-
         tection models’ capabilities in real social media platforms. It incorporates real
         AI-generate text from popular social media platforms like Zhihu and Quora. Un-
         like existing benchmarks, SAID deals with content that reflects the sophisticated
         strategies employed by real AI users on the Internet which may evade detection
         or gain visibility, providing a more realistic and challenging evaluation landscape.
         A notable finding of our study, based on the Zhihu dataset, reveals that annotators
         can distinguish between AI-generated and human-generated texts with an average
         accuracy rate of 96.5%. This finding necessitates a re-evaluation of human capa-
         bility in recognizing AI-generated text in today’s widely AI-influenced environ-
         ment. Furthermore, we present a new user-oriented AI-text detection challenge fo-
         cusing on the practicality and effectiveness of identifying AI-generated text based
         on user information and multiple responses. The experimental results demonstrate
         that conducting detection tasks on actual social media platforms proves to be more
         challenging compared to traditional simulated AI-text detection, resulting in a de-
         creased accuracy. On the other hand, user-oriented AI-generated text detection
         significantly improve the accuracy of detection.


1   I NTRODUCTION
The advent of AI-generated text has had a profound impact on numerous sectors, including social
media platforms. On one side, AI-generated responses enable automation, personalization, and
scaling of content creation, thereby revolutionizing how information is disseminated and consumed.
However, this promising technology has a darker aspect, where it is exploited for disseminating
misinformation, impersonating real users, or creating content that can deceive or manipulate public
opinion Ji et al. (2023); Chen et al. (2023); Li et al. (2023); Lin et al. (2022); Lukas et al. (2023);
Perez et al. (2022); Zhuo et al. (2023); Santurkar et al. (2023).
Addressing the abuse and malicious use of AI has led to significant research efforts in the field of
AI-generated text detection. A range of approaches have been explored, including but not limited
to machine learning algorithms Guo et al. (2023); Solaiman et al. (2019), text-based features anal-
ysis Mitchell et al. (2023); Tulchinskii et al. (2023); Mitchell et al. (2023), and positive unlabeled
techniques Tian et al. (2023). These endeavours aim to automatically discern machine-generated
text from human-generated content, thereby mitigating the risks associated with its abuse.
One of the most significant shortcomings of the existing research landscape is the lack of bench-
marks that accurately represent the complexity and variety of AI-generated text in real-world sce-
narios. Many of the existing benchmarks employ artificial, controlled environments, such as directly
querying LLMs for generating AI content Mitchell et al. (2023); Guo et al. (2023); Krishna et al.
(2023). While such settings may be useful for preliminary evaluation, they often fail to capture the
nuanced tactics that are deployed in the wild to evade detection or maximize exposure. For example,
AI-generated text posted on social media may be crafted using a combination of strategies like text
modification Cai & Cui (2023) or paraphrasing Krishna et al. (2023), thereby making it harder for
traditional detection methods to identify them.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 Table 1: Statistics of human and AI-generated responses in SAID.
                                         SAID-Quora        SAID-Zhihu
                                       Human      AI       Human        AI
                           Users        491       464       6769       4565
                         Responses     14669     22902     72568      108654


On the other hand, existing datasets for AI-generated text on realistic scenarios were assembled
before 2022, the extensive deployment of LLM (e.g. TweepFake-2021 Fagni et al. (2021), XSum-
2018 Narayan et al. (2018), Kaggle FakeNews-2018 Lifferth (2018)). The relevance and efficacy of
these datasets are now questionable for evaluating detection capabilities against contemporary, more
advanced LLM-generated text.
In light of these limitations, we introduce SAID (Social media AI Detection) — a novel benchmark
aimed at addressing the gaps in existing AI-generated text detection benchmarks. SAID is unique
in its approach of crawling real AI-generated data from popular social media platforms, such as
Zhihu.com and Quora.com, to provide a more accurate and challenging assessment of the current
detection models. We aim to advance the field of AI-generated text detection by offering a more
realistic testing ground.
One significant challenge in collecting real machine-generated text is determining the ground truth of
whether a piece of text is AI-generated. Fortunately, we found that Zhihu itself provides automated
detection labels for AI responses, serving as a foundation for our AI labeling. Initially, we consider
responses with this label as AI-generated. Subsequently, we extend this label to a user level. In this
paper, our major assumption is that users with AI-generated responses are likely to be an AI, and
therefore their other responses are also AI-generated.
A prevailing notion previously posited by OpenAI suggests that humans are incapable of distin-
guishing between AI-generated and human-generated texts Solaiman et al. (2019). However, from
the SAID-Zhihu, one of the vital conclusions of this paper is that annotators, adept with LLMs
and social media, can accurately distinguish whether a response is AI-generated, achieving an
average recognition accuracy rate of up to 96.5%. We do not perceive this conclusion as entirely
contradictory to the findings of Solaiman et al. (2019), but rather reflective of a shift in context.
In 2019, when the conclusion of OpenAI was drawn, AI-generated text was in its infancy and not
widely applied. Humans had a limited understanding of AI-generated text at this time, thus, smooth
and coherent text on the internet was generally believed to be human-generated. However, by 2023,
when our experiments were conducted, AI-generated text had matured and yielded societal benefits.
Hence, individuals familiar with AI-generated text, having encountered ample examples, have de-
veloped the capability to distinguish it from human-generated content. Consequently, we argue that
in today’s era, where AI-generated content widely impacts individuals, it is crucial to re-establish
the understanding of humans’ ability to recognize AI-generated text.
Armed with this new insight, we proceeded to label AI-generated and human-generated responses
on Quora. To enhance the efficiency of extracting AI-generated text, we collected AI-generated
responses from the collapsed answers. Statistics of SAID are presented in Table 1.
We then evaluated the performance of current AI-generated text detectors, which are mostly de-
veloped based on simulated data.The results indicate that, when tested on the real SAID dataset,
the performance of detectors experienced a noticeable decline compared to previous simulated data,
such as HC3 Guo et al. (2023). Consequently, SAID presents new challenges for developing gen-
uinely practical AI-generated text generators, emphasizing the necessity of improving the reliability
and robustness of detection methods in real-world applications.
Moreover, we introduce a novel and practical challenge: user-oriented AI-generated text detection,
identifying whether a response is AI-generated or human-generated based not only on its content,
but also on its user information like the user’s other responses. This task proves to be more practical
and effective for AI-generated text detection. As AI users tend to post voluminous AI-generated
text, the other answers from the user provide abundant valuable information for the detection, thus
significantly enhancing the detection accuracy. Experimental results substantiate our assertion.
In summary, the main contributions of our work are as follows:


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      1. Novel Benchmark for AI-generated text Detection: We introduce SAID, a benchmark
         offering real-world AI-generated text from social media platforms, Zhihu and Quora. This
         addresses the shortcomings of existing benchmarks by providing more realistic and diver-
         sified AI detection.

      2. Insightful Findings on Human Discernment: Our work unveils the noteworthy finding
         that, contrary to prior assumptions, individuals familiar with LLMs and social media can
         accurately distinguish between AI-generated and human-generated responses, achieving
         an impressive 96.5% average accuracy. This prompts a re-examination of human cognition
         capabilities in AI-generated text detection in the modern AI-infused environment.

      3. User-Oriented AI-Generated Text Detection Challenge: We propose and illustrate a
         novel user-oriented AI-generated text detection challenge. This emphasizes the importance
         and effectiveness of leveraging user information and content analysis for more practical
         and robust AI detection. We demonstrate its effect through experimental validation.

      4. Empirical Evaluation of Current AI Detectors: By deploying contemporary AI-
         generated text detectors on SAID, we present a detailed empirical evaluation, uncovering
         their capabilities and limitations in real-world scenarios. We found clear performance de-
         cline in SAID. This offers novel insights and directions for enhancing the reliability of AI
         detection methods.


2   R ELATED W ORK

The burgeoning field of AI-generated text detection has witnessed numerous contributions, explor-
ing diverse detection strategies and methodologies. Here, we elaborate on the pertinent works and
the evolution of AI-generated content detection, illustrating the context in which our research is
positioned.
AI-Generated Text Detection Approaches Various studies have introduced innovative solutions
to tackle the challenges posed by AI-generated text, using machine learning algorithms Guo et al.
(2023); Solaiman et al. (2019). These approaches extensively analyze textual features to differentiate
between human and AI-generated content Mitchell et al. (2023); Tulchinskii et al. (2023). Guo et al.
(2023) and Solaiman et al. (2019) have played a pivotal role in shaping the early development of
detection algorithms, leveraging classical machine learning models to discern the nuances in AI-
generated text structures. As explored by Tian et al. (2023), positive unlabeled techniques have
surfaced as promising avenues for enhancing detection accuracies. These techniques effectively
deal with the scarcity of labeled AI-generated text instances in real-world scenarios by utilizing the
available positive and unlabeled samples to train robust models.
Feature Analysis The focus on text-based feature analysis is evident in the works of Mitchell et al.
(2023) and Tulchinskii et al. (2023). These studies delved into the inherent features and patterns
of texts to devise effective detection mechanisms, exploiting the subtle discrepancies between hu-
man and machine writings. The intrinsic analysis of text has proven vital in unveiling the hidden
characteristics and intricacies of AI-generated content.
Evasion Tactics and Paraphrasing The increasing sophistication in evasion tactics is highlighted
in studies such as Cai & Cui (2023); Sadasivan et al. (2023); Krishna et al. (2023). These works
emphasize the escalating challenges posed by advanced text modification and paraphrasing tech-
niques, which mask the identifiable traits of AI-generated text, necessitating the development of
more resilient detection methodologies.
Benchmark Datasets Existing benchmarks have largely been constrained by artificial and con-
trolled environments, limiting the representative scope of AI-generated content in real-world con-
ditions Mitchell et al. (2023); Guo et al. (2023); Krishna et al. (2023). Fagni et al. (2021); Lifferth
(2018); Narayan et al. (2018) documented datasets compiled before the proliferation of large lan-
guage models (LLMs), thus questioning their relevance and efficacy against modern, more advanced
AI-generated text.


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3     C OLLECTING SAID-Z HIHU

In this section, we detail the methodology deployed to collect SAID-Zhihu.

3.1   I NITIAL P OOL OF AI-G ENERATED T EXT

The major challenge in constructing a realistic dataset for AI-generated text detection in social media
is obtaining groundtruth labels indicating whether content is AI-generated. On one hand, several
social media platforms impose stringent policies restricting AI-generated content, exemplified by
StackOverflow’s prohibition of AI responses. On the other hand, AI users often employ strategies
to make their responses appear more human-like.
Fortunately, Zhihu itself provides labels for a part of AI-generated responses. While Zhihu does
automatically detect and limit the display of AI responses—collapsing detected AI responses and la-
beling them as “Suspected AI Creation”—such responses remain accessible and expandable. Users
suspected to be AI can still post normally on Zhihu. We, therefore, use responses labeled as “Sus-
pected AI Creation” as our initial pool of AI-generated texts.

3.2   AI-G ENERATED T EXT E XPANSION S TRATEGY BASED ON AI U SERS

Only collecting the labeled responses as AI-generated is not enough. A drawback of the above initial
pool is its limited coverage; it only comprises a portion of the AI-generated texts on Zhihu. Relying
solely on this pool for AI detection benchmarking has limited significance, as it doesn’t assess the
detection capabilities beyond what Zhihu detects.
To overcome this, we observed that when a user has posted AI-generated responses, it is highly likely
that the user is an AI. Hence, we hypothesize that other responses from this user, although possibly
not labeled by Zhihu, are also AI-generated. Following this intuition, we propose the hypothesis
below:

Hypothesis 1 If an user has some AI-generated responses, then other responses of the user also
tend to be AI-generated.

In this paper, we transform this hypothesis into a concrete label expansion strategy: if more than
three out of the first ten responses from a user are labeled as “Suspected AI Creation,” we consider
this user as an AI and all its responses as AI-generated.

3.3   F ILTERING

To enhance the confidence in the labels of the collected responses, we employ two filtering strategies
for collected AI-generated responses:

       • We only consider responses with a character length greater than 250. This criterion aligns
         with our observation that establishing whether short responses are AI-generated is inher-
         ently challenging. Several AI detectors, like GPTZero, align with similar filtering strategy,
         supporting the detection of texts longer than a specific threshold.
       • We limit our consideration to responses posted after March 2023. The emergence of Chat-
         GPT at the end of 2022 marks a milestone event for AI-generated texts. We posit March
         2023 as a temporal node when a substantial number of users began to use ChatGPT for
         generating content.

3.4   R ESULTS

Table 1 presents the statistical data of our collected SAID-Zhihu dataset. For comparison, we also
collected comparable number of human-generated responses. Here, we consider users whose an-
swers do not carry the “Suspected AI Creation” label as humans.
Table 2 provides an example from SAID-Zhihu. It is observable that the AI-generated responses in
it exhibit distinct AI characteristics—they are more vague, less specific, and more formalized.

                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Examples of AI and Human-generated Responses from SAID-Zhihu and SAID-Quora.
Texts in green indicate features participants thought are critical in AI-generated text detection.
 Zhihu-AI
 Is it possible to successfully pass the graduate entrance exam for control engineering within six
 months?
 Response: Firstly, I want to remind you that control engineering is a highly complex discipline
 that requires a strong foundation in mathematics and abstract thinking abilities . . .
 Secondly, gaining admission . . .
 Lastly, first-tier universities . . .
 In summary, if you are well-prepared and genuinely passionate about control engineering as a
 discipline, it is possible . . .
 Zhihu-Human
 What subtle hints did you miss initially?
 Response: During the summer vacation before starting the second year of junior high school,
 one afternoon, it drizzled outside. The girl I had secretly admired for a long time came to ask me
 for help with a computer issue. On that rainy day, we both craved spicy hot pot, and conveniently,
 there was a hot pot place located between my house and hers. I said, ”I want to eat too!” She
 asked if I wanted to go buy some, but it was raining outside. I said it was no problem, a little rain
 wouldn’t bother me even without an umbrella. I’ll go, you just wait at home. . . .
 Quora-AI
 Question: Which algorithm is best suitable for studying protein folding?
 Response: ”The study of protein folding is . . . Here are a few notable examples:
 1. Molecular Dynamics (MD): Molecular Dynamics simulations . . .
 2. Monte Carlo (MC) Methods: Monte Carlo methods use . . .
 ...
 It’s worth noting that different algorithms and approaches have their own strengths, limitations,
 and areas of applicability.
 Quora-Human
 Question: Does light come out of stars at an infinite number of angles? Is that why two people
 standing next to each other are able to see the same star thousands of light years away?
 Response: Well, there aren’t an infinite number of photons
 But that finite number of photons are spread randomly around a continuous sphere, not fixed to
 discrete angles.
 So yes, that’s why light from the same star can reach both you and another person, no matter how
 tiny the angle between you.


4   C AN H UMANS D IFFERENTIATE BETWEEN AI-G ENERATED AND
    H UMAN -G ENERATED T EXTS ?
Finding 1 Humans distinguishes AI-generated and human-generated responses with high accuracy.

Previous research Solaiman et al. (2019) by OpenAI posits that humans struggle to distinguish be-
tween AI-generated and human-generated texts. However, as illustrated in Table 2, there are dis-
cernable differences between AI-generated and human-generated content. Consequently, in this
section, we endeavor to investigate, using SAID-Zhihu as our research subject, whether humans can
effectively distinguish between AI-generated and human-generated text.
Setup We randomly selected 100 AI-generated and 100 human-generated responses from SAID-
Zhihu. These responses were organized into 100 pairs, each containing one response of each label.
The orders of the two responses were randomized. Two participants, familiar with LLMs such as
ChatGPT and social media, were involved in the tests. The participants were tasked with identifying
which response in each pair was AI-generated, with the evaluative metric being the accuracy of the
participants. Random guessing would result in an accuracy of 50%.
The results are presented in Table 3. Surprisingly, the results contrast with the results reported
in Solaiman et al. (2019). While early experiments Solaiman et al. (2019) reported an accuracy of


                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 Table 3: Accuracy of participants in identifying AI-generated text.
                                   Participant 1 Participant 2 Average
                        Accuracy          99              94           96.5


Table 4: Common reasons for identifying text as AI-generated and their frequency. Here a / b
indicates the frequency in AI-generated responses and in human-generated responses, respectively.
  Reason                 Description                                      Quora        Zhihu
 Enumerations            Usage of enumerative structures (1/2/3/4/5,          74%/5%       76%/18%
                         firstly/secondly/lastly) or bulleted contents.
 Conclude at the end     Presence of a summarizing statement at the end.      44%/5%       62%/9%
 Specific Phrases        Employment of specific phrases such as it’s          65%/4%       79%/9%
                         worth noting, please note, remember.
 Too objectivity         The response is overly objective and lacks sub-      93%/16%      90%/14%
                         jective opinions.
 Formal style            The style of the reply is overly formal.             83%/11%      88%/11%


54%, the participants identified the categories of the responses with an average accuracy of 96.5%.
We attribute this to a changing landscape: starting from the end of 2022, as more people began
utilizing LLMs to generate texts, they became increasingly acquainted with the characteristics of
AI-generated text. As a result, individuals have developed the capability to differentiate between it
and human-generated text.
The results from Table 3 also suggest hypothesis 1 holds true, and the user-based expansion strategy
set forth in Section 3.2 is effective. This is because the responses expanded based on this strat-
egy could only be identified with such high accuracy if the expanded responses by AI users have
consistent features as the initial AI responses.

4.1   H OW H UMANS D ISTINGUISH : I NSIGHTS INTO H UMAN D IFFERENTIATION S TRATEGIES

To further delve into how humans make distinctions between AI-generated and human-generated
texts, we asked the participants to elucidate the reasons they identified the texts as AI-generated. We
list the five most frequently mentioned reasons along with their proportions in Table 4.
It is evident that current AI-generated texts still possess explicit features from human-generated
texts. This reinforces the notion that humans are indeed capable of differentiating between AI-
generated and human-generated texts.

5     C OLLECTING SAID-Q UORA

5.1   DATA C OLLECTION

Similar to Zhihu, Quora implements an answer-collapsing policy where responses of low quality are
collapsed. These responses are labeled with the reason for collapsing. We noticed that AI-generated
texts are also regarded as low quality and collapsed by Quora. Hence, we, analogous to our strategy
with Zhihu, procured AI-generated responses from the collapsed answers.
However, unlike Zhihu, Quora does not provide a specific “Suspected AI-generated” tag in the rea-
sons for collapsing. Therefore, based on Finding 1, we employed participants to further annotate
whether the collapsed answers are AI-generated. To improve annotation accuracy, in line with Hy-
pothesis 1 and the finding we will present in Section 7, we instructed the annotators to label at the
user level, i.e., to determine whether the user of a collapsed answer is an AI, rather than labeling
individual responses. If an user is labeled as AI, we regard all its responses as AI-generated. We
collect AI-generated responses using this strategy.


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For comparison, we also collect human-generated responses. We randomly selected responses and
their users from the pool of uncollapsed answers, considering them as human-generated. We dis-
covered that a non-negligible proportion of uncollapsed answers and their corresponding users on
Quora were AI. Hence, we also required annotators to label whether the users corresponding to
uncollapsed answers were AI.
We present the statistical results of the collected data from Quora in Table 1 and illustrate examples
of AI-generated and human-generated responses on Quora in Table 2. It is discernible that responses
on Quora, whether AI-generated or human-generated, still have distinctive features as on Zhihu.

5.2   H UMAN CAN DISTINGUISH RESPONSES ON Z HIHU . C AN THEY GENERALIZE SUCH
      ABILITY TO Q UORA ?

Finding 2 The features outlined in Table 4 are effective for both Quora and Zhihu.

One major concern of the collection strategy for SAID-Quora is, whether Finding 1 from the Chinese
Zhihu, can be generalized to the English platform Quora. Only if this holds true, participants can
differentiate AI-generated responses in Quora. We posit that such generalization is plausible due to
the following reasons: (1) The features used by participants in Table 4 are language-independent;
(2) A significant proportion of responses annotated as AI-generated on Quora also align with these
features. We demonstrate the coverage ratio of each feature in Table 4. It is evident that these
features continue to aid participants in distinguishing AI-generated responses from human-generated
ones substantially.

6     E VALUATION OF S TATE - OF - THE -A RT AI D ETECTORS ON SAID
In this section, we evaluate the performance of three AI detectors—GPTZero (Tian, 2022), Hel-
loSimpleAI (Guo et al., 2023), and MPU (Tian et al., 2023)—on the SAID dataset. The aim is to
understand their effectiveness in distinguishing between AI-generated and human-generated texts
on real-world social media.

6.1   T EST S ETUP

For the evaluation, we randomly selected 100 AI users and 100 human users from each split of
the SAID dataset. The detectors were deployed to classify the label of their responses, leveraging
their pre-existing models. The metrics for assessment include accuracy, complemented by precision,
recall, and F1-score to provide a holistic view of each detector’s performance.
We consider the following three detectors:

       • GPTZero (Tian, 2022) We observed that GPTZero is incapable of accurately detecting text
         in Chinese. Consequently, we confined the use of GPTZero to the testing of SAID-Quora
         only.
       • HelloSimpleAI (Guo et al., 2023) For our experiments on SAID-Quora and SAID-Zhihu,
         we deployed its English and Chinese versions, respectively.
       • MPU (Tian et al., 2023) We applied its English-adapted version for SAID-Quora and
         Chinese-adapted version for SAID-Zhihu.

6.2   E VALUATION R ESULTS

Finding 3 The performance of AI detectors experiences a decline on the real dataset SAID, com-
pared to the synthetic datasets.

The evaluation results are shown in Table 5. The results reveal a discernible decrement in perfor-
mance for all the detectors on the SAID dataset compared to the synthetic dataset HC3 (Guo et al.,
2023). The performance of HelloSimpleAI and MPU noticeably declined. On the HC3 dataset,
their F1 scores were 96.4% and 98.4%. However, on the SAID-Quora, their F1 scores experienced
a respective decrease of over 14%. These findings underline the inherent limitations of detectors


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


that are traditionally trained and optimized on synthetic datasets when confronted with the divergent
statistical properties of AI-generated content encountered in real-world scenarios. Consequently,
there’s a need to recalibrate and refine the AI detectors to acclimate to ensure their relevancy and
robustness in practical applications.


                 Table 5: Performance of Different AI Detectors on SAID and HC3.
                                   SAID-Zhihu                                SAID-Quora                 HC3
                   accu.   prec.     recall        f1        accu.   prec.     recall        f1          f1
 HelloSimpleAI      96.1    97.6      95.8    96.7 (+0.3%)   84.4    84.1      79.8     81.9 (-14.5%)   96.4
 GPTZero             -       -         -            -        89.1    97.0      81.3          88.5        -
 MPU                93.9    97.1      92.3    94.7 (-3.7%)   89.3    96.0      74.7     84.0 (-14.4%)   98.4



7     U SER -O RIENTED AI-G ENERATED T EXT D ETECTION
In addition to the normal experiments and analyses, we introduce a novel challenge in AI-generated
text detection—identifying whether responses are AI-generated based on both the content of the
response and user information. We term this approach user-oriented AI-generated text detection.
Here, user information encompasses the user’s other responses, making this task more practical and
effective.

7.1   R ATIONALE

The conventional methods predominantly focus on analyzing the textual content alone . However,
AI users tend to disseminate a multitude of AI-generated texts, making the user’s other responses a
rich and untapped source of valuable information for AI-generated text detection. Thus, leveraging
user information can significantly enhance the detection capabilities and improve the accuracy of
discerning current responses.

7.2   TASK S ETUP

For this user-oriented detection, the input features include both the response content and corre-
sponding user information, which includes their other responses. The goal is to classify responses
as AI-generated or human-generated based on this amalgamated information.
Task Formulation: Our training data is structured as (x0 , u(x0 ), y), where x0 represents the target
response, u(x0 ) = {x1 , . . . , xn } denotes all n responses from the user corresponding to x0 , and
y ∈ {AI-generated, human-generated} is the response label. We aim to learn a model f (x, u(x))
that maximizes its accuracy on the test set. This formulation allows the model to incorporate the col-
lective responses from a user, thereby enhancing the classification accuracy of individual responses.
The models are assessed using accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score.
Dataset: We utilize the SAID dataset, extracting relevant user information and response content.
For each data split, we randomly select 50 AI users and 50 human users, utilizing their responses
as the training set. Similarly, we randomly choose 100 AI users and 100 human users to compose
the test set with their responses. To avoid data leakage, we ensure that there is no overlap of users
between the training and test sets.
Detector Architecture: To demonstrate the efficacy of the task, we design detectors built
upon existing detectors. We employ the detection results of existing detectors on individual re-
sponses as model features. For an input (x0 , u(x0 ) = {x1 , . . . , xn }), these responses are in-
dependently analyzed by the existing detectors. We use their detection results as input features
d(x0 ), d(x1 ), . . . , d(xn ), where d(xi ) represents the detection result of xi (d(xi ) ∈ [0 − 1]), with
higher scores indicating higher likelihood of being AI-generated. Based on these features, we have
designed the following three detectors:

       • Max Pooling: This computes the maximum value of all d(xi ), i.e., maxi d(xi ), as the
         prediction result and utilizes 0.5 as the threshold for classification. The rationale behind


                                                        8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              Table 6: Accuracy Comparison (%)
                     HelloSimpleAI             GPTZero                          MPU
                   Zhihu         Quora       Zhihu        Quora         Zhihu         Quora
      original      96.1          84.4          -          89.1          93.9          89.3
      max           97.8          76.1          -          92.2          95.7          90.8
      mean       98.6 (+2.5)   88.2 (+3.8)      -          92.8          97.1          90.3
      MLP           90.4          83.7          -       95.3 (+6.2)   98.2 (+4.3)   92.5 (+3.2)


         this approach is that if any response is AI-generated, all other responses from that user are
         likely to be AI-generated.
       • Mean Pooling: This calculates the average value of all d(xi ), i.e., meani d(xi ), as the
         prediction result and employs 0.5 as the classification threshold.
       • MLP Detector: This is a one-layer perceptron classifier, using d(xi ) as input and out-
         putting a value between 0 and 1, representing the likelihood of the response being AI-
         generated. In this paper, we set the dimension of the hidden layer to 256.

It’s noteworthy that both max pooling and mean pooling classifiers are training-free. We can directly
leverage existing detectors for the two architectures.
Formats of Detection Result: Both HelloSimpleAI and GPTZero yield the probability of the target
text being identified as AI-generated, denoted as d(xi ). MPU, on the other hand, only produces
labels for the target text. We convert these labels into 0 (human-generated) and 1 (AI-generated) to
represent d(xi ).

7.3   R ESULTS

Finding 4 User-oriented AI-generated text detection can significantly enhance detection effective-
ness.

In Table 6, our empirical findings underline the proficiency of user-oriented AI-generated text de-
tection, setting a benchmark in tackling the evolving challenges of realistic detection. The three
detector architectures—mean, max, and MLP, exhibit superior performance in most cases.
Even without necessitating any additional training, the strategies incorporating the utilization of
maximum and mean values have demonstrated to outperform the original models by a considerable
margin. The mean strategy brings enhancements across all the evaluated scenarios.
MLP model has also showcased superior efficacy, especially for GPTZero, where it enhances the
detection accuracy by +6.2%, and for MPU, contributing to an improvement of +4.3% and +3.2%.
These substantial advancements underscore the capability of training a more sophisticated classifier.

8     C ONCLUSION
This paper introduced SAID, a benchmark aimed at enhancing the realism and diversity in evaluating
AI-generated text detectors, utilizing actual content from Zhihu and Quora. Our findings contradict
prevailing assumptions, revealing that individuals adept with LLMs and social media can accurately
differentiate AI-generated from human-generated responses, with a notable 96.5% accuracy rate.
We also introduced a practical and effective user-oriented AI-generated text detection challenge,
emphasizing the relevance of user information and content analysis for detection, substantiated by
our experimental results.
Finally, the empirical evaluation conducted on contemporary detectors using the SAID benchmark
illustrated their limitations and capabilities in real-world settings, pointing towards the need for
more refined and resilient detection methods in the evolving landscape of AI-generated content.
This work is anticipated to spur advancements and innovations in the field, aiding the development
of more reliable and robust detection mechanisms in the proliferating era of AI-generated text.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Shuyang Cai and Wanyun Cui.        Evade chatgpt detectors via a single space.     arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2307.02599, 2023.
Chen Chen, Jie Fu, and Lingjuan Lyu. A pathway towards responsible ai generated content. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2303.01325, 2023.
Tiziano Fagni, Fabrizio Falchi, Margherita Gambini, Antonio Martella, and Maurizio Tesconi.
  Tweepfake: About detecting deepfake tweets. Plos one, 16(5):e0251415, 2021.
Biyang Guo, Xin Zhang, Ziyuan Wang, Minqi Jiang, Jinran Nie, Yuxuan Ding, Jianwei Yue, and Yu-
  peng Wu. How close is chatgpt to human experts? comparison corpus, evaluation, and detection.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.07597, 2023.
Ziwei Ji, Nayeon Lee, Rita Frieske, Tiezheng Yu, Dan Su, Yan Xu, Etsuko Ishii, Ye Jin Bang,
  Andrea Madotto, and Pascale Fung. Survey of hallucination in natural language generation. ACM
  Computing Surveys, 55(12):1–38, 2023.
Kalpesh Krishna, Yixiao Song, Marzena Karpinska, John Wieting, and Mohit Iyyer. Paraphras-
  ing evades detectors of ai-generated text, but retrieval is an effective defense. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.13408, 2023.
Haoran Li, Dadi Guo, Wei Fan, Mingshi Xu, and Yangqiu Song. Multi-step jailbreaking privacy
  attacks on chatgpt. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05197, 2023.
W Lifferth. Fake news. Website, 2018. URL https://kaggle.com/competitions/
 fake-news.
Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. Truthfulqa: Measuring how models mimic human
  falsehoods. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 3214–3252, 2022.
Nils Lukas, Ahmed Salem, Robert Sim, Shruti Tople, Lukas Wutschitz, and Santiago Zanella-
  Béguelin. Analyzing leakage of personally identifiable information in language models. In 2023
  IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), pp. 346–363. IEEE Computer Society, 2023.
Eric Mitchell, Yoonho Lee, Alexander Khazatsky, Christopher D Manning, and Chelsea Finn. De-
  tectgpt: Zero-shot machine-generated text detection using probability curvature. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2301.11305, 2023.
Shashi Narayan, Shay Cohen, and Maria Lapata. Don’t give me the details, just the summary!
  topic-aware convolutional neural networks for extreme summarization. In 2018 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 1797–1807. Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics, 2018.
Ethan Perez, Saffron Huang, Francis Song, Trevor Cai, Roman Ring, John Aslanides, Amelia
  Glaese, Nat McAleese, and Geoffrey Irving. Red teaming language models with language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.03286, 2022.
Vinu Sankar Sadasivan, Aounon Kumar, Sriram Balasubramanian, Wenxiao Wang, and Soheil Feizi.
  Can ai-generated text be reliably detected? arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11156, 2023.
Shibani Santurkar, Esin Durmus, Faisal Ladhak, Cinoo Lee, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori Hashimoto.
  Whose opinions do language models reflect? arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17548, 2023.
Irene Solaiman, Miles Brundage, Jack Clark, Amanda Askell, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Jeff Wu, Alec
   Radford, Gretchen Krueger, Jong Wook Kim, Sarah Kreps, et al. Release strategies and the social
   impacts of language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.09203, 2019.
Edward Tian. GPTZero. Website, 2022. URL https://gptzero.me/faq.
Yuchuan Tian, Hanting Chen, Xutao Wang, Zheyuan Bai, Qinghua Zhang, Ruifeng Li, Chao Xu,
  and Yunhe Wang. Multiscale positive-unlabeled detection of ai-generated texts. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.18149, 2023.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Eduard Tulchinskii, Kristian Kuznetsov, Laida Kushnareva, Daniil Cherniavskii, Serguei Baran-
  nikov, Irina Piontkovskaya, Sergey Nikolenko, and Evgeny Burnaev. Intrinsic dimension estima-
  tion for robust detection of ai-generated texts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.04723, 2023.
Terry Yue Zhuo, Yujin Huang, Chunyang Chen, and Zhenchang Xing. Exploring ai ethics of chatgpt:
  A diagnostic analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.12867, 2023.


                                              11
