Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H ANDLING C OST AND C ONSTRAINTS WITH O FF -
P OLICY D EEP R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Methods for off-policy deep reinforcement learning (DRL) offer improved sam-
         ple efficiency relative to their on-policy counterparts, due to their ability to reuse
         data throughout the training process. For continuous action spaces, the most pop-
         ular approaches to off-policy learning include policy improvement steps where
         a learned state-action (Q) value function is maximized over selected batches of
         data. These updates are often paired with regularization to combat associated
         overestimation of Q values. With an eye toward safety, we revisit this strategy in
         environments with “mixed-sign” reward functions; that is, with reward functions
         that include independent positive (incentive) and negative (cost) terms. This set-
         ting is common in real-world applications, and may be addressed with or without
         constraints on the cost terms. We find the combination of function approximation
         and a term that maximizes Q in the policy update to be problematic in such envi-
         ronments, because systematic errors in value estimation impact the contributions
         from the competing terms asymmetrically. This results in overemphasis of either
         incentives or costs and may severely limit learning. We explore two remedies to
         this issue. First, consistent with prior work, we find that periodic resetting of Q
         and policy networks can be used to reduce value estimation error and improve
         learning in this setting. Second, we formulate novel off-policy actor-critic meth-
         ods for both unconstrained and constrained learning that do not maximize Q in
         the policy update. We find that this second approach, when applied to continuous
         action spaces with mixed-sign rewards, consistently and significantly outperforms
         state-of-the-art methods augmented by resetting. We further explore the appli-
         cability of our approach to more frequently-studied control problems that do not
         have mixed-sign rewards, finding it to both more reliably produce competent per-
         formance and be competitive in terms of overall performance.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Model-free deep reinforcement learning (DRL) algorithms have shown significant potential in nu-
merous domains, from robotic manipulation (Akkaya et al., 2019) to complex games (Mnih et al.,
2015) to plasma control (Degrave et al., 2022). To become more widely used in real-world applica-
tions, however, further improvements in both training efficiency and agent safety are necessary.
Improved sample efficiency of DRL reduces training costs, whether through computation or runtime
on physical systems. Off-policy methods for DRL reuse data collected throughout the training
process, offering sample efficiency superior to that of on-policy approaches. State-of-the-art off-
policy approaches typically leverage a replay buffer of experiences, learn a state-action value (Q)
function, and find a policy that maximizes the learned Q function. When applied to continuous
action spaces, either a stochastic (Haarnoja et al., 2019) or deterministic (Fujimoto et al., 2018)
policy representation may be used. Various approaches to regularizing learning in this setting have
enabled significant increases in efficiency by enabling more network updates to be made per step of
training data collected (Li et al., 2023; D’Oro et al., 2023).
Beyond training requirements, agents intended for real-world use must be safe. Environments where
safety is critical typically include competing positive (incentive) and negative (cost) terms in their
reward functions. The two may be considered together, or separately through constraints on the
cost terms. In this work, we observe deficient behavior of state-of-the-art off-policy approaches for


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Sample unconstrained Learning on Safety Gym. Top row: learning with relatively small
cost weights. Bottom row: learning with larger cost weights. SAC and TD3 struggle to learn
without resetting, particularly as the weight on cost terms increases. Even with periodic resets, they
do not match the performance of OPAC2 .


continuous control in such “mixed-sign” environments. This scenario occurs in numerous appli-
cation spaces, from robotics (navigation in the presence of obstacles, robotic surgery) to resource
allocation (when both performance and efficiency must be considered), to financial decision-making
(where the risk of losses exists in the pursuit of gains).
Our contributions in this work are the following:

       • We diagnose the cause of the aforementioned poor performance, finding that it stems from
         value estimation error impacting contributions from different reward terms asymmetrically.
       • To address the issue, we provide a novel algorithm building around the off-policy actor-
         critic originally proposed by Degris et al. (2012). We empirically demonstrate that our
         method is not prone to harmful levels of value estimation error, and that it provides effective
         learning in both the unconstrained and constrained settings.

We find that in environments with mixed-sign rewards, our method significantly outperforms exist-
ing approaches where Q is maximized in the policy update (Haarnoja et al., 2019; Fujimoto et al.,
2018), even when they are augmented by resetting (Nikishin et al., 2022). We further find that our
algorithm is competitive with these approaches, as well as more reliable in the sense of producing at
least moderate competence, on tasks that do not include mixed-sign rewards.

2    P RELIMINARIES : O FF -P OLICY RL FOR C ONTINUOUS ACTION S PACES

Reinforcement learning (RL) considers the problem of maximizing discounted returns in a Markov
Decision Process (MDP) (S, A, P, r, γ), where S is the state space, A is the action space, P are the
transition dynamics, r is the reward function, and γ ∈ [0, 1) is the discount factor. RL maximizes
                                 P∞               0
the value function V (st ) := t0 =t Eπ [γ t −t r(st0 , at0 )|st ] at initial (t = 0) states for trajectories
encountered by an agent with policy π(at |st ) in an environment. The state-action value function
               P∞             0
Q(st , at ) := t0 =t Eπ [γ t −t r(st0 , at0 )|st , at ] is the expected future discounted reward from a state
st , given that action at is taken at time t.
Practical approaches to off-policy deep reinforcement learning maintain a replay buffer D of tran-
sition tuples (s, a, r, s0 , d), where d indicates episode termination, and interleave data collection


                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


with network updates based on samples from the buffer. The network updates include both policy
evaluation and policy improvement steps.
Policy evaluation typically involves estimation of the Q function via a Bellman backup with loss
                                        h                                          2 i
                L(φ) = E(s,a,r,s0 ,d)∼D r + γ(1 − d)Qπtarg (s0 , a0 ) − Qπ (s, a)      ,        (1)

where a0 ∼ πθ (a|s0 ) is sampled from the current policy evaluated at the next state s0 . A target
network Qπtarg , delayed from the current estimate for Qπ , is often used to promote learning stability
(Mnih et al., 2015).
Policy improvement aims to maximize expected reward. The difference between the density of states
encountered by the current policy and the totality of the replay buffer is often ignored in this step,
introducing a bias in the policy estimate that is often manageable (Fu et al., 2019). In practice this
amounts to learning a more general policy, applicable to the full range of scenarios encountered by
the agent throughout the training process. The RL objective, for policy parameterized by variables
θ, may then be written as
                         J(θ) ≈ Es∼D V πθ (s) = Es∼D,a∼πθ (a|s) Qπθ (s, a)                         (2)
The chain rule may be used to compute a policy gradient for this expression, and a more tractable
form obtained by ignoring the second term:
              ∇θ J(θ) ≈ Es∼D,a∼πθ (a|s) [∇θ log(πθ (a|s))Qπθ (s, a) + ∇θ Qπθ (s, a)]
                                                                                                   (3)
                       ≈ Es∼D,a∼πθ (a|s) [∇θ log(πθ (a|s))Qπθ (s, a)]
Neglect of the second term, which may be difficult to compute off-policy, is shown to preserve the
local minima to which the policy converges in the tabular case in Degris et al. (2012). To reduce
variance of the policy gradient estimate, Degris et al. (2012) recommend removing a state dependent
baseline, resulting in
                                                  h                         i
                       ∇θ J(θ) ≈ Es∼D,a∼πθ (a|s) ∇θ log(πθ (a|s))Aπθ (s, a) ,                   (4)

where Aπθ (s, a) = Qπθ (s, a) − V πθ (s) is the advantage function.
There are two common alternatives to (Eq. 3), both more commonly used today. The first is the de-
terministic policy gradient (DPG; Silver et al. (2014)), which represents the policy as a deterministic
function µθ (s). With that representation, the policy may be updated according to
                         ∇θ J(θ) ≈ Es∼D ∇θ µθ (s)∇a Qµθ (s, a)|a=µθ (s)

                                                                                                    (5)
The second is the reparameterization trick, which encodes the stochasticity of the policy in an in-
dependent noise variable. The resulting form has provably lower variance than (3) (Kingma et al.,
2015), and is used by Soft Actor-Critic (SAC; Haarnoja et al. (2018; 2019)). SAC also uses a
“squashed” action representation for enforcing control bounds: aθ (s, ξ) = tanh(µθ (s)+σθ (s) ξ),
where ξ ∼ N (0, I) and µθ , σθ are the state-dependent mean and variance, respectively. Including a
second term to encourage policy entropy, SAC performs soft policy improvement via
           ∇θ J(θ) = Es∼D,ξ∼ N (0,1) [∇θ Qπθ (s, aθ (s, ξ)) − α∇θ log(πθ (aθ (s, ξ)|s)] .          (6)
Modern off-policy approaches using the deterministic policy gradient (e.g., TD3; Fujimoto et al.
(2018)) and reparameterization trick (e.g., SAC) consider multiple Q functions to combat overesti-
mation of Q originating in its maximization in the policy update steps (5) and (6). This mechanism
was addressed for discrete action spaces in Hasselt (2010) and explained in detail for continuous
action spaces in Fujimoto et al. (2018). It is rooted in overestimation errors in the value update be-
ing propagated by the policy update. To combat this effect, both TD3 and SAC employ the “clipped
double Q trick” in the policy evaluation step
                                   "                                                     #   2
           L(φ) = E(s,a,r,s0 ,d)∼D     r + γ(1 − d) min Qπφi ,targ (s0 , a0 ) − Qπφ (s, a)         (7)
                                                       i=1,2

to train two Q functions with different initial parameters φ1 , φ2 toward the minimum of their outputs,
for each sampled experience. SAC also uses the minimum of the two Q functions in the policy
update. Other methods (Chen et al., 2021; Hiraoka et al., 2022) go further, training larger ensembles


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


of Q functions. These adjustments mitigate Q overestimation, but do not fully solve the problem. In
some cases, Q may still be overestimated; in others, it may be underestimated.
Notably, we find that these corrections are unnecessary with the off-policy actor-critic (Eq.
3). While Q may still be slightly overestimated, we find that the “gentler” updates provided
by the off-policy actor-critic remove the tendency for large inaccuracies. The addition of the
value function in Eq. 4 both provides variance reduction and weakens the feedback between
the policy and Q updates, leading to learning that we find to be both reliable and performant.



3   T HE I MPACT OF C OMPETING O BJECTIVES

As explained in Fujimoto et al. (2018), the tendency of Q to be
systematically overestimated when maximized in the policy up-
date occurs because of the pairing of that update with the use of
Q (albeit delayed) in the target of its own update (Eq. 1). SAC
and TD3 combat this upward bias by learning two Q functions,
using each as the target for the other’s update. To make sure this
target is never a worse overestimate than just using the same Q
function, the target is set to the minimum of the two Q functions
(the “clipped double Q trick”). SAC also uses this minimum in
the policy update. Unfortunately, it is unlikely that any form of
regularization will exactly balance the intrinsic tendency of Q to
be overestimated when maximized in the policy update.
Now consider a continuous control problem where the reward
function is a sum of multiple independent objectives. A special
case of this is when rewards are “mixed-sign;” that is, contain Figure 2: Top: Total (cost and
independent incentive (> 0) and cost (< 0) terms. As recently incentive) reward per-episode of
explored (Nikishin et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023), off-policy DRL fully-trained agents as a func-
agents are prone to overemphasizing experiences collected early tion of cost adjustment rela-
in training. In the context of multiple independent objectives, this tive to reward adjustment early
corresponds to excessive focus on the reward terms most easily in Safety Gym training. Bot-
accessed by an agent of low capability. Fixation on some terms tom: SAC and TD3 perform
may lead to others being neglected entirely, as has been observed best when prioritizing
                                                                                   2
                                                                                           cost simi-
for entire tasks in multi-task learning (Yu et al., 2020; Liu et al., larly to OPAC .
2021). The situation is more likely to become acute with mixed-sign rewards; favoring a given
reward term early in training may cause the agent to ignore terms designed to counterbalance it.
Even if overemphasis of particular terms does not lead to wholesale neglect of others, it is likely to
impact the relative consideration of different terms by the agent and thereby impact behavior.
To explore this issue, we evaluated the performance of different off-policy algorithms on the OpenAI
Safety Gym (Ray et al., 2019), a “mixed-sign” suite of robotic navigation tasks with obstacles. In
the top panel of Figure 2, each marker represents 5 training runs on a given configuration, where
a configuration is a combination of robot, obstacle set, task, and penalty assessed each time an
obstacle is contacted. Each algorithm tackled the same set of 24 configurations, covering significant
range in the ease of accessing incentive and cost terms early in training. The x-axis reflects how
much an agent adjusts its cost levels relative to incentives early on: it is the change in average costs
accumulated by the agent at the start of training compared to what it accumulates 200k steps in,
divided by that same difference for incentives. Points with x = 0 were configured to have 0 penalty
(ignore costs). The y-axis is the average total reward (including costs and incentives) per-episode
of the fully trained agent, normalized by the level achieved by our updated off-policy actor-critic
(OPAC2 ) agent. We observe that SAC and TD3 are typically able to accumulate incentives well
only when cost is close to ignored, and tend to prioritize cost more highly than OPAC2 . In the
bottom panel, we plot all configurations with nonzero penalty weights. We normalize the x and y
values for each point by those obtained by OPAC2 in the environment configuration corresponding
to the point. We observe that SAC and TD3 are able to compete with OPAC2 only when they adjust
cost and reward similarly to OPAC2 early in training, suggesting improper balancing elsewhere. We
provide more details on these experiments in Appendix A and describe OPAC2 further below.


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4       A DDRESSING E RRONEOUS Q E STIMATES
We investigate two routes for addressing this problem. Section 4.1 examines the efficacy of a popular
regularization strategy in this setting. In Section 4.2, we propose a novel algorithm with desirable
properties for this problem.

4.1       R EGULARIZATION VIA R ESETTING

One method recently shown to be effective for improving off-policy learning is to periodically reset
policy and value networks throughout training, while preserving accumulated experience (Nikishin
et al., 2022). This method has been shown to enable learning that is extremely sample-efficient, by
allowing many network updates to be conducted per collected data point (learning at high “replay
ratios”). Li et al. (2023) observed that resetting reduces temporal difference (TD) error on validation
(i.e., not seen in training) transitions. We find this observation to be particularly relevant in mixed-
sign environments; in many cases, resetting is seen to enable learning with SAC and TD3 when it
would not otherwise be possible. However it is not seen to provide optimal performance, and could
be inappropriate in scenarios where cumulative cost is a consideration1 .

4.2       U PDATING THE O FF -P OLICY ACTOR -C RITIC

To more directly address erroneous Q estimates in environments with competing objectives, we
revisit the off-policy actor-critic (Eq. 4). We seek to build a practical algorithm around it, leveraging
techniques from more recent methods as well as novel extensions to reduce the variance on the
policy gradient estimate while leveraging its potentially less biased value estimation. Differing from
Degris et al. (2012), we neglect importance weights in our gradient estimates, an approximation that
significantly reduces variance and amounts to learning a more general policy over all states in the
buffer (rather than one tailored to the current density of states). We adopted several aspects of Soft
Actor-Critic, including Q and V updates that match the original version of SAC (though we require
only a single Q network) and “squashing” of actions with a hyperbolic tangent to respect control
bounds. The latter tactic reduces policy gradient bias relative to methods that allow the environment
to clip actions (Fujita & Maeda, 2018). Finally, we normalized advantage estimates prior to use in
the policy gradient (Eq. 4).
Incentivizing policy entropy has been shown to improve learning in complex problems and with
high-dimensional control spaces (Haarnoja et al., 2018). One existing approach is the “maximum-
entropy” framework of Haarnoja et al. (2019), wherein entropy is bundled with the reward. While
this strategy is compatible with our approach, we also considered the use of an entropy bonus to be
added directly to the policy loss. Empirically, we found this entropy bonus to outperform the “max-
entropy” strategy (Figure 3) in environments with mixed-sign rewards. To accommodate squashing,
our bonus used an action sampled with the reparameterization trick and was optimized towards a
target entropy level, similar to Haarnoja et al. (2019). Pseudocode for our unconstrained algorithm
(OPAC2 ) is provided in Appendix B.

4.2.1       C ONSTRAINED A PPROACH
Reinforcement learning with costs may alternatively be formulated with constraints. Differing
from the unconstrained setting discussed above, Constrained Markov Decision Processes (CMDPs)
have positive rewards r(s, a) and costs c(s, a) provided separately for each time step, as well
as an overall constraint C(τ ) = F (c(s1 , a1 ), . . . , c(sT , aT )) defined over the whole trajectory
τ ≡ s1 , a1 , . . . , sT , aT . The associated learning problem is to maximize the value function V π (st )
associated with rewards, such that the expected value of the constraint over trajectories sampled
by the agent will not exceed a fixed threshold M : JC (θ) = Eτ ∼pθ (τ ) C(τ ) < M . Here pθ (τ ) is
the probability distribution of trajectories τ encountered by an agent parameterized by θ. While
other functions are possible, here we will be concerned with constraints on total trajectory cost:
         PT
C(τ ) = t=1 c(st , at ).
Constrained RL is often conducted using dual methods (Bertsekas, 1996; Boyd & Vandenberghe,
2004), and has previously been explored off-policy with SAC (Ha et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2022;
    1
        D’Oro et al. (2023) incorporated offline training after resets to mitigate this issue.


                                                            5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yang et al., 2021). The goal is to learn a Lagrange multiplier β that scales cost relative to reward
during policy optimization in order to satisfy the constraint. This circumvents the need for reward
shaping, as the weight of the cost terms is learned. As β changes throughout training, it is beneficial
to train separate Q and V networks for reward (Qr , Vr ) and cost (Qc , Vc ). To facilitate cost matching
in the states currently frequented by the agent, we update β toward the average cost incurred by the
agent over only the last epoch of training. This update, like those on other quantities, is conducted
every time step. Our full constrained approach, Constrained Off-Policy Actor-Critic, SQUAshed and
REgularizeD (C-OPAC2 ), is given in Algorithm 1. This differs from the unconstrained approach in
two ways: we now learn two Q and V networks, one each for rewards and costs, and we also learn
β in order to satisfy the constraint.

Algorithm 1 Constrained Off-Policy Actor-Critic, SQUAshed and REgularizeD (C-OPAC2 )
 1: Input: Initial policy parameters θ; Qr , Qc parameters φr , φc ; Vr , Vc parameters ψr , ψc
 2: Input: Initial entropy weight α, penalty weight β
 3: Initialize Vr , Vc target network parameters: ψr,targ ← ψr ; ψc,targ ← ψc
 4: Initialize replay buffer D = ∅, a ring buffer of fixed size
 5: for iteration k ∈ [0, . . . , K − 1 do
 6:     for step s ∈ [0, . . . , S − 1] do                             . Typically take just one step (S = 1)
 7:          Sample a ∼ πθk (a|s); observe s0 ∼ p(s0 |s, a)                             . One step in CMDP
 8:          Store transition tuple (s, a, s0 , r(s, a), c(s, a)) in D
 9:     end for
10:     for gradient step g ∈ [0, . . . , G − 1] do
11:          Sample batch B = {(si , ai , s0i , ri , ci , di )} from D
12:          Update β: β ← β − λβ ∇β β(M − JC (θ)) . JC (θ) computed over most recent epoch
                                             P                                                   2
13:          Compute Q error: EQ (B) = i [Qr (si , ai ) − (ri + γ(1 − di )Vr,targ (si ))] +
                                                                                               2
14:                                           [Qc (si , ai ) − (ci + γ(1 − di )Vc,targ (si ))]
15:        Update Q: φr ← φr − λφ ∇φr EQ (B); φc ← φc − λφ ∇φc EQ (B)
16:        Sample ai,π ∼ π(a|si ), using tanh squashing
                                         P                              2                           2
17:        Compute V error: EV (B) = i [Vr (si ) − Qr (si , ai,π )] + [Vc (si ) − Qr (si , ai,π )]
18:        Update V : ψr ← ψr − λψ ∇ψr EV (B); ψc ← ψc − λψ ∇ψc EV (B)
19:        Compute A(si , ai,π ) = Qr (si , ai,π ) − Vr (si ) − β[Qc (si , ai,π ) − Vc (si )] . Normalize
20:        Sample arp,π ∼ π(a|si ) withPreparameterization trick (for tanh squashing)
21:        Compute π loss: Eπ (B) = i [α log πθ (arp,π |si ) − A(si , ai,π ) log(πθ (ai,π |si )]
22:        Update π: θ ← θ − λθ ∇θ Eπ (B)
23:        Update α : α ← α − λα ∇α [−α log(π(ai,π |si )) − αHtarget ]
24:        Update value targets: ψr,targ ← ρψr,targ + (1 − ρ)ψr ; ψc,targ ← ρψc,targ + (1 − ρ)ψc
25:    end for
26: end for



5     E XPERIMENTS
We used the OpenAI Safety Gym (Ray et al., 2019) to explore off-policy learning for environments
with continuous action spaces and mixed-sign rewards. Safety Gym is a configurable set of robotic
navigation tasks, wherein different robots must navigate through courses containing multiple obsta-
cle types to perform different tasks as many times as possible in a fixed time window. The locations
of goals and obstacles are randomized, leading to outcome variability and necessitating the learning
of a generalized control strategy. For unconstrained experiments, each cost event incurred a fixed,
negative reward. For constrained experiments, the weight coefficient for cost events was learned. We
evaluated all robots and tasks for the most obstacle-rich (level 2) publicly available environments.
Additional experimental details, including hyperparameters, are given in Appendix C.

5.1   U NCONSTRAINED L EARNING

To explore the effect of mixed-sign rewards on unconstrained off-policy learning, we considered
both small and large static cost weights in our target environments. The larger penalty weights
matched those used on-policy in Markowitz et al. (2023), while the smaller weights were reduced


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Unconstrained learning with mixed-sign rewards. Left: TD error in validation is generally
higher with SAC and TD3 than OPAC2 , but may be reduced with resetting. Middle: Q is underes-
timated by SAC and TD3 in all “Car” and “Point” environments, but may be improved by resetting.
Right: Our entropy bonus (blue) outperforms max-entropy and no regularization when used with
OPAC2 on the higher-dimensional Doggo control problems.


by a factor of 2. We compared OPAC2 with SAC and TD3, both with and without resets. A sam-
ple of the resulting learning curves is shown in Figure 1. The remainder, which follow similar
qualitative trends, are provided in Appendix D. We find SAC and TD3 to be generally unable to
reach adequate performance, particularly as the penalty weight increases. The situation is improved
when resetting is applied; however, it often does not result in performance that reaches the level of
OPAC2 . Attesting to the sample efficiency of off-policy methods, we find that OPAC2 is typically
able to reach performance comparable to that of Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO; Schulman
et al. (2017b)) and Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO; Schulman et al. (2017a)) using 20–50
times fewer samples (based on results reported by Markowitz et al. (2023)). On the Doggo envi-
ronments, OPAC2 exceeds the positive reward accumulation of PPO and TRPO trained without cost
terms and with twice as many samples (Ray et al., 2019).
To explore the issues affecting SAC and TD3, we examined the validation TD error as well as the
Q function error. As in Li et al. (2023), “validation” refers to a held-out set of transitions not in
the replay buffer. Figure 3 and Appendix D demonstrate that SAC and TD3 are prone to large TD
error, and that periodic resets mitigate this. This phenomenon was observed by Li et al. (2023) in
the context of learning at high replay ratios. OPAC2 is not nearly as prone to high TD error, and
accordingly does not benefit from resets (Appendix D.1). We also compared Q function estimates
to discounted Monte Carlo returns to measure Q function accuracy. We found that SAC and TD3
underestimate the true Q value in all “Car” and “Point” environments, while the trend was more
variable in the “Doggo” environments.
In the rightmost panel of Figure 3 and Appendix D.2, we display the efficacy of our entropy bonus
strategy on “Doggo” environments. “Doggo” is a higher-dimensional control problem than “Car”
and “Point” (12-dimensional vs. 2-dimensional), potentially leading it to require more exploration.
In all environments with mixed-sign rewards tested, we observed better performance with our en-
tropy bonus than with a maximum entropy approach.

5.2   C ONSTRAINED L EARNING

We further compared all methods in the constrained setting, again on Safety Gym. In all environ-
ments, we chose a target cost level equal to half the cost accumulated by a fully-trained TRPO agent
unaware of cost (as reported by Ray et al. (2019)). We chose this target to force the agent to strongly
consider safely, but not be constrained to the point of being unable to complete the task. All agents
learned separate value networks for reward and cost, to accommodate the variability of the penalty
weight throughout training. We offer comparison with constrained versions of SAC and TD3.
A representative sample of constrained learning performance is given in Figure 4, with full results
being provided in Appendix E. We found all methods capable of reaching the target cost level, with
OPAC2 achieving the highest positive rewards in all environments tested. Sample efficiency was
again greatly improved relative to on-policy approaches, with performance matching that of state-
of-the-art on-policy methods using roughly 50 times less data (Markowitz et al., 2023). TD3 and
SAC were both seen to benefit from resetting, allowing them to reduce the error on their cost and


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: Representative sample of constrained learning on Safety Gym. Top Row: Positive re-
ward accumulated by agents. Note that reward accumulation initially increases sharply while β, the
penalty weight, is low. It dips and then rises again as β increases and stabilizes, allowing perfor-
mance to be optimized at the appropriate cost level. Bottom Row: Cost converges to the target level
(yellow).


reward value estimates. However, this improvement is not always enough to match the performance
of OPAC2 . Finally, we note that this approach is highly configurable; the initial value and learning
rate of the cost weight β may be adjusted upward to provide faster convergence to the prescribed cost
target or downward to enable more early exploration and potentially higher final positive rewards.

5.3   E VALUATION ON D EEP M IND C ONTROL

Given the consistently strong performance of OPAC2 in Safety
Gym, we chose to additionally evaluate it on 10 tasks without
mixed-sign rewards from the DeepMind Control Suite (Tunyasu-
vunakool et al., 2020). We used the same 10 tasks as the authors
of Nikishin et al. (2022), motivated by the fact that they pro-
vide some challenge for SAC. Following the practice of Agarwal
et al. (2021), we aggregate performance across tasks using the
interquartile mean (IQM), calculated as the mean score of the
middle 50% of runs. We also computed performance profiles
for each method, tabulating the fraction of experiments that ex-
                                                                      Fraction of runs with score > τ


ceeded each possible performance level.                                                                              DMC Performance Profiles
                                                                                                        1.00                                    SAC

As shown in Figure 5, the aggregated task performance of OPAC2                                          0.75
                                                                                                                                                TD3
                                                                                                                                                OPAC2

is worse than SAC but on par with or slightly better than TD3
                                                                                                        0.50
(full results in Appendix F). This is to be expected, given the
likely lower variance of the policy gradient estimates of SAC.                                          0.25
However, OPAC2 was found to be more reliable than the other                                             0.00
methods at producing at least some learning in each environment,                                               0.0   0.2   0.4     0.6    0.8      1.0
                                                                                                                       Normalized Score (τ )
as evidenced by the left side of the performance profile plot.
                                                                      Figure 5: Top: Rewards ag-
6     R ELATED W ORK                                                  gregated over 10 tasks from the
                                                                      DeepMind Control Suite. Bot-
                                                                      tom: Frequency of reward accu-
Our methods build on the off-policy actor-critic introduced in De-
                                                                      mulation matching given perfor-
gris et al. (2012), applied in differing forms over the past decade
                                                                      mance levels.

                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(Wang et al., 2017; Espeholt et al., 2018; Gu et al., 2017), and summarized in Levine et al. (2020).
We compare it with more popular methods for off-policy DRL with continuous action spaces (Fuji-
moto et al., 2018; Haarnoja et al., 2019). The resetting strategy that we employ was explored by Nik-
ishin et al. (2022) and subsequently further evaluated and extended (D’Oro et al., 2023; Schwarzer
et al., 2023). Its ability to curtail TD error, as well as the role of TD error in limiting off-policy DRL
more generally, was discussed in Li et al. (2023). To our knowledge, its impact on environments
with mixed-sign rewards had not previously been quantified.
Constrained DRL has previously been explored on-policy (Bhatnagar, 2010; Achiam et al., 2017;
Ray et al., 2019; Chow et al., 2019; Tessler et al., 2019; Paternain et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020;
Markowitz et al., 2023; Moskovitz et al., 2023), typically leveraging dual gradient descent (Bert-
sekas, 1996; Boyd & Vandenberghe, 2004). Constraints have recently been applied off-policy (Ha
et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2022) for specific applications and with a distributional critic (Yang et al.,
2021). They have also been applied to probabilistically ensure safety during training (Bharadhwaj
et al., 2021), a useful requirement that we do not consider here. To our knowledge, this work is the
first to apply constraints with the off-policy actor-critic, the first to explore the use of resetting in
this context, and the first to specify constraints via consideration of only the most recent epoch in
the replay buffer.


7    D ISCUSSION

The success of OPAC2 relative to SAC and TD3 in environments with mixed-sign rewards under-
scores the necessity of managing function approximation error in off-policy deep reinforcement
learning. Off-policy DRL agents are known to be sensitive to experience gained early in training
(Nikishin et al., 2022), tending to exploit any initial success they have. When multiple independent
reward terms are present, this translates to some terms being favored over others. In environments
with mixed-sign rewards, the explicit competition between incentives and costs exacerbates this ten-
dency. This effect is fundamentally a result of overfitting in Q estimation. While OPAC2 does not
fully eliminate Q estimation errors, we empirically observe it to significantly dampen them. Further,
the likely higher variance of the policy gradient estimate in OPAC2 may actually be beneficial in this
setting: while not being large enough to preclude learning, it may help to address competition be-
tween reward terms by preventing the policy from converging too quickly to one that ignores some
terms. This combination gives OPAC2 a significant advantage over methods that update the policy
to maximize the Q function estimate when competing reward terms are present, even when the latter
are periodically “course corrected” by resetting.
Several additional observations may be made based on these findings. First, they argue for the use of
a policy-gradient-based approach whenever mixed-sign rewards are present (including constrained
learning). This is particularly true when resetting is impractical, for instance when cumulative cost
is a consideration or for offline learning. When rewards do not include terms of mixed signs, we may
expect OPAC2 to perform competently and reliably, but often not as well as SAC. It is interesting
to note that OPAC2 showed strong learning on the acrobot-swingup task, the only DeepMind
Control environment we tested that SAC and TD3 both failed to solve. Finally, we note that a policy-
gradient-based approach may prove beneficial for multi-task or meta-learning, where competing
reward terms from multiple tasks must be considered.


8    C ONCLUSIONS

In this work, we examine the tendency of state-of-the-art approaches to off-policy DRL for continu-
ous action spaces to struggle when applied to environments with mixed-sign rewards. We elucidate
the role of function approximation error in the process; in particular, the sensitivity of off-policy
methods to experience gathered early in training may lead to the neglect of some terms of the re-
ward function. To remedy the situation, we consider both a popular regularization strategy (periodic
resetting) and a novel approach that produces more reliable value estimates (OPAC2 ). Empirically
we find the latter, which represents an update to the off-policy actor critic (Degris et al., 2012) and
related methods, to produce more performant learning in the presence of costs.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E THICS S TATEMENT
In the interest of transparency and reproducibility, we provide full details necessary for reproducing
experiments in the Appendix, as well as all source code. While our work is immediately targeted at
making safer robotic agents, it is true that others could repurpose our code for malicious applications.
We encourage the authors of any subsequent work to consider the societal impacts of future results.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We provide detailed pseudocode of our constrained algorithm in Algorithm 1, and for our uncon-
strained algorithm in Algorithm 2. In Appendix C, we provide hyperparameters, evaluation proce-
dures, and implementation details necessary for replicating all experiments. Additionally, we make
the source code available here: (available in supplementary material while under review; will be
posted publicly pending acceptance).

R EFERENCES
Joshua Achiam, David Held, Aviv Tamar, and Pieter Abbeel. Constrained policy optimization. In
  Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh (eds.), Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 22–31. PMLR,
  06–11 Aug 2017. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v70/achiam17a.html.
Rishabh Agarwal, Max Schwarzer, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aaron Courville, and Marc G Bellemare.
  Deep reinforcement learning at the edge of the statistical precipice. Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 2021.
Ilge Akkaya, Marcin Andrychowicz, Maciek Chociej, Mateusz Litwin, Bob McGrew, Arthur Petron,
   Alex Paino, Matthias Plappert, Glenn Powell, Raphael Ribas, Jonas Schneider, Nikolas Tezak,
   Jerry Tworek, Peter Welinder, Lilian Weng, Qiming Yuan, Wojciech Zaremba, and Lei Zhang.
   Solving rubik’s cube with a robot hand, 2019.
Dimitri P. Bertsekas. Constrained Optimization and Lagrange Multiplier Methods (Optimization
  and Neural Computation Series). Athena Scientific, 1 edition, 1996. ISBN 1886529043.
Homanga Bharadhwaj, Aviral Kumar, Nicholas Rhinehart, Sergey Levine, Florian Shkurti, and Ani-
  mesh Garg. Conservative safety critics for exploration. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=iaO86DUuKi.
Shalabh Bhatnagar. An actor–critic algorithm with function approximation for discounted cost
  constrained markov decision processes. Systems & Control Letters, 59(12):760–766, 2010.
  ISSN 0167-6911. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sysconle.2010.08.013. URL https://www.
  sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167691110001246.
Stephen P Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex optimization. Cambridge university press, 2004.
Xinyue Chen, Che Wang, Zijian Zhou, and Keith W. Ross. Randomized ensembled double q-
  learning: Learning fast without a model. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=AY8zfZm0tDd.
Yinlam Chow, Ofir Nachum, Aleksandra Faust, Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, and Edgar A.
  Duéñez-Guzmán. Lyapunov-based safe policy optimization for continuous control. CoRR,
  abs/1901.10031, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1901.10031.
Jonas Degrave, Federico Felici, Jonas Buchli, Michael Neunert, Brendan Tracey, Francesco
  Carpanese, Timo Ewalds, Roland Hafner, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Diego de las Casas, Craig Don-
  ner, Leslie Fritz, Cristian Galperti, Andrea Huber, James Keeling, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Jackie
  Kay, Antoine Merle, Jean-Marc Moret, Seb Noury, Federico Pesamosca, David Pfau, Olivier
  Sauter, Cristian Sommariva, Stefano Coda, Basil Duval, Ambrogio Fasoli, Pushmeet Kohli,
  Koray Kavukcuoglu, Demis Hassabis, and Martin Riedmiller. Magnetic control of tokamak
  plasmas through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 602(7897):414–419, February 2022.
  ISSN 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/s41586-021-04301-9. URL https://doi.org/10.1038/
  s41586-021-04301-9.


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Thomas Degris, Martha White, and Richard S Sutton. Off-policy actor-critic. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2012.
Pierluca D’Oro, Max Schwarzer, Evgenii Nikishin, Pierre-Luc Bacon, Marc G Bellemare, and
  Aaron Courville. Sample-efficient reinforcement learning by breaking the replay ratio bar-
  rier. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=OpC-9aBBVJe.
Lasse Espeholt, Hubert Soyer, Remi Munos, Karen Simonyan, Volodymir Mnih, Tom Ward, Yotam
  Doron, Vlad Firoiu, Tim Harley, Iain Dunning, Shane Legg, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Impala:
  Scalable distributed deep-rl with importance weighted actor-learner architectures, 2018.
Justin Fu, Aviral Kumar, Matthew Soh, and Sergey Levine. Diagnosing bottlenecks in deep q-
  learning algorithms. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of
  the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 2021–2030. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019. URL https://proceedings.
  mlr.press/v97/fu19a.html.
Scott Fujimoto, Herke van Hoof, and David Meger. Addressing function approximation error in
  actor-critic methods. In Jennifer Dy and Andreas Krause (eds.), Proceedings of the 35th In-
  ternational Conference on Machine Learning, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 1587–1596. PMLR, 10–15 Jul 2018. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
  press/v80/fujimoto18a.html.
Yasuhiro Fujita and Shin-ichi Maeda. Clipped action policy gradient. In Jennifer Dy and Andreas
  Krause (eds.), Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 80
  of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1597–1606. PMLR, 10–15 Jul 2018. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/fujita18a.html.
Shixiang Gu, Timothy Lillicrap, Zoubin Ghahramani, Richard E. Turner, and Sergey Levine.
  Q-prop: Sample-efficient policy gradient with an off-policy critic. In International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2017. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  SJ3rcZcxl.
Sehoon Ha, Peng Xu, Zhenyu Tan, Sergey Levine, and Jie Tan. Learning to walk in the real world
  with minimal human effort. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.08550, 2020.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In Jennifer G. Dy and
  Andreas Krause (eds.), Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  ICML 2018, Stockholmsmässan, Stockholm, Sweden, July 10-15, 2018, volume 80 of Proceedings
  of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1856–1865. PMLR, 2018. URL http://proceedings.
  mlr.press/v80/haarnoja18b.html.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Kristian Hartikainen, George Tucker, Sehoon Ha, Jie Tan, Vikash
  Kumar, Henry Zhu, Abhishek Gupta, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic algo-
  rithms and applications, 2019.
Hado Hasselt. Double q-learning. In J. Lafferty, C. Williams, J. Shawe-Taylor, R. Zemel, and
  A. Culotta (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 23. Curran
  Associates, Inc., 2010. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
  paper/2010/file/091d584fced301b442654dd8c23b3fc9-Paper.pdf.
Takuya Hiraoka, Takahisa Imagawa, Taisei Hashimoto, Takashi Onishi, and Yoshimasa Tsu-
  ruoka. Dropout q-functions for doubly efficient reinforcement learning. In International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  xCVJMsPv3RT.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In 3rd Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2015.
Diederik P. Kingma, Tim Salimans, and Max Welling. Variational dropout and the local reparame-
  terization trick, 2015.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sergey Levine, Aviral Kumar, George Tucker, and Justin Fu. Offline reinforcement learning: Tuto-
  rial, review, and perspectives on open problems, 2020.
Qiyang Li, Aviral Kumar, Ilya Kostrikov, and Sergey Levine. Efficient deep reinforcement learning
  requires regulating overfitting. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations (ICLR), 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=14-kr46GvP-.
Bo Liu, Xingchao Liu, Xiaojie Jin, Peter Stone, and Qiang Liu.    Conflict-averse gra-
  dient descent for multi-task learning. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin,
  P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, volume 34, pp. 18878–18890. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021.    URL
  https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2021/file/
  9d27fdf2477ffbff837d73ef7ae23db9-Paper.pdf.
Jared Markowitz, Ryan W. Gardner, Ashley Llorens, Raman Arora, and I-Jeng Wang. A risk-
   sensitive approach to policy optimization. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
   Intelligence, 37(12):15019–15027, Jun. 2023. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v37i12.26753. URL https:
   //ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/26753.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A. Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G. Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K. Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, Stig Petersen,
  Charles Beattie, Amir Sadik, Ioannis Antonoglou, Helen King, Dharshan Kumaran, Daan Wier-
  stra, Shane Legg, and Demis Hassabis. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning.
  Nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
Ted Moskovitz, Brendan O’Donoghue, Vivek Veeriah, Sebastian Flennerhag, Satinder Singh, and
  Tom Zahavy. Reload: Reinforcement learning with optimistic ascent-descent for last-iterate con-
  vergence in constrained mdps. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 25303–
  25336. PMLR, 2023.
Evgenii Nikishin, Max Schwarzer, Pierluca D’Oro, Pierre-Luc Bacon, and Aaron Courville. The
  primacy bias in deep reinforcement learning. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song,
  Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
  pp. 16828–16847. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/
  v162/nikishin22a.html.
Santiago Paternain, Luiz Chamon, Miguel Calvo-Fullana, and Alejandro Ribeiro.  Con-
  strained reinforcement learning has zero duality gap.   In Advances in Neural In-
  formation Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.      URL
  https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2019/file/
  c1aeb6517a1c7f33514f7ff69047e74e-Paper.pdf.
Alex Ray, Joshua Achiam, and Dario Amodei. Benchmarking Safe Exploration in Deep Reinforce-
  ment Learning. 2019.
John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Philipp Moritz, Michael I. Jordan, and Pieter Abbeel. Trust region
  policy optimization. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning
  (ICML), 2017a.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv:1707.06347, 2017b.
Max Schwarzer, Johan Samir Obando Ceron, Aaron Courville, Marc G Bellemare, Rishabh Agar-
 wal, and Pablo Samuel Castro. Bigger, better, faster: Human-level Atari with human-level effi-
 ciency. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato,
 and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learn-
 ing, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 30365–30380. PMLR, 23–29
 Jul 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/schwarzer23a.html.
David Silver, Guy Lever, Nicolas Heess, Thomas Degris, Daan Wierstra, and Martin A. Riedmiller.
  Deterministic policy gradient algorithms. In ICML, volume 32 of JMLR Workshop and Con-
  ference Proceedings, pp. 387–395. JMLR.org, 2014. URL http://dblp.uni-trier.de/
  db/conf/icml/icml2014.html#SilverLHDWR14.

                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Chen Tessler, Daniel J. Mankowitz, and Shie Mannor. Reward constrained policy optimization. In
  Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2019.
Saran Tunyasuvunakool, Alistair Muldal, Yotam Doron, Siqi Liu, Steven Bohez, Josh Merel,
  Tom Erez, Timothy Lillicrap, Nicolas Heess, and Yuval Tassa. dm control: Software and
  tasks for continuous control. Software Impacts, 6:100022, 2020. ISSN 2665-9638. doi:
  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.simpa.2020.100022. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/
  science/article/pii/S2665963820300099.
Ziyu Wang, Victor Bapst, Nicolas Heess, Volodymyr Mnih, Remi Munos, Koray Kavukcuoglu,
  and Nando de Freitas. Sample efficient actor-critic with experience replay. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2017. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=HyM25Mqel.
Qisong Yang, Thiago D. Simão, Simon H Tindemans, and Matthijs T. J. Spaan. Wcsac: Worst-
  case soft actor critic for safety-constrained reinforcement learning. Proceedings of the AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 35(12):10639–10646, May 2021. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v35i12.
  17272. URL https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/17272.
Tianhe Yu, Saurabh Kumar, Abhishek Gupta, Sergey Levine, Karol Hausman, and
  Chelsea Finn.    Gradient surgery for multi-task learning. In H. Larochelle, M. Ran-
  zato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 5824–5836. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020.    URL
  https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/file/
  3fe78a8acf5fda99de95303940a2420c-Paper.pdf.
Yiming Zhang, Quan Vuong, and Keith Ross. First order constrained optimization in pol-
  icy space. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 15338–15349. Curran As-
  sociates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/
  af5d5ef24881f3c3049a7b9bfe74d58b-Paper.pdf.
Xuanhan Zhou, Xiaochen Zhang, Haitao Zhao, Jun Xiong, and Jibo Wei. Constrained soft actor-
  critic for energy-aware trajectory design in uav-aided iot networks. IEEE Wireless Communica-
  tions Letters, 11(7):1414–1418, 2022. doi: 10.1109/LWC.2022.3172336.


                                              13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    A DDITIONAL E MPIRICAL R ESULTS ON THE I MPACT OF C OMPETING
     O BJECTIVES

Here we supplement the empirical findings of Section 3. First, we note that the duration of “early”
training reflected by the x-axis was chosen to match the time before the first network reset in exper-
iments that featured network resetting.
In Figure 6, we show the breakdown of incentive and cost in the experiments that constitute Figure
2, again normalizing by the performance of OPAC2 on each environment. We find that, particularly
with nonzero cost weights, OPAC2 achieves far higher levels of incentives than TD3 or SAC (left
panel). OPAC2 does accumulate higher costs than the others (right panel), but by not nearly as large
a factor. These trends correspond to OPAC2 accumulating much higher total reward (Figure 2), as
is the goal of the optimization. When cost is considered in these environments, the SAC and TD3
agents largely fail to properly balance the competing objectives.


Figure 6: Left panel: Average positive reward (incentive) per episode at the end of training, as a
function of initial prioritization of cost. Right panel: Average cost per episode at the end of training,
as a function of initial prioritization of cost. In both cases, quantities are normalized by the OPAC2
result for the given environmental configuration.


In Figure 7, we again show the incentives (left panel) and costs (right panel) at the end of training
plotted against the ratio of early change in cost accumulation to early change in incentives gained, but
this time normalized by the best on-policy result for an agent unaware of cost Ray et al. (2019). We
see that OPAC2 vastly outperforms the on-policy methods in terms of positive reward accumulation,
despite using half as much training data. As OPAC2 is increasingly configured to consider cost, its
accumulation of both cost and reward decreases.


Figure 7: Left panel: Average positive reward (incentive) per episode at the end of training, as
a function of initial prioritization of cost. Right panel: Average cost per episode at the end of
training, as a function of initial prioritization of cost. In both cases, quantities are normalized by the
best on-policy result from Ray et al. (2019) for the given environmental configuration.


B    U NCONSTRAINED O FF -P OLICY ACTOR -C RITIC , SQUASHED AND
     RE GULARIZE D

Below is pseudocode for the unconstrained version of our method, OPAC2 . It represents a simplifi-
cation of the constrained approach provided in the main text.


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 2 Off-Policy Actor-Critic, SQUAshed and REgularizeD (OPAC2 )
 1: Input: Initial policy parameters θ; Q parameters φ; V parameters ψ
 2: Input: Initial entropy weight α
 3: Set V target equal to main parameters: ψtarg ← ψ
 4: Initialize optimizers with learning rates λπ = λV = λQ ; λα
 5: Initialize replay buffer D = ∅, a ring buffer of fixed size
 6: Initialize environment : s ∼ p(s0 )
 7: for iteration k ∈ [0, . . . , K − 1] do
 8:     for step s ∈ [0, . . . , S − 1] do                         . Typically take just one step (S = 1)
 9:          Sample a ∼ πθk (a|s); observe s0 ∼ p(s0 |s, a)                            . One step in MDP
10:          D ← D ∪ {(s, a, s0 , r(s, a))}                                                . Update buffer
11:     end for
12:     for gradient step g ∈ [0, . . . , G − 1] do
13:          Sample batch B = {(si , ai , s0i , ri , di )} from D     . or, a batch for each parameter set
                                             P                                             2
14:          Compute Q error: EQ (B) = i [Q(si , ai ) − (ri + γ(1 − di )Vtarg (si ))]
15:          Update Q: φ ← φ − λφ ∇φ EQ (B)
16:          Sample ai,π ∼ π(a|si ), using tanh squashing
                                             P                           2
17:          Compute V error: EV (B) = i [(V (si ) − Q(si , ai,π )]
18:          Update V : ψ ← ψ − λψ ∇ψ EV (B)
19:          Compute A(si , ai,π ) = Q(si , ai,π ) − V (si )                                  . Normalize
20:          Sample arp,π ∼ π(a|si ) with  P reparameterization   trick, for tanh  squashing
21:          Compute π loss: Eπ (B) = i [α log πθ (arp,π |si ) − A(si , ai,π ) log(πθ (ai,π |si )]
22:          Update π: θ ← θ − λθ ∇θ Eπ (B)
23:          Compute α loss: Eα (B) = −α [log(π(ai,π |si )) + Htarget ]
24:          Update α : α ← α − λα ∇α Eα (B)
25:          Update value target: ψtarg ← ρψtarg + (1 − ρ)ψ
26:     end for
27: end for


C    E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

Full source code is available in the supplementary material, and will be released publicly pending
review. Hyperparameters are listed in Table 1. For all Safety Gym experiments, we used a learning
rate of 10−4 for all algorithms (matching the setting in the OpenAI safety-starter-agents
accompanying the suite). For all DeepMind Control experiments, we used a learning rate of 3×10−4
for SAC and TD3, following standard practice. We retained the learning rate of 10−4 for OPAC2
on DeepMind Control. All methods shared the same learning rate for the logarithm of the entropy
weight α (5×10− 4) and all constrained experiments used a learning rate of 5×10− 6 was used for the
Lagrangian β. For all DeepMind Control experiments, we configured OPAC2 to use max-entropy
regularization, finding that it performed better than the entropy bonus we used for experiments with
mixed-sign rewards.
Throughout, all neural networks considered were multilayer perceptrons, with two hidden layers of
256 units each. As is standard, ReLU activations were used for SAC and TD3. We chose tanh
activations for OPAC2 in order to match on-policy methods with a similar policy update. We eval-
uated tanh activations on SAC and TD3 as well, but found them to make little difference. For
experiments involving resetting, we followed the practice of Nikishin et al. (2022) of resetting all
networks and optimizers (except for those corresponding to the learned temperature) every 200k
environment steps. All traces shown reflect five random seeds.
The policy networks output the mean values of a multivariate normal distribution with diagonal
covariance. For OPAC2 , control variances were optimized. Variances were independent of state for
all constrained experiments with the Car and Point robots, as well as for unconstrained experiments
for Car and Point on Goal and Push. They varied with state for all experiments with Doggo robot,
as well as for the Car and Point robots on the unconstrained Button task. For SAC, control variances
always varied with state.


                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 Parameter                                          Value
                 Discount                                         0.99
                 Replay Buffer Size                               106
                 Optimizer                              Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015)
                 Network Layers                                     2
                 Network Hidden Units (per layer)                 256
                 Batch Size                                       256
                 Target Network Update Interval                    1
                 τ (target network averaging)                    0.995
                 Initial Exploration                             10000

                    Table 1: Shared hyperparameters for SAC, TD3, and OPAC2


As mentioned in Section 5 of the main text, we chose to evaluate our approach using the OpenAI
Safety Gym (Ray et al., 2019). This choice was governed by our desire to test in conditions with clear
cost-incentive trade-offs, significant stochasticity, adequate complexity, and available benchmarks.
The environments chosen were the most obstacle-rich of the publicly available environments; we
considered all robots and all tasks. The Point robot is constrained to the 2D plane and has two
control dimensions: one for moving forward/backward and one for turning. The Car robot also has
two control dimensions, corresponding to independently actuated parallel wheels. It has a freely
rotating wheel and, while it is not constrained to the 2D plane, typically remains in it. The Doggo
robot is a quadrupedal robot with bilateral symmetry and 12 control dimensions. Several types of
obstacles and tasks were present in the environments we evaluated. In all cases, the robot is given
a fixed amount of time (1000 steps) to complete the prescribed task as many times as possible and
is motivated by both sparse and dense reward contributions. In the “Goal” environments, the robot
must navigate to a series of randomly-assigned goal positions, with a new target being assigned as
soon as a goal is reached. In the “Button” environments, the robot must reach and press a sequence of
goal buttons while avoiding other buttons. In the “Push” task, the robot must push a box to a series
of goal positions. The set of obstacles are different for each task; among the three environments
there are a total of five different constraint elements (hazards, vases, incorrect buttons, pillars, and
gremlins), each with different dynamics. See Ray et al. (2019) for further details.
All of our experiments used a single indicator for overall cost at each time step (the OpenAI default).
In the unconstrained experiments, each cost event (robot contacting obstacle) was assigned a fixed
(negative) weight in the reward function. The Car and Point robots used large penalty weights that
matched Markowitz et al. (2023); the small ones were reduced by a factor of 2. The DoggoButton2
environment used factors of 0.0125 and 0.00625 for large and small penalty weights, respectively,
while DoggoGoal2 used 0.025 and 0.0125.


D    A DDITIONAL U NCONSTRAINED R ESULTS : S AFETY G YM



Below we supplement the unconstrained results for Safety Gym provided in the main text. We
include all learning curves, as well as representative plots of TD error and Q approximation error,
both on held-out validation transitions. Five episodes (5000 transitions) of evaluation data were
collected every 10000 training steps throughout the learning process.


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 8: Unconstrained Learning on Safety Gym. SAC and TD3 struggle to learn without resetting.
Even with periodic resets, they do not match the performance of OPAC2 .


As mentioned in the main text, we observed negative Q errors in all Point and Car environments,
while the trend was more variable with Doggo. While the magnitude of TD and Q errors varied
per-environment, qualitative trends were consistent across environments.


                                              17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         Figure 9: Validation TD error, Q estimation error plots for sample environments.


D.1   R ESETTING WITH THE O FF -P OLICY ACTOR -C RITIC


We additionally explored the effect of resetting on OPAC2 . We found resetting to not be beneficial,
and in fact typically be detrimental, to the learning of OPAC2 in Safety Gym. This makes sense,
considering that OPAC2 has fairly accurate value estimates to begin with. Any small gains in value
estimation accuracy provided by resetting are not sufficient to overcome its disruptive effects on
network training.


 Figure 10: Resetting is not found to be beneficial for OPAC2 , and in fact is typically detrimental.


D.2   E NTROPY R EGULARIZATION S TRATEGIES


Below we plot the effect of different entropy regularization strategies in the DoggoButton2 and
DoggoGoal2 environments. While not shown here, we found these trends to be consistent in the
CarButton2 and PointButton2 environments.


                                                 18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 11: Different entropy regularization strategies on Doggo environments. Our entropy bonus
consistently, though sometimes narrowly, outperforms maximum entropy and no entropy regular-
ization in these environments.


D.3    J USTIFYING T WO Qc N ETWORKS


We found 2 Qc networks to provide enhanced constrained learning for both SAC and TD3. We
used this for the results in the main text in order to give the baselines the best chance at performing
well. While the gap was larger in some environments than others, we always observed at least some
improvement through the addition of an extra Qc network, for both algorithms.


Figure 12: Comparison of positive reward accumulation in constrained learning. In all cases, cost
plots were qualitatively similar. Top row: comparison using SAC. Bottom row: comparison using
TD3.


E     A DDITIONAL C ONSTRAINED R ESULTS : S AFETY G YM


Here we include additional reward and cost results from Safety Gym. As mentioned in the main
text, OPAC2 was able to match specified cost levels in every environment tested, while providing
higher positive rewards than other methods.


                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 13: Additional results from constrained learning experiments from Safety Gym. Top rows:
reward accumulated by agents. Bottom rows: cost converges to the target level (yellow). Note that
reward accumulation initially increases sharply while β, the penalty weighting, is low. It dips and
then rises again as performance is optimized at the appropriate cost level.


We additionally provide a few extra plots reflecting the superior ability of OPAC2 to mitigate vali-
dation TD error for both cost and reward in constrained learning, compared to SAC and TD3.


                                                20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 14: Top row: Validation TD error for reward in constrained learning. Bottom row: Valida-
tion TD error for cost in constrained learning.


F   A DDITIONAL U NCONSTRAINED R ESULTS : D EEP M IND C ONTROL


For completeness, we include the learning curves for our evaluation of OPAC2 , SAC, and TD3 in
each of the 10 DeepMind Control Suite environments we tested. We also provide an overall average
plot, across the 10 environments.


        Figure 15: Per-environment results for 10 tasks from the DeepMind Control Suite.


                                              21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 16: Overall average performance of SAC, TD3, and OPAC2 on 10 tasks from the DeepMind
control suite.


                                             22
