Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


O N THE F OUNDATIONS OF S HORTCUT L EARNING
    Katherine L. Hermann1 , Hossein Mobahi2 , Thomas Fel1 , and Michael C. Mozer1
 Google {1 DeepMind, 2 Research}, Mountain View, CA, USA
 {hermannk, hmobahi, thomasfel, mcmozer}@google.com



                                             A BSTRACT
          Deep-learning models can extract a rich assortment of features from data. Which
          features a model uses depends not only on predictivity—how reliably a feature
          indicates training-set labels—but also on availability—how easily the feature can
          be extracted from inputs. The literature on shortcut learning has noted examples in
          which models privilege one feature over another, for example texture over shape
          and image backgrounds over foreground objects. Here, we test hypotheses about
          which input properties are more available to a model, and systematically study how
          predictivity and availability interact to shape models’ feature use. We construct
          a minimal, explicit generative framework for synthesizing classification datasets
          with two latent features that vary in predictivity and in factors we hypothesize to
          relate to availability, and we quantify a model’s shortcut bias—its over-reliance
          on the shortcut (more available, less predictive) feature at the expense of the core
          (less available, more predictive) feature. We find that linear models are relatively
          unbiased, but introducing a single hidden layer with ReLU or Tanh units yields
          a bias. Our empirical findings are consistent with a theoretical account based on
          Neural Tangent Kernels. Finally, we study how models used in practice trade
          off predictivity and availability in naturalistic datasets, discovering availability
          manipulations which increase models’ degree of shortcut bias. Taken together,
          these findings suggest that the propensity to learn shortcut features is a fundamental
          characteristic of deep nonlinear architectures warranting systematic study given its
          role in shaping how models solve tasks.


1     I NTRODUCTION
Natural data domains provide a rich, high-dimensional input from which deep-learning models can
extract a variety of candidate features. During training, models determine which features to rely
on. Following training, the chosen features determine how models generalize. A challenge for
machine learning arises when models come to rely on spurious or shortcut features instead of the
core or defining features of a domain (Arjovsky et al., 2019; McCoy et al., 2019; Geirhos et al., 2020;
Singla & Feizi, 2022). Shortcut “cheat” features, which are correlated with core “true” features in
the training set, obtain good performance on the training set as well as on an iid test set, but poor
generalization on out-of-distribution inputs. For instance, ImageNet-trained CNNs classify primarily
according to an object’s texture (Baker et al., 2018; Geirhos et al., 2018a; Hermann et al., 2020),
whereas people define and classify solid objects by shape (e.g., Landau et al., 1988). Focusing on
texture leads to reliable classification on many images but might result in misclassification of, say,
a hairless cat, which has wrinkly skin more like that of an elephant. The terms “spurious” and
“shortcut” are largely synonymous in the literature, although the former often refers to features that
arise unintentionally in a poorly constructed dataset, and the latter to features easily latched onto by a
model. In addition to a preference for texture over shape, other common shortcut features include
a propensity to classify based on image backgrounds rather than foreground objects (Beery et al.,
2018; Sagawa et al., 2020a; Xiao et al., 2020; Moayeri et al., 2022), or based on individual diagnostic
pixels rather than higher-order image content (Malhotra et al., 2020).
The literature examining feature use has often focused on predictivity—how well a feature indicates
the target output. Anomalies have been identified in which networks come to rely systematically on
one feature over another when the features are equally predictive, or even when the preferred feature
has lower predictivity than the non-preferred feature (Beery et al., 2018; Pérez et al., 2018; Tachet


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


et al., 2018; Arjovsky et al., 2019; McCoy et al., 2019; Hermann & Lampinen, 2020; Shah et al.,
2020; Nagarajan et al., 2020; Pezeshki et al., 2021; Fel et al., 2023). Although we lack a general
understanding of the cause of such preference anomalies, several specific cases have been identified.
For example, features that are linearly related to classification labels are preferred by models over
features that require nonlinear transforms (Hermann & Lampinen, 2020; Shah et al., 2020). Another
factor leading to anomalous feature preferences is the redundancy of representation, e.g., the size of
the pixel footprint in an image (Sagawa et al., 2020a; Wolff & Wolff, 2022; Tartaglini et al., 2022).
Because predictivity alone is insufficient to explain feature reliance, here we explicitly introduce
the notion of availability to refer to the factors that influence the likelihood that a model will use a
feature more so than a purely statistical account would predict. A more-available feature is easier for
the model to extract and leverage. Past research has systemtically manipulated predictivity; in the
present work, we systematically manipulate both predictivity and availability to better understand
their interaction and to characterize conditions giving rise to shortcut learning. Our contributions are:

       • We define quantitative measures of predictivity and availability using a generative framework
         that allows us to synthesize classification datasets with latent features having specified
         predictivity and availability. We introduce two notions of availability relating to singular
         values and nonlinearity of the data generating process, and we quantify shortcut bias in
         terms of how a learned classifier deviates from an optimal classifier in its feature reliance.
       • We perform parametric studies of latent-feature predictivity and availability, and examine
         the sensitivity of different model architectures to shortcut bias, finding that it is greater for
         nonlinear models than linear models, and that model depth amplifies bias.
       • We present a theoretical account based on Neural Tangent Kernels (Jacot et al., 2018) which
         indicates that shortcut bias is an inevitable consequence of nonlinear architectures.
       • We show that vision architectures used in practice can be sensitive to non-core features
         beyond their predictive value, and show a set of availability manipulations of naturalistic
         images which push around models’ feature reliance.

2    R ELATED WORK

The propensity of models to learn spurious (Arjovsky et al., 2019) or shortcut (Geirhos et al., 2020)
features arises in a variety of domains (Heuer et al., 2016; Gururangan et al., 2018; McCoy et al.,
2019; Sagawa et al., 2020a) and is of interest from both a scientific and practical perspective. Existing
work has sought to understand the extent to which this tendency derives from the statistics of the
training data versus from model inductive bias (Neyshabur et al., 2014; Tachet et al., 2018; Pérez et al.,
2018; Rahaman et al., 2019; Arora et al., 2019; Geirhos et al., 2020; Sagawa et al., 2020b;a; Pezeshki
et al., 2021; Nagarajan et al., 2021), for example a bias to learn simple functions (Tachet et al., 2018;
Pérez et al., 2018; Rahaman et al., 2019; Arora et al., 2019). Hermann & Lampinen (2020) found that
models preferentially represent one of a pair of equally predictive image features, typically whichever
feature had been most linearly decodable from the model at initialization. They also identified cases
where models relied on a less-predictive feature that had a linear relationship to task labels over a
more-predictive feature that had a nonlinear relationship to labels. Together, these findings suggest
that predictivity alone is not the only factor that determines model representations and behavior. A
theoretical account by Pezeshki et al. (2021) studied a situation in supervised learning in which
minimizing cross-entropy loss captures only a subset of predictive features, while other relevant
features go unnoticed. They introduced a formal notion of strength that determines which features
are likely to dominate a solution. Their notion of strength confounds predictivity and availability, the
two concepts which we aim to disengangle in the present work.
Work in the vision domain has studied which features vision models rely on when trained on natural
image datasets. For example, ImageNet models prefer to classify based on texture rather than shape
(Baker et al., 2018; Geirhos et al., 2018a; Hermann et al., 2020) and local rather than global image
content (Baker et al., 2020; Malhotra et al., 2020), marking a difference from how people classify
images (Landau et al., 1988; Baker et al., 2018). Other studies have found that image backgrounds
play an outsize role in driving model predictions (Beery et al., 2018; Sagawa et al., 2020a; Xiao et al.,
2020). Two studies manipulated the quantity of a feature in an image to test how this changed model
behavior. Tartaglini et al. (2022) probed pretrained models with images containing a shape consistent


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Synthetic data. A: Two datasets differing in the predictivity of zs . B: Schematic of the
embedding procedure manipulating availability via the mapping from z to x. Dashed boxes are
optional.


with one class label and a texture consistent with another, where the texture was present throughout
the image, including in the background. They varied the opacity of the background, and as the the
texture became less salient, models increasingly classified by shape. Wolff & Wolff (2022) found that
when images had objects with opposing labels, models preferred to classify by the object with the
larger pixel footprint, an idea we return to in Section 5. The development of methods for reducing
bias for particular features over others is an active area (e.g. Arjovsky et al., 2019; Geirhos et al.,
2018a; Hermann et al., 2020; Robinson et al., 2021; Minderer et al., 2020; Sagawa et al., 2020b;
Ryali et al., 2021; Kirichenko et al., 2022; Teney et al., 2022; Tiwari & Shenoy, 2023; Ahmadian &
Lindsten, 2023; Pezeshki et al., 2021; Puli et al., 2023; LaBonte et al., 2023), important for improving
generalization and addressing fairness concerns (Zhao et al., 2017; Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018).

3    G ENERATIVE PROCEDURE FOR SYNTHETIC DATASETS
To systematically explore the role of predictivity and availability, we construct synthetic datasets from
a generative procedure that maps a pair of latent features, z = (zs , zc ), to an input vector x ∈ Rd and
class label y ∈ {−1, +1}. The subscripts s and c denote the latent dimensions that will be treated
as the potential shortcut and core feature, respectively. The procedure draws z from a multivariate
Gaussian conditioned on class,
                                                y µs      1 σsc
                                 z|y ∼ N              ,                ,
                                                y µc     σsc 1
with |σsc | < 1. Through symmetry, the optimal decision boundary for latent feature i is zi = 0,
                                         √ ρi−1
allowing us to define the feature predictivity    ≡ Pr(y = sign(zi )). For Gaussian likelihoods, this
predictivity is achieved by setting µi = 2 erf (2ρi − 1). Figure 1A shows sample latent-feature
distributions for ρc = 0.9 and two levels of ρs .
Availability manipulations. Given a latent vector z, we manipulate the hypothesized availability
(hereafter, simply availability) of each feature independently through an embedding procedure,
sketched in Figure 1B, that yields an input x ∈ Rd . We posit two factors that influence availability of
feature i, its amplification αi and its nesting ηi . Amplification αi is a scaling factor on an embedding,
ei = αi wi zi , where wi ∈ Rd is a feature-specific random unit vector. Amplification includes
manipulations of redundancy (replicating a feature) and magnitude (increasing a feature’s dynamic
range). Nesting ηi is a factor that determines ease of recovery of a latent feature from an embedding.
We assume a nonlinear, rank-preserving transform, e0i = fηi (e), where fηi is a fully connected,
random net with ηi ∈ N tanh layers in cascade. For ηi = 0, feature i remains in explicit form,
e0i = ei ; for ηi > 0, the feature is recoverable through an inversion of increasing complexity with ηi .
To complete the data generative process, we combine embeddings by summation: x = e0s + e0c .
Assessing shortcut bias. Given a synthetic dataset and a model trained on this dataset, we assess
the model’s reliance on the shortcut feature, i.e., the extent to which the model uses this feature as a
basis for classification decisions. When zc and zs are correlated (σsc > 0), some degree of reliance
on the shortcut feature is Bayes optimal (see orange dashed line in Figure 6B). Consequently, we
need to assess reliance relative to that of an optimal classifier. We perform this assessment in latent
space, where the Bayes optimal classifier can be found by linear discriminant analysis (LDA) (see


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Deep nonlinear models can prefer a less-predictive but more-available feature to a
more-predictive but less-available one. The color of each cell in the heatmap indicates the mean
bias of a model as a function of the availability and predictivity of the shortcut feature, zs . The inset
shows in faint coloring the decision surface for an optimal Bayes classifier (LDA) and a trained
model. Overlaid points are a subset of training instances. The model obtains a shortcut bias of 0.53.

Figure 2 inset). The shortcut bias is the reliance of a model on the shortcut feature over that of the
optimal, LDA:
                                 bias = reliancemodel − relianceoptimal .
Appendix C.1 describes and justifies our reliance measure in detail. For a given model M, whether
trained net or LDA, we probe over the latent space and determine for each probe z the binary
classification decision, ŷM(z) (see Figure 2). Shortcut reliance is the difference between the model’s
alignment (covariance) with decision boundaries based only on the shortcut and core features:
                                       X
                                   2                            X
                   relianceM =              ŷMi sign(zsi ) −       ŷMi sign(zci ) ,
                                  n      i                       i
where n is the number of probe items. Both the reliance score and shortcut bias are in [−1, +1].

4    E XPERIMENTS MANIPULATING FEATURE PREDICTIVITY AND AVAILABILITY
Methodology. Using the procedure described in Section 3, we conduct controlled experiments
examining how feature availability and predictivity and model architecture affect the shortcut bias.
We sample class-balanced datasets with 3200 train instances, 1000 validation instances, and 900 probe
(evaluation) instances that uniformly cover the (zs , zc ) space by taking a Cartesian product of 30 zs
evenly spaced in [−3µs , +3µs ] and 30 zc evenly spaced in [−3µc , +3µc ]. In all simulations, we set
d = 100, ηc = ηs = 0, ρc = 0.9, σsc = 0.6. We manipulate shortcut-feature predictivity with the
constraint that it is lower than core-feature predictivity but still predictive, i.e., 0.5 < ρs < ρc = 0.9.
Because only the relative amplification of features matters, we vary the ratio αs /αc , with the shortcut
feature more available, i.e., αs /αc ≥ 1. We report the means across 10 runs (Appendix C.3).
Models prefer the more available feature, even when it is less predictive. We first test whether
models prefer zs when it is more available than zc , including when it is less predictive, while holding
model architecture fixed (see Appendix C.3). Figure 2 shows that when predictivity of the two
features is matched (ρc = ρs = 0.9), models prefer the more-available feature. And given sufficiently
high availability, models can prefer the less-predictive but more-available shortcut feature to the
more-predictive but less-available core feature. Availability can override predictivity.
Model depth increases shortcut bias. In the previous experiment, we used a fixed model architec-
ture. Here, we investigate how model depth and width influence shortcut bias when trained with
αs /αc = 64 and ρs = 0.85, previously shown to induce a bias (see Figure 2, gray square). As shown
in Figure 3A, we find that bias increases as a function of model depth when dataset is held fixed.
Model nonlinearity increases shortcut bias. To understand the role of the hidden-layer activation
function, we compare models with linear, ReLU, and Tanh activations while holding weight initializa-
tion and data fixed. As indicated in Figure 3B, nonlinear activation functions induce a larger shortcut
bias than their linear counterpart.


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: A: Model depth increases shortcut bias. The color of each cell indicates the mean bias
of an MLP with ReLU hidden activation-functions, for various model widths and depths, trained on
data with a shortcut feature that is more available (αs /αc = 64) but less predictive (ρs = 0.85) than
the core feature. Model nonlinearity increases shortcut bias. B: Shortcut bias for three hidden
activation functions for a deep MLP with width 128 and depth 2, trained on datasets where predictivity
is matched (ρs = ρc = 0.9), but shortcut availability is higher (αs /αc = 32). A shortcut bias is more
pronounced when the model contains a nonlinear activation function. C: Shortcut bias for MLPs with
a single hidden layer and a hidden activation function that is either linear (left) or ReLU (right), for
various shortcut feature availabilities (αs /αc ) and predictivities (ρs ). See B.1 for Tanh.

          A                                  B                                  C


Figure 4: ResNet-18 prefers a shortcut feature when availability is instantiated as the pixel
footprint of an object (feature), even when that feature is less predictive. A: Sample images. B:
Shortcut bias increases as a function of relative availability of the shortcut feature when features
are equally predictive (ρs = ρc = 0.9), consistent with Wolff & Wolff (2022). C: Even when the
shortcut feature is less predictive, models have a shortcut bias due to availability, when αs /αc = 4.


Feature nesting increases shortcut bias. The synthetic experiments reported above all manipulate
availability with the amplitude ratio αs /αc . We also conducted experiments manipulating a second
factor we expected would affect availability (Hermann & Lampinen, 2020; Shah et al., 2020), the
relative nesting of representations, i.e., ηc − ηs ≥ 1. We report these experiments in Appendix C.3.


5    AVAILABILITY MANIPULATIONS WITH SYNTHETIC IMAGES

What if we instantiate the same latent feature space studied in the previous section in images? We
form shortcut features that are analogous to texture or image background—features previously noted
to preferentially drive the behavior of vision models (e.g. Geirhos et al., 2018a; Baker et al., 2018;
Hermann et al., 2020; Beery et al., 2018; Sagawa et al., 2020a; Xiao et al., 2020). Building on the
work of Wolff & Wolff (2022), we hypothesize that these features are more available because they
have a large footprint in an image, and hence, by our notions of availability, a large αs .
Methods. We instantiate a latent vector z from our data-generation procedure as an image. Each
feature becomes an object (zs a circle, zc a square) whose color is determined by the respective
feature value. Following Wolff & Wolff (2022), we manipulate the availability of each feature in
terms of its size, or pixel footprint. We randomly position the circle and square entirely within the
image, avoiding overlap, yielding a 224 × 224 pixel image (Figure 4A, Appendix C.4).
Results. Figure 4B presents the shortcut bias in ResNet18 as a function of shortcut-feature availability
(footprint) when the two features are equally predictive (ρs = ρc = 0.9). In Figure 4C, the availability


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ratio is fixed at αs /αc = 4, and the shortcut bias is assessed as a function of ρs . ResNet18 is biased
toward the more available shortcut feature even when it is less predictive than the core feature.
Together, these results suggest that a simple characteristic of image contents—the pixel footprint
of an object—can bias models’ output behavior, and may therefore explain why models can fail to
leverage typically-smaller foreground objects in favor of image backgrounds (Section 7).

6    T HEORETICAL ACCOUNT
In our empirical investigations, we quantified the extent to which a trained model deviates from a
statistically optimal classifier in its reliance on the more-available feature using a measure which
considered the basis for probe-instance classifications. Here, we use an alternative approach of
studying the sensitivity of a Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) (Jacot et al., 2018) to the availability of a
feature. The resulting form presents a crisp perspective of how predictivity and availability interact.
In particular, we prove that availability bias is absent in linear networks but present in ReLU networks.
The proof for the theorems of this section is given in the Supplementary Materials.
For tractability of the analysis, we consider a few simplifying assumptions. We focus on 2-layer fully
connected architectures for which the kernel of the ReLU networks admits a simple closed form.
In addition, to be able to compute integrations that arise in the analysis, we resort to an asymptotic
approximation which assumes covariance matrix is small. Specifically, we represent the covariance
matrix as s [ 1 , σ12 ; σ12 , 1 ], where the scale parameter s > 0 is considered to be small. Finally, in
order to handle the analysis for a ReLU kernel, we will use a polynomial approximation.
Kernel Spectrum. Consider a two-layer network with the first layer having a possibly nonlin-
ear activation function. When the width of this model gets large, learning of this model can be
approximated by a kernel regression problem, with a given kernel function k( . , . ) that depends
on the architecture and the activation function. Given a distribution over the input data p(x), we
define a (linear)
          R       kernel operator as one that acts on a function f to produce another function g as in
g(x) = Rn k(x, z) f (z) p(z) dz. This allows us to define an eigenfunction φ of the kernel operator
as one that satisfies,                      R
                                λ φ(x) = Rn k(x, z) φ(z) p(z) dz .                                 (1)
The value of λ will be the eigenvalue of that eigenfunction when the eigenfunction φ is normalized as
     φ2 (x) p(x) dx = 1 .
R
  Rn

Form of p(z). Recall that in our generative dataset framework, we have a pair of latent features
zc and zs that are embedded into a high dimensional space via xd×1 = αs zs ws + αc zc wc =
U d×2 A2×2 z 2×1 . With this expression, we switch terminology such that our wi → U and αi →
A, and therefore A is diagonal matrix with positive diagonal entries, and the columns of U are
(approximately) orthonormal. Henceforth, we also refer to features with indices 1 and 2 instead of s
and c. An implication of orthonormal columns on U is that the dot product of any two input vectors
x and x† will be independent of U , i.e., hx, x† i = hAz, Az † i. Consequently, we can compute dot
products in the original 2-dimensional space instead of in the d-dimensional embedding space. On
the other hand, we will later see that the kernel function k(x1 , x2 ) of the two cases we study here
(ReLU and linear) depends on their input only through the dot product hx1 , x2 i and norms kx1 k and
kx2 k (self dot products). Thus, the kernel is entirely invariant to U and without loss of generality,
we can consider the input to the model as x = Az. Therefore,

                a1 µ1       a21     a1 a2 σ12       −              a1 µ1       a21     a1 a2 σ12
  x+ ∼ N               ,                         , x   ∼  N    −          ,                         .
                a2 µ2    a1 a2 σ12      a22                        a2 µ2    a1 a2 σ12     a22

Linear kernel function. If the activation function is linear, then the kernel function simply becomes
a standard dot product,
                                      k(x1 , x2 ) , hx1 , x2 i .                                   (2)
The following theorem provides details about the spectrum of this kernel.

Theorem 1 Consider the kernel function k(x1 , x2 ) , hx1 , x2 i. The kernel operator associated
with k under the data distribution p specified above has only one non-zero eigenvalue λ = kAµk2
and its eigenfunction has the form φ(x) = hAµ,xi
                                             kAµk2 .


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ReLU kernel function. If the activation function is set to be a ReLU, then the kernel function is
known to have the following
                           form (Cho & Saul,
                                             2009; Bietti & Bach, 2020):                !
                                              x1    x2                                         1                  p
   k(x1 , x2 ) , kx1 k kx2 k h                    ,                          , h(u) ,            u π − arccos(u) + 1 − u2                           .       (3)
                                             kx1 k kx2 k                                       π

 In order to obtain an analytical form for the eigenfunctions of the kernel under the considered
                                                                                      815
data distribution, we resort to a quadratic approximation of h by b  h as bh(u) , 3072    (1 + u)2 . This
approximation enjoys certain optimality criteria. Derivation details of this quadratic form are provided
in the Supplementary Materials, as is a plot showing the quality of the approximation. We now focus
on spectral characteristics of the approximate ReLU kernel. Replacing h in the kernel function k of
Equation 3 with bh, we obtain an alternative kernel function approximation for ReLUs:
                                     D           E                          D          E 2
            k(x, z) , kxk kzk b    h kxkx     z
                                           , kzk    = kxk kzk a∗ 1 + kxk       x    z
                                                                                 , kzk      .         (4)
The following theorem characterizes the spectrum of this kernel.
                                                                     D          E 2
Theorem 2 Consider the kernel function k(x, z) , kxk kzk a∗ 1 + kxk     x    z
                                                                          , kzk     . The kernel
operator associated with k under the data distribution p specified above has only two non-zero
eigenvalues λ1 = λ2 = 2a∗ kAµk2 with associated eigenfunctions given by
                                               2
                           kxk 1+h kxk , kAµk i
                                    x     Aµ                   D            E
                                                                   x    Aµ
                φ1 (x) = kAµk         2          and φ 2 (x) =   kAµk kAµk .
                                                                     ,

6.1     S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS
We now assign a target value y(x) to each input point
                                                    P x. ByRexpressing the kernel operator using
its eigenfunctions, it is easy to show that f (x) =    i (φi (x) Rn φi (z) y(z) p(z) dz) where i runs
over non-zero eigenvalues λi of the kernel operator (see also Appendix G). We now restrict our focus
to a binary classification scenario, y : X → {0, 1}. More precisely, we replace p with our Gaussian
mixture and set y(x) to 1 and 0 depending on whether x is drawn from the positive or negative
component of the mixture.
             P         1                +         1                −

                                                                              = 12 i φi (x)φi (Aµ) ,
                         R                          R                             P
 f (x) =      i φi (x) 2 R2 φi (z) (1) p (z) dz + 2 R2 φi (z) (0) p (z) dz


 where p+ and p− denote class-conditional normal distributions. Now let us tweak the availability
of each feature by a diagonal scaling matrix B , diag(b) where b , [b1 , b2 ]. Denote the modified
prediction function as gB . That is, gB (x) , 12 i φi (x)φi (BAµ). The alignment between f and
                                                P
g is their normalized dot product,
                       γ(b) , R2 √R f2(x)          √ R gB  (x)
                               R
                                                         2
                                                                 p(x) dx .                     (5)
                                                              R2
                                                                   f (t)p(t) dt          R2
                                                                                              gB (t)p(t) dt

We define the sensitivity of the alignment to feature i for i = 1, 2 as its m’th order derivative of γ
w.r.t. bi evaluated at b = 1 (which leads to identity scale factor B = I),

                 ∂m                    ∂m
                                                                   P                                      P
                                                                       i φi (x)φi (Aµ)                        i φi (x)φi (BAµ)
                                             R
      ζi ,       ∂bm
                     γ         =       ∂bm       R2
                                                      r                                    2        r                             2        dx           .
                   i     b=1             i                R         P                                R    P                                     b=1
                                                          R2            i φi (x)φi (Aµ)        dt    R2        i φi (x)φi (BAµ)       dt


ζi indicates how much the model relies on feature i to make a prediction. In particular, if whenever
feature i is more available than feature j, i.e. ai > aj , we also see the model is more sensitive to
feature i than feature j, i.e. |ζi | > |ζj |, the model is biased toward the more-available feature. In
addition, when ai < aj but |ζi | > |ζj |, the bias is toward
                                                              the less-available feature. One can express
the presence of these biases more concisely as sign (|ζ1 | − |ζ2 |)(a1 − a2 ) , where values of +1 and
−1 indicate bias toward more- and less- available features, respectively. To verify either of these two
cases via sensitivity, we must choose the lowest order m that yields a non-zero |ζ1 | − |ζ2 |. On the
other hand, if |ζ1 | − |ζ2 | = 0 for any choice of a1 and a2 , the model is unbiased to feature availability.
The following theorems now show that linear networks are unbiased to feature availability, while
ReLU networks are biased toward more available features.

Theorem 3 In a linear network, |ζ1 | − |ζ2 | is always zero for any choice of m ≥ 1 and regardless of
the values of a1 and a2 .


                                                                               7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      µ2 = 0.1             µ2 = 0.5           µ2 = 1            µ2 = 2            µ2 = 10
Figure 5: Plot of sign((|ζ1 | − |ζ2 |)(a1 − a2 )) for ReLU network as a function of a1 and a2 . We fix µ1 = 1
and vary µ2 ∈ {0.1, 0.5, 1, 2, 10}. Yellow and blue correspond to values +1 and −1 respectively.


Theorem 4 In a ReLU network, |ζ1 | − |ζ2 | = 0 for any 1 ≤ m ≤ 8. The first non-zero |ζ1 | − |ζ2 |
happens at m = 9 and has the following form,
                                      5670
                     |ζ1 | − |ζ2 | =         (a1 a2 µ1 µ2 )8 (a21 µ21 − a22 µ22 ) .           (6)
                                     kAµk18
A straightforward consequence of this theorem is that
                                            5670                  8 2 2      2 2

                                                                                                       2 2     2 2

 sign (|ζ1 | − |ζ2 |)(a1 − a2 ) = sign              (a1 a2 µ1 µ2 ) (a1 µ1 − a2 µ2 )(a1 − a2 ) = sign (a1 µ1 − a2 µ2 )(a1 − a2 ) . (7)
                                           kAµk18
                                                                                           µi
 Recall from Section 3 that feature predictivity ρi is related to µi via ρi = 12 (1 + erf( √ 2
                                                                                               )). Observe
that ρi is an increasing function in µi ; thus, bigger µi implies larger ρi . That together with (7)
provides a crisp interpretation of the trade-off between predictivity and availability. For example,
when the latent features are equally predictive (µ1 = µ2 ), the sign becomes +1 for any (non-negative)
choice of availability parameters a1 and a2 . Thus, for equally predictive features, the ReLU networks
are always biased toward the more available feature. Figure 5 shows some more examples with
certain levels of predictivity. The coloring indicates the direction of the availability bias (only the
boundaries between the blue and the yellow regions have no availability bias).

7    F EATURE AVAILABILITY IN NATURALISTIC DATASETS
We have seen that models trained on controlled, synthetic data are influenced by availability to learn
shortcuts when a nonlinear activation function is present. How do feature predictivity and availability
in naturalistic datasets interact to shape the behavior of models used in practice? To test this, we train
ResNet18 models (He et al., 2016) to classify naturalistic images by a binary core feature irrespective
of the value of a non-core feature. We construct two datasets by sampling images from Waterbirds
(Sagawa et al., 2020a) (core: Bird, non-core: Background), and CelebA (Liu et al., 2015) (core:
Attractive, non-core: Smiling). See C.5 for additional details.
Sensitivity to the non-core feature beyond a statistical account. Figures 6A and B show that,
for both datasets, as the training-set predictivity of the non-core feature increases, model accuracy
dramatically increases for congruent probes and decreases for incongruent ones. In contrast, a Bayes
optimal classifier is far less sensitive to the predictivity of the non-core feature. Thus, models are
more influenced by the non-core feature than what we would expected based solely on predictivity.
This heightened sensitivity implies that models prioritize the non-core feature more than they should,
given its predictive value. Thus, in the absence of predictivity as an explanatory factor, we conclude
that the non-core feature is more available than the core feature.
Availability manipulations. Motivated by the result that Background is more available to models
than the core Bird (Figure 6A), we test whether specific background manipulations (hypothesized
types of availability) shift model feature reliance. As shown in Figure 6C, we find that Bird accuracy
increases as we reduce the availability of the image background by manipulating its spatial extent
(Bird size, Background patch removal) or drop background color (Color), implicating these as among
the features that models latch onto in preferring image backgrounds (validated with explainability
analyses in C.5). Experiments in Figure B.9 show that this phenomenon also occurs in ImageNet-
pretrained models; background noise and spatial frequency manipulations also drive feature reliance.

8    C ONCLUSION
Shortcut learning is of both scientific and practical interest given its implications for how models
generalize. Why do some features become shortcut features? Here, we introduced the notion of


                                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 6: Availability as well as predictivity determines which features image classifiers rely on.
A: Models (ResNet18) were trained to classify Birds from images sampled from Waterbirds. We
varied Background (non-core) predictivity while keeping Bird (core) predictivity fixed (= 0.99), and
show Bird classification accuracy for two types of probes: congruent (blue, core and non-core features
support the same label) and incongruent (orange, core and non-core features support opposing labels).
As Background predictivity increases, the gap in accuracy between incongruent and congruent probes
also increases. The model is more sensitive to the non-core feature than expected by a Bayes-optimal
classifier (optimal): predictivity alone does not explain the model’s behavior. B: Similar to the
Waterbirds dataset, models trained to classify images from CelebA as “Attractive” exhibit an effect
of “Smiling” availability. C: Bird accuracy for incongruent Waterbirds probes is influenced by both
Background predictivity (ρ) and availability when we manipulate the latter explicitly (see also B.9).



availability and conducted studies systematically varying availability. We proposed a generative
framework that allows for independent manipulation of predictivity and availability of latent features.
Testing hypotheses about the contributions of each to model behavior, we find that for both vector
and image classification tasks, deep nonlinear models exhibit a shortcut bias, deviating from the
statistically optimal classifier in their feature reliance. We provided a theoretical account which
indicates the inevitability of a shortcut bias for a single-hidden-layer nonlinear (ReLU) MLP but
not a linear one. The theory specifies the exact interaction between predictivity and availability, and
consistent with our empirical studies, predicts that availability can trump predictivity. In naturalistic
datasets, vision architectures used in practice rely on non-core features more than they should on
statistical grounds alone. Connecting with prior work identifying availability biases for texture and
image background, we explicitly manipulated background properties such as spatial extent, color,
and spatial frequency and found that they influence a model’s propensity to learn shortcuts.
Taken together, our empirical and theoretical findings highlight that models used in practice are prone
to shortcut learning, and that to understand model behavior, one must consider the contributions
of both feature predictivity and availability. Future work will study shortcut features in additional
domains, and develop methods for automatically discovering further shortcut features which drive
model behavior. The generative framework we have laid out will support a systematic investigation
of architectural manipulations which may influence shortcut learning.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Pieter-Jan Kindermans for feedback on the manuscript, and Jaehoon Lee, Lechao Xiao,
Robert Geirhos, Olivia Wiles, Isabelle Guyon, and Roman Novak for interesting discussions.

R EFERENCES
Amirhossein Ahmadian and Fredrik Lindsten. Enhancing representation learning with deep classifiers
 in presence of shortcut. In ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech
 and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 1–5. IEEE, 2023.
Martin Arjovsky, Léon Bottou, Ishaan Gulrajani, and David Lopez-Paz. Invariant risk minimization.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.02893, 2019.
Sanjeev Arora, Nadav Cohen, Wei Hu, and Yuping Luo. Implicit regularization in deep matrix
  factorization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Nicholas Baker, Hongjing Lu, Gennady Erlikhman, and Philip J Kellman. Deep convolutional
  networks do not classify based on global object shape. PLoS computational biology, 14(12):
  e1006613, 2018.
Nicholas Baker, Hongjing Lu, Gennady Erlikhman, and Philip J Kellman. Local features and global
  shape information in object classification by deep convolutional neural networks. Vision research,
  172:46–61, 2020.
Sara Beery, Grant Van Horn, and Pietro Perona. Recognition in terra incognita. In Proceedings of the
  European conference on computer vision (ECCV), pp. 456–473, 2018.
Alberto Bietti and Francis R. Bach. Deep equals shallow for relu networks in kernel regimes. ArXiv,
  abs/2009.14397, 2020.
Joy Buolamwini and Timnit Gebru. Gender shades: Intersectional accuracy disparities in commercial
  gender classification. In Conference on fairness, accountability and transparency, pp. 77–91.
  PMLR, 2018.
Youngmin Cho and Lawrence Saul. Kernel methods for deep learning. In Y. Bengio, D. Schuurmans,
  J. Lafferty, C. Williams, and A. Culotta (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 22. Curran Associates, Inc., 2009.
Thomas Fel, Remi Cadene, Mathieu Chalvidal, Matthieu Cord, David Vigouroux, and Thomas Serre.
  Look at the variance! efficient black-box explanations with sobol-based sensitivity analysis. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Thomas Fel, Victor Boutin, Mazda Moayeri, Rémi Cadène, Louis Bethune, Mathieu Chalvidal,
  Thomas Serre, et al. A holistic approach to unifying automatic concept extraction and concept
  importance estimation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023.
Robert Geirhos, Patricia Rubisch, Claudio Michaelis, Matthias Bethge, Felix A Wichmann, and
  Wieland Brendel. Imagenet-trained cnns are biased towards texture; increasing shape bias improves
  accuracy and robustness. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.12231, 2018a.
Robert Geirhos, Carlos RM Temme, Jonas Rauber, Heiko H Schütt, Matthias Bethge, and Felix A
  Wichmann. Generalisation in humans and deep neural networks. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 31, 2018b.
Robert Geirhos, Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen, Claudio Michaelis, Richard Zemel, Wieland Brendel, Matthias
  Bethge, and Felix A Wichmann. Shortcut learning in deep neural networks. Nature Machine
  Intelligence, 2(11):665–673, 2020.
Suchin Gururangan, Swabha Swayamdipta, Omer Levy, Roy Schwartz, Samuel R Bowman,
  and Noah A Smith. Annotation artifacts in natural language inference data. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1803.02324, 2018.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 770–778, 2016.
Katherine Hermann and Andrew Lampinen. What shapes feature representations? exploring datasets,
  architectures, and training. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:9995–10006,
  2020.
Katherine Hermann, Ting Chen, and Simon Kornblith. The origins and prevalence of texture
  bias in convolutional neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
 19000–19015, 2020.
Hendrik Heuer, Christof Monz, and Arnold WM Smeulders. Generating captions without looking
  beyond objects. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.03708, 2016.
Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clément Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and
  generalization in neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Jason Jo and Yoshua Bengio. Measuring the tendency of cnns to learn surface statistical regularities.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.11561, 2017.
Polina Kirichenko, Pavel Izmailov, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. Last layer re-training is sufficient
  for robustness to spurious correlations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02937, 2022.
Tyler LaBonte, Vidya Muthukumar, and Abhishek Kumar. Towards last-layer retraining for group
  robustness with fewer annotations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.08534, 2023.
Barbara Landau, Linda B Smith, and Susan S Jones. The importance of shape in early lexical learning.
  Cognitive development, 3(3):299–321, 1988.
Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep learning face attributes in the wild. In
  Proceedings of International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), December 2015.
Gaurav Malhotra, Benjamin D Evans, and Jeffrey S Bowers. Hiding a plane with a pixel: examining
  shape-bias in cnns and the benefit of building in biological constraints. Vision Research, 174:
  57–68, 2020.
R Thomas McCoy, Ellie Pavlick, and Tal Linzen. Right for the wrong reasons: Diagnosing syntactic
  heuristics in natural language inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.01007, 2019.
Matthias Minderer, Olivier Bachem, Neil Houlsby, and Michael Tschannen. Automatic shortcut
 removal for self-supervised representation learning. In International Conference on Machine
 Learning, pp. 6927–6937. PMLR, 2020.
Mazda Moayeri, Phillip Pope, Yogesh Balaji, and Soheil Feizi. A comprehensive study of image
 classification model sensitivity to foregrounds, backgrounds, and visual attributes. In Proceedings
 of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022.
Vaishnavh Nagarajan, Anders Andreassen, and Behnam Neyshabur. Understanding the failure modes
  of out-of-distribution generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.15775, 2020.
Vaishnavh Nagarajan, Anders Andreassen, and Behnam Neyshabur. Understanding the failure modes
  of out-of-distribution generalization. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2021.
Behnam Neyshabur, Ryota Tomioka, and Nathan Srebro. In search of the real inductive bias: On the
  role of implicit regularization in deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6614, 2014.
Guillermo Valle Pérez, Chico Q Camargo, and Ard A Louis. Deep learning generalizes because the
  parameter-function map is biased towards simple functions. stat, 1050:23, 2018.
Vitali Petsiuk, Abir Das, and Kate Saenko. Rise: Randomized input sampling for explanation of
  black-box models. In Proceedings of the British Machine Vision Conference (BMVC), 2018.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Mohammad Pezeshki, Oumar Kaba, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron C Courville, Doina Precup, and Guil-
 laume Lajoie. Gradient starvation: A learning proclivity in neural networks. Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 34:1256–1272, 2021.
Aahlad Puli, Lily Zhang, Yoav Wald, and Rajesh Ranganath. Don’t blame dataset shift! shortcut
  learning due to gradients and cross entropy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12553, 2023.
Nasim Rahaman, Aristide Baratin, Devansh Arpit, Felix Draxler, Min Lin, Fred Hamprecht, Yoshua
  Bengio, and Aaron Courville. On the spectral bias of neural networks. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 5301–5310. PMLR, 2019.
Joshua Robinson, Li Sun, Ke Yu, Kayhan Batmanghelich, Stefanie Jegelka, and Suvrit Sra. Can
  contrastive learning avoid shortcut solutions? Advances in neural information processing systems,
  34:4974–4986, 2021.
Chaitanya K Ryali, David J Schwab, and Ari S Morcos. Characterizing and improving the robustness
  of self-supervised learning through background augmentations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.12719,
  2021.
Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Tatsunori B Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Distributionally robust
  neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020a.
Shiori Sagawa, Aditi Raghunathan, Pang Wei Koh, and Percy Liang. An investigation of why
  overparameterization exacerbates spurious correlations. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 8346–8356. PMLR, 2020b.
Harshay Shah, Kaustav Tamuly, Aditi Raghunathan, Prateek Jain, and Praneeth Netrapalli. The
  pitfalls of simplicity bias in neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  33:9573–9585, 2020.
Sahil Singla and Soheil Feizi. Salient imagenet: How to discover spurious features in deep learning?
  In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022.
Daniel Smilkov, Nikhil Thorat, Been Kim, Fernanda Viégas, and Martin Wattenberg. Smoothgrad:
  removing noise by adding noise. In Workshop on Visualization for Deep Learning, Proceedings of
  the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2017.
Ajay Subramanian, Elena Sizikova, Najib J Majaj, and Denis G Pelli. Spatial-frequency channels,
  shape bias, and adversarial robustness. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.13190, 2023.
Remi Tachet, Mohammad Pezeshki, Samira Shabanian, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. On the
  learning dynamics of deep neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.06848, 2018.
Alexa R Tartaglini, Wai Keen Vong, and Brenden M Lake. A developmentally-inspired examination
  of shape versus texture bias in machines. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.08340, 2022.
Damien Teney, Ehsan Abbasnejad, Simon Lucey, and Anton Van den Hengel. Evading the simplicity
  bias: Training a diverse set of models discovers solutions with superior ood generalization. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
 16761–16772, 2022.
Rishabh Tiwari and Pradeep Shenoy. Sifer: Overcoming simplicity bias in deep networks using a
  feature sieve. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.13293, 2023.
Yusuke Tsuzuku and Issei Sato. On the structural sensitivity of deep convolutional networks to the
  directions of fourier basis functions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 51–60, 2019.
Catherine Wah, Steve Branson, Peter Welinder, Pietro Perona, and Serge Belongie. The caltech-ucsd
  birds-200-2011 dataset. Technical report, California Institute of Technology, 2011.
Max Wolff and Stuart Wolff. Signal strength and noise drive feature preference in cnn image
 classifiers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.08893, 2022.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Kai Xiao, Logan Engstrom, Andrew Ilyas, and Aleksander Madry. Noise or signal: The role of image
  backgrounds in object recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.09994, 2020.
Dong Yin, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Jon Shlens, Ekin Dogus Cubuk, and Justin Gilmer. A fourier
  perspective on model robustness in computer vision. Advances in Neural Information Processing
 Systems, 32, 2019.
Matthew D Zeiler and Rob Fergus. Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks. In
 Proceedings of the IEEE European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2014.
Jieyu Zhao, Tianlu Wang, Mark Yatskar, Vicente Ordonez, and Kai-Wei Chang. Men also like
   shopping: Reducing gender bias amplification using corpus-level constraints. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1707.09457, 2017.
Bolei Zhou, Agata Lapedriza, Aditya Khosla, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. Places: A 10
  million image database for scene recognition. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine
  intelligence, 40(6):1452–1464, 2017.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       Supplementary Material for
                “On the Foundations of Shortcut Learning”

A    B ROADER IMPACTS
Our work aims to achieve a principled and fundamental understanding of the mechanisms of deep
learning—when it succeeds, when it fails, and why it fails. As the goal is to better understand existing
algorithms, there is no downside risk of the research. The upside benefit concerns cases of shortcut
learning which have been identified as socially problematic and where fairness issues are at play, for
example, the use of shortcut features such as gender or ethnicity that might be spuriously correlated
with a core feature (e.g., likelihood of default).

B    S UPPLEMENTARY FIGURES
Methods details accompanying these figures appear in Section C.


Figure B.1: Bias as a function of zs availability and predictivity for a single-hidden-layer MLP with
a tanh hidden-layer activation function. Settings match those described in Figure 3C.


Figure B.2: The zs -reliance (Sections 3 and C.1) of hypothetical classifiers which rely exclusively
on zs (top left) or zc (top right), or rely equally on both features (bottom row). Color indicates the
predicted label (red: pos, blue: neg) for probe items plotted by base probe (zs , zc ) values


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure B.3: Supplementary data for the results presented in Figure 2. T OP ROW: Model performance
on the train (left) and validation (right) sets. B OTTOM ROW: zs -reliance for the optimal classifier
(left) and models (right).


Figure B.4: The results shown in Figure 2 are not specific to choice of σsc . Results for the same
experiment using datasets with σsc = 0.4 (A) and σsc = 0.8 (B).


Figure B.5: Supplementary data for the results presented in Figure 3. Model performance on the train
(left) and validation (right) sets.



                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure B.6: Supplementary data for image experiments. Model performance underlying A: Experi-
ments with the Waterbirds datasets presented in Figure 6 and described in C.5, and B: Experiments
with image instantiations of the base dataset manipulating pixel footprint presented in Figure 4 B
(left) and C (right).


Figure B.7: Models prefer a shallowly embedded nonlinear feature (zs ) to a deeply embedded
nonlinear one (zc ). A: The color of each cell of the heatmap indicates the mean bias of models as a
function of the degree of nesting of zc (ηc ), and the predictivity of zs (ρs ). zs is always shallowly
embedded (ηs = 0), and the predictivity of zc is held fixed (ρc = 0.9). See C.3 for additional details.
B: Model performance. C:zs -reliance of the optimal classifier (left) versus the model (right).


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure B.8: Illustration of studied Background availability manipulations. For each of the six
perturbations influencing the availability of both the background and the bird (in the case of bird
scale), we provide visual representations of the potential perturbations applied to the training dataset.
For instance, the first row demonstrates variations in the dataset resulting from changes in bird size,
ranging from 5% to 95%.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure B.9: Manipulations of image backgrounds show that availability as well as predictivity
determines feature reliance in vision models, including in models pretrained on ImageNet.
Expanding on the results shown in Figure 6, we plot Bird accuracy for incongruent probes (opposing
Bird and Background labels) as a function of Background predictivity (ρ) and hypothesized types of
availability. T OP ROW: ResNet18 models. B OTTOM ROW: IN ResNet50 models (see Section C.5 for
additional details).


                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure B.10: Explainability sanity check: Attribution maps corroborate Background availabil-
ity study. In Figures 6 and B.9, we saw that a Bird size manipulation affects models’ tendency to
classify incongruent probes consistent with their Bird labels. Here, we see that attribution maps for
probe images (top row) reflect a difference in focal point for models trained on images with Bird size
= 40% (preference for image background) versus Bird size = 80% (preference for foreground bird).
See C.5 for additional details.


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C     S UPPLEMENTARY METHODS AND RESULTS
C.1    A SSESSING BIAS

In Section 3, we described how we determine relianceM , a score which quantifies the extent to which
a model (optimal classifier or trained model) uses feature zs as the basis for its classification decisions.
In Figure B.2, for intuition, we show the zs reliance of hypothetical classifiers.

C.2    S YNTHETIC DATA

Optimal classifier. To obtain optimal classifications, we use Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA,
as implemented in Sklearn with the least-squares solver). In all but the experiments on the effect
of nesting as part of the generative process (C.3 and Figure B.7), the optimal classifier was fit to
and probed with the same embedded base inputs used to train the corresponding model in a given
experiment. In the nesting experiments, LDA was fit to and probed with base inputs directly.

C.3    V ECTOR EXPERIMENTS

Default model architecture and training procedure. Unless otherwise described, we train a multi-
layer perceptron (MLP, depth = 8, width = 128, hidden activation function = ReLU) with MSE loss
for 100 epochs using an SGD optimizer with batch size = 64 and learning rate = 1e − 02. We use
Glorot Normal weight initialization.
Models prefer the more-available feature, even when it is less predictive. In these experiments,
given a base dataset with (ρs , ρc ), for each availability setting (αs , αc ), we manipulate the availability
of the dataset, sample a random intialization seed, train the default model architecture, and evaluate
the bias of the model. We repeat this process for each of 10 runs, computing the biases for individual
(model, optimal classifier) pairs, and then averaging the results.
Effect of nesting on availability. Figure 1B illustrates how our generative procedure for synthetic
datasets supports nested embedding of latent features, as described in Section 3. In this experiment,
we test whether a model prefers a shallowly embedded nonlinear feature (zs ) to a deeply embedded
nonlinear one (zc ) when the amplitude of both features is matched (αs = αc = 0.1) and the
nonlinearity is a scaled tanh (tanh(λx), with λ = 100). After embedding each feature as ei =
αi wi zi , we apply the nonlinearity. For a nesting factor ηi > 0, we pass ei through a fully connected
network (depth = ηi , width = d, no bias weights) with scaled tanh activations on the hidden and
output layers. We initialize weight matrices to be random special orthogonal matrices (implemented
as scipy.stats.special_ortho_group). In Figure B.7, we show bias as a function of ηc
and ρs ; zs is fixed to be shallowly embedded with ηs = 0 and has ρc = 0.9. We report the results as
the mean across 3 runs.

C.4    P IXEL FOOTPRINT EXPERIMENTS

Model architecture and training procedure. In these experiments, we train a randomly initialized
ResNet18 architecture with MSE loss using an Adam optimizer with batch size = 64 and learning
rate = 1e − 02, taking the best (defined on validation accuracy) across 100 epochs of training. For
each (ρs , ρc ) predictivity setting, we repeat this process for 10 (sampled dataset, random weight
initialization) runs.
Analyses. In Figure 4, we report results for experiments in which we use a base zs pixel footprint of
400 px, and manipulate zs pixel footprint to be 1 − 5× larger (αc = 1, αs ∈ [1, 5]). To determine the
bias of a model, we compute the zs -reliance of the trained model given image instantiations of the
base probe items, and compare to the zs -reliance of the optimal classifier (LDA) fit to and probed
using vector instantiations of the same base dataset with the same αs and αc . We repeat this process
for 5 runs, computing bias on a per-run basis as in Section C.3.

C.5    F EATURE AVAILABILITY IN NATURALISTIC DATASETS

Datasets. Waterbirds. Waterbirds images (Sagawa et al., 2020a) combine birds taken from the
Caltech-UCSD Birds-200-2011 dataset (Wah et al., 2011) and backgrounds from the Places dataset


                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(Zhou et al., 2017). To construct the datasets used in Figure 6A, we sample images from a base
Waterbirds dataset generated using code by (Sagawa et al., 2020a) (github.com/kohpangwei/
group_DRO) with val frac = 0.2 and confounder strength = 0.5, yielding sets of 5694
train images (224 × 224), 300 validation images, and 5794 test images. We then subsample these sets
to 1200 train, 90 validation (×2 sets), and 1000 probe images (×2 sets), respectively, such that the
train and validation sets instantiate target feature predictivities, and the probe sets contain congruent
or incongruent feature-values, as described in Section 7.
To construct the datasets used in Figures 6C and B.9, for a given predictivity setting, we subsample
8 bird types per category (land, water) and cross them with land and water backgrounds randomly
sampled from the standard Waterbirds background classes, to generate class-balanced train sets
ranging in size from 800 − 1200, and incongruent probe sets of size 400.
CelebA. The CelebA (Liu et al., 2015) dataset contains images of celebrity faces paired with a variety
of binary attribute labels. In our experiments, we cast the “Attractive” label as the core feature, and
the “Smiling” label as the non-core feature. To construct the datasets used in Figure 6B, we sample
images consistent with the target predictivities.
Waterbirds availability manipulations. In the datasets depicted in Figures 6C and B.9, we aim
to manipulate various aspects of background availability. To do so, we use CUB-200 masks to
exclusively modify the background, and apply five distinct types of perturbations: altering bird size,
removing background patches, changing background colors, applying low-pass filtering, adding
Perlin noise, and adding white noise. These perturbations test hypotheses about specific image
properties than may make an image background more available to a model than the foreground object.
We vary Background predicitivity while holding bird predictivity fixed (= 0.99). We report results
for at least 500 runs (model training) for each perturbation type. Figure B.8 shows sample image to
which the perturbations have been applied. In detail, the perturbations are as follow:

       • Bird size: We manipulate the pixel footprint of the bird by scaling the square mask. Note
         that an increase in bird size corresponds to a decrease in background pixels in the image.
       • Background patch removal: This manipulation removes patches of the image background
         while preserving the foreground bird. To apply the manipulation, we partition the image into
         a 3 × 3 checkerboard, position the bird in the center, and then remove x in [1, 8] background
         cells.
       • Color: To assess the influence of color information, we use the original image with its
         colored background (“Color”) or convert the background to grayscale (“Grayscale”).
       • Low-pass filtering: We apply a low-pass filter to the frequency representation of the
         background, with the cutoff frequency varying from 224 (original image) to 2 (retaining
         only components at 2 cycles per image).
       • Uniform noise: Uniform noise is introduced to the image with an amplitude ranging from 0
         (original image) to 255. It is essential to note that image values are clipped within the (0,
         255) range before preprocessing.
       • Perlin noise: We apply Perlin noise, which possesses spatial coherence, at various intensity
         levels along with uniform noise. We employ 6-octave Perlin noise to match the frequency
         distribution of natural backgrounds (wavelengths 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, and 128).

Model architecture and training procedure. For the experiments shown in Figure 6A and B, we
normalize all images by the ImageNet train-set statistics (RGB mean = [0.485, 0.456, 0.406]), std
= [0.229, 0.224, 0.225]), and then use the same settings as described in 5.
In the experiments shown in Figures 6C and B.9, we preprocess images by normalizing to be in
[−1, 1], apply random crops of size 200 | 200, resize to 224 | 224, and randomly flip over the
horizontal axis with p = 0.5 We train models with MSE loss using an Adam optimizer with batch
size = 32, cosine decay learning rate schedule (linear warmup, initial learning rate = 1e − 03), and
weight decay = 1e − 05. For the ResNet18 experiments in Figures 6C and B.9, we train a randomly
initialized ResNet18 trained for 30 epochs. For the ResNet50 experiments in Figure B.9, we train the
randomly initialized readout layer of a frozen, ImageNet-pretrained ResNet50 (IN ResNet50) for 15
epochs.


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Results: Vision models, including ImageNet-pretrained ones, are sensitive to Background
availability manipulations. Figure B.9 displays the results of the six manipulations which we
hypothesized affect Background availability. The top row shows accuracy for ResNet18 models
trained from scratch, while the bottom row shows the results for IN-ResNet50. Our findings reveal
several key observations:
First, as the size of the bird increases (Col.1), as well as when the background becomes noisier (Col.
4,6), filtered of its high frequencies (Col 5), or simply masked (Col 2), the model tends to rely more
heavily on the bird itself for classification. Conversely, when the background is clear and informative
(available), the model utilizes the background features to predict the class. Second, the spuriousness
of the background, as quantified by ρ, also has a discernible effect on the model’s behavior. However,
it only partially accounts for the observed variations, demonstrating that availability factors are
at play. Last, these results indicate that pretraining has a beneficial impact and can modulate
feature availability. This effect may be attributed to the learned invariances during the pretraining
process, enabling the model to better adapt to different availability conditions. Our spatial frequency
experiments complement existing and concurrent work studying what models learn as a function of
spatial frequency manipulations at training (Jo & Bengio, 2017; Yin et al., 2019; Tsuzuku & Sato,
2019; Hermann et al., 2020; Subramanian et al., 2023) or test time (Geirhos et al., 2018b).
Results: Explainability analyses corroborate Background availability study. The experiments
presented in Figures 6C and B.9 showed that the degree of Background availability influences
model classifications of incongruent probes. Here, we use attribution methods to verify that when
a model predominantly relies on the image background, or on the foreground bird, according to
the experimental results, its focal point reflect this. Figure B.10 shows the attributions maps of
two ResNet18 models trained from scratch, one using a bird size of 40%, and the other using a
bird size of 80%. For the same set of probe images, the model trained on larger birds exhibits a
strategy shift in classification, seemingly having his focal point on the birds, whereas the model
trained on smaller birds mainly relies on the background. The methods employed encompass a
combination of black-box techniques (Rise (Petsiuk et al., 2018) and Sobol indices (Fel et al., 2021))
and gradient-based approaches (Saliency (Zeiler & Fergus, 2014) and Smoothgrad (Smilkov et al.,
2017)).



D    Q UADRATIC A PPROXIMATION OF h

Since u is the dot product of two normalized vectors, its range is limited to −1 ≤ u ≤ 1. Observe
that the derivative of h has the form,


                                                    1
                                     h0 (u) = 1 −     arccos(u) .                                  (8)
                                                    π


The only place within u ∈ [−1, 1] that h0 vanishes is at u = −1, suggesting the critical point of our
quadratic must lie at this point. Furthermore, observe that h(−1) = 0. Forcing these two constraints
onto our quadratic, leaves us with the form,


                                          h(u) = a(1 + u)2 ,
                                          b                                                        (9)


where a is a parameter to be determined. Our aim is to find a so that the function b  h and h looks
similar over the entire domain u ∈ [−1, 1]. We choose `2 error between the two functions defined as,

                                          Z 1                   2
                                   ea =          h(u) − b
                                                        h(u)        du.                           (10)
                                           −1


                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                         h (orange) within u ∈ [−1, 1].
                      Figure D.1: The plots for h (blue) b


                                                   h(u))2 , one can 1 obtain
                                    h into (h(u) − b
Replacing the definitions for h and b
                                        1 163        32        32
                                      ea =−     a + a2 +            .                           (18)
                                        3    48       5       27π 2
Since ea is a convex quadratic in a, its minimizer can be determined by zero-crossing the derivative
of ea w.r.t. a. This yields,
                                                           815
                                    a∗ , arg min ea =           .                               (19)
                                                a         3072
This leads to the claimed quadratic form,
                                                     815
                                             h(u) ,
                                             b           (1 + u)2 .                                          (20)
                                                    3072
Figure D.1 shows a plot of the original h and the quadratic approximation b
                                                                          h to visually get a sense of
the approximation quality.

E        P ROOF OF R E LU K ERNEL T HEOREM
                                                                                            h thus
Recall that the kernel function k for ReLU is expressed using h as in (3). Replacing h with b
gets us an alternate kernel function which approximates that of ReLU’s.
                                                                                    2
                                  x    z                    ∗           x     z
     k(x, z) , kxk kzk h   b         ,         = kxk kzk a 1 +              ,           .     (21)
                                 kxk kzk                               kxk kzk
    1
                                                               h(u))2 has the form,
        We first claim that the indefinite integral of (h(u) − b
                           Z                                         !
                                 1                        p                           2
           Ea (u) ,                 u π − arccos(u) + 1 − u        2   − a(1 + u)2 d u                       (11)
                                 π
                               1
                                      432π 2 a2 u5 + 80 9π 2 6a2 − 4a + 1 − 17 u3

                      =                                                                                      (12)
                           2160π 2
                           +240 9π 2 a2 + 11 u + 1080π 2 a(2a − 1)u4 + 2160π 2 a(2a − 1)u2

                                                                                                             (13)
                                  p
                           −15π 1 − u2 a 90u3 + 256u2 + 207u − 64 − 128u2 + 32

                                                                                                             (14)
                                                                                      p
                           +120 3πa 3u2 + 8u + 6 u2 − 12πu3 + 4 1 − 4u2                 1 − u2 cos−1 (u)

                                                                                                             (15)

                           −1215πa sin−1 (u) + 720u3 cos−1 (u)2                                              (16)

This can be be easily shown by taking the derivative of both sides and arriving at equality. The definite integral
can now computed by evaluation the indefinite integral at the boundary points.
                                                         1   163    32 2    32
                             ea = Ea (1) − Ea (−1) =       −     a+    a +       .                           (17)
                                                         3   48      5     27π 2



                                                        23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.1    E IGENFUNCTIONS

An eigenfunction φ must satisfy,
               Z                                             2
                                               x      z
                    a∗ kxk kzk 1 +                ,              φ(z)p(z) dz = λ φ(x) ,                       (22)
                 Rn                           kxk kzk
or equivalently,
                       Z                                     2
                                               x      z
               a∗ kxk        kzk 1 +              ,              φ(z)p(z) dz = λ φ(x) ,                       (23)
                         Rn                   kxk kzk
We first focus on the above integral.
             Z                                   2
                                   x       z
                  kzk 1 +             ,              φ(z)p(z) dz                                              (24)
               Rn                kxk kzk
                                                  hx, zi2

                                 hx, zi
             Z
         =        kzk 1 + 2                  +                    φ(z)p(z) dz                                 (25)
               Rn               kxk kzk kxk2 kzk2
                                             hx, zi2
             Z
                              hx, zi
         =          kzk + 2           +                    φ(z)p(z) dz                                        (26)
               Rn              kxk         kxk2 kzk
                                                                                    !
                                                   x21 z12 + x22 z22 + 2x1 x2 z1 z2
             Z
                              x1 z1 + x2 z2
         =          kzk + 2 p 2                 +                    p                  φ(z)p(z) dz           (27)
               R2                 x1 + x22              (x21 + x22 ) z12 + z22
                                      √                         √
             Z               √            2x1         √             2x2            z2          x21
         =          kzk + 2z1                     +      2z 2             +  p 1                              (28)
                                                                                             2
                                                                                 z12 + z22 (x1 + x22 )
                                   p                          p
               R2                     x21 + x22                 x21 + x22
                                                     √             √         !
                         z22         x22 z22            2z1 z2       2x1 x2
                   +p 2                         +p 2                               φ(z)p(z) dz                (29)
                        z1 + z22 (x21 + x22 )          z1 + z22 (x21 + x22 )
                         √                     √                                                 √
                           2x1                   2x2                x21             x22            2x1 x2
         = a0 + a1 p 2              + a2 p 2              + a3 2        2 + a4 2         2 + a5 2         ,   (30)
                         x1 + x2 2             x1 + x2 2        x1 + x2         x1 + x2          x1 + x22
where a0 to a5 are the result of the definite integral for each term. Observe that each ai is thus
constant in x and z. Plugging the above expression into (23) yields,
                   √                √                                        √
  ∗                   2x1             2x2            x21            x22         2x1 x2
a kxk (a0 +a1 p 2            +a2 p 2         +a3 2         2 +a4 2      2 +a5 2        ) = λ φ(x) ,
                    x1 + x22        x1 + x22      x1 + x2        x1 + x2      x1 + x22
                                                                                                   (31)
Thus the eigenfunction has the form,
                               √                 √                                          √
          a∗                     2x1               2x2              x21           x22         2x1 x2
φ(x) =        kxk (a0 + a1 p 2           + a2 p 2           + a3 2      2 + a4 2      2 + a5 2       ).
           λ                   x1 + x22          x1 + x2 2       x1 + x2       x1 + x2      x1 + x22
                                                                                                   (32)
In order to figure out the values of a0 to a5 we plug the obtained eigenfunction form into (23) again,
for both φ(x) and φ(z), That takes us from
                        Z                              2
                                            x     z
                a∗ kxk       kzk 1 +           ,             φ(z)p(z) dz = λ φ(x) ,                (33)
                          R2              kxk kzk
to,
                                     √                      √
                 Z             √         2x1       √           2x2            z2        x21
        a∗ kxk         kzk +  2z1 p             + 2z2 p               +p 1            2     2
                                                                                                        (34)
                  R2
                                        2
                                     x1 + x2  2               2
                                                            x1 + x2 2
                                                                            z1 + z2 (x1 + x2 )
                                                                              2   2

                                                  √           √          !
                         z22       x22 z22          2z1 z2       2x1 x2
                     +p            2       2
                                              +p                2     2
                                                                                                        (35)
                       z12 + z22 (x1 + x2 )        z12 + z22 (x1 + x2 )
                                     √                 √                                       √
                  a∗                    2z1               2z2              z2           z2       2z1 z2
                 × kzk (a0 + a1 p               + a2 p            + a3 2 1 2 + a4 2 2 2 + a5 2          )
                   λ                 z12 + z22         z12 + z22        z1 + z2      z1 + z2   z1 + z22
              ×p(z) dz                                                                           (36)
                            √               √                                       √
           a∗                  2x1             2x2           x21          x22         2x1 x2
        =λ    kxk (a0 + a1 p          + a2 p          + a3 2       + a4 2       + a5 2       ) . (37)
           λ                x21 + x22       x21 + x22     x1 + x22     x1 + x22     x1 + x22


                                                       24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Dividing both sides by a∗ kxk/λ yields,
                                                                2
                                                    x      z
                              Z
                 ∗
             a kxk                    kzk       1+      ,          φ(z)p(z) dz = λ φ(x)                                                                                          (38)
                                  R2              kxk kzk
                                                  √                    √
                                         √           2x1       √          2x2            z2           x21
                     Z
                 ∗
         ⇒   a                    kzk + 2z1 q                + 2z2 q             + q 1              2 + x2 )
                                                                                                                                                                                 (39)
                         R2                       x21 + x22            x21 + x22       z12 + z22 (x 1     2

                                           2          2 2
                                                                 √           √         !
                                         z          x2 z2          2z1 z2      2x1 x2
                                   +q 2            2      2
                                                              + q             2     2
                                                                                                                                                                                 (40)
                                       z 2 + z 2 (x1 + x2 )
                                            1         2           z 2 + z 2 (x1 + x2 )
                                                                                     1         2
                                                          √                          √                                                                  √
                                                              2z1                        2z2                    z12               z22                      2z1 z2
                          ×kzk (a0 + a1 q                             + a2 q                       + a3                 + a4               + a5                   )   p(z) dz (41)
                                                          z12 + z22                  z12 + z22               z1 + z22
                                                                                                              2                z1 + z22
                                                                                                                                2                       z12 + z22
                                            √                         √                                                                   √
                                                2x1                        2x2                    x21                   x22                 2x1 x2
             = λ (a0 + a1 q                                + a2 q                     + a3                    + a4                + a5              ).                           (42)
                                            x21 + x22                 x21 + x22                x1 + x22
                                                                                                2                    x1 + x22
                                                                                                                      2                   x21 + x22

 For the above identity to hold at any point x we need to equate the coefficients for each term
involving x. That is, we need to have,
             kzk
                                                                                                                                               
            √
    
         √
            2z 1                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                          a                                  a0
                                                                                                                                                                             
           2z2                                                                                                                          0
            2
                                                                                                                                         a1                             a1 
    Z  z1                                    √               √                    2                   2          √                   
  ∗                                                                                z1                  z2             2z1 z2             a2                            a 
                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                          λ  2
         q       
 a      z2 +z2  kzk                               2z1            2z2                                                2 +z 2  p(z) dz                            =
                                                                               q                   q                 q                  
     2  1 2                                                                     2 +z 2
                                                                                   z1                   2 +z 2
                                                                                                       z1              z1                    a3 
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                             a3 
     R  z2                                                                          2                   2               2           
        q 2                                                                                                                           a4                            a 
                                                                                                                                                                                 4
        z2 +z2                                                                                                                      
        √ 1 2                                                                                                                        a5                                   a5
        2z1 z2                                                                                                                      
                 q
                      2 +z 2
                     z1   2
                                                                                                                                                                                 (43)
or in a more compact form,
                                                                Z
                                                          a∗               v z v Tz p(z) dz a = λ a ,

                                                                                                                                                                                (44)
                                                                     R2
where,
                                                          h               √              √                   z12      z22
                                                                                                                                  √
                                                                                                                                  2z1 z2
                                                                                                                                           iT
                                   vz           ,          kzk                2z1            2z2            kzk      kzk          kzk
                                                                                                                                                    .                           (45)
We now focus on the form of p(z). Recall that we assume p(z) is a mixture of I Gaussian sources.
Denote the selection probability of each Gaussian component by πi and the corresponding component-
conditional normal density function by g(z ; µ(i) , C (i) ). Thus,
                                           X
                                  p(z) =       πi g(z ; µ(i) , C (i) ) .                     (46)
                                                                                 i

Since we assume that the covariance matrix of each gi is small element-wise, we can resort to a
Laplace-type approximation for the integrals as below.
                             Z                      X
                                  f (z) p(z) dz ≈      πi f (µ(i) ) .                      (47)
                                                            R2                                          i

Under this approximation, the linear system can be expressed as,
                                                     !
                                      X
                                                   T     λ
                                          πi v i v i a = ∗ a ,                                                                                                                  (48)
                                       i
                                                         a
                                   |      {z         }
                                                                               C

where,
                                         h                     √                     √                      (i) 2         (i) 2       √       (i)   (i)
                                                                                                                                                            iT
                                                                       (i)                 (i)           µ1              µ2               2µ1 µ2
                     vi           ,       kµ(i) k                    2µ1                 2µ2            kµ(i) k         kµ(i) k           kµ(i) k
                                                                                                                                                                 .              (49)
Thus, any solution a must be an eigenvector of C. In the sequel we discuss how to obtain the
eigenvectors of C. In particular, in our 2-d problem with 2 Gaussian mixtures, where π1 = π2 = 1/2
and µ(1) = Aµ and µ(2) = −Aµ, the linear equation can be expressed as below.

                               1 + +T 1 − −T                  λ
                                 v v       + v v        a = ∗a,                               (50)
                               2             2                a
                             |            {z          }
                                                                           C


                                                                                           25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where,
                     h             √            √                    (a1 µ1 )2    (a2 µ2 )2
                                                                                                √                  iT
          v+    ,        kAµk          2a1 µ1       2a2 µ2            kAµk         kAµk
                                                                                                    2a1 µ1 a2 µ2
                                                                                                     kAµk
                                                                                                                                 (51)
                     h              √                √                    (a1 µ1 )2     (a2 µ2 )2
                                                                                                        √               iT
          v−    ,        kAµk      − 2a1 µ1         − 2a2 µ2               kAµk          kAµk
                                                                                                         2a1 µ1 a2 µ2
                                                                                                          kAµk
                                                                                                                             .   (52)

We now seek the eigenvectors of C in this specific setting. A key observation is that kv + k = kv − k
because the two are different only in the sign of their components. We now claim that, for any two
                                                                                        T          T
vectors v + and v − such that kv + k = kv − k. the eigevectors of the matrix C , v + v + + v − v −
have the form,
                          ψ 1 = c1 (v + + v − ) , ψ 2 = c2 (v + − v − ) ,                       (53)
where c1 and c2 are normalization constants. We prove that ψ 1 is an eigenvector of C; similar
argument applies to ψ 2 .
                                        T               T
               Cψ1       = (v + v + + v − v − ) c1 (v + + v − )                                                                  (54)

                         = c1 v + kv + k2 + v − hv + , v − i + v + hv + , v − i + v − kv − k2                                    (55)

                         = c1 v + kv + k2 + v − hv + , v − i + v + hv + , v − i + v − kv − k2                                    (56)
                         = c1 (kv + k2 + hv + , v − i)v + + c1 (kv − k2 + hv + , v − i)v −                                       (57)
                                       + 2          +       −    +                    + 2           +    −     −
                         = c1 (kv k + hv , v i)v                       + c1 (kv k + hv , v i)v                                   (58)
                                   + 2          +       −
                         =    (kv k + hv , v i) c1 (v 1 + v 2 )                                                                  (59)
                               kv + k2 + hv + , v − i ψ 1 .

                         =                                                                                                       (60)
The above shows that ψ 1 satisfies Cψ 1 ∝ ψ 1 and thus ψ 1 must be an eigenvector of C. Plugging
the definition for v + and v − gives us the eigenvectors of our C matrix, and thus obtain the solution
a in the equation (48). Since we are not constraining the length of the eigenvectors here, we can
absorb all the constants in equation (48) into one and express the solution pair a as below.
                       v+ + v−       h                          2
                                                                     (a2 µ2 )2
                                                                                  √              iT
             a ∝                  = kAµk 0 0 (akAµk      1 µ1 )
                                                                      kAµk
                                                                                    2a1 µ1 a2 µ2
                                                                                     kAµk
                                                                                                            (61)
                           2
                       v+ − v−         √             √                          T
             a ∝                  = 0       2a1 µ1     2a2 µ2 0 0 0 .                                       (62)
                           2
Recall from (32) that,
                                     √           √                                            √
                     a∗                2x1          2x2           x21           x22              2x1 x2
       φ(x) =           kxk(a0 + a1         + a2        + a3            + a4          + a5              ) . (63)
                     λ                kxk          kxk           kxk2          kxk2             kxk2
Plugging the pair of solutions for a into the above yields the two eigenfunctions,
                                                                       √             √       !
                                   (a1 µ1 )2 x21     (a2 µ2 )2 x22       2a1 µ1 a2 µ2 2x1 x2
    φ1 (x) ∝ kxk kAµk +                           +                 +                          (64)
                                    kAµk kxk2         kAµk kxk2           kAµk        kxk2
                                  √                 √      !
                         √          2x1 √             2x2
    φ2 (x) ∝ kxk           2a1 µ1        + 2a2 µ2             ,                                (65)
                                   kxk               kxk
or more simply,
                                                                                               2 !
                                                                               x   Aµ
                             φ1 (x) ∝        kxk kAµk            1+              ,                                               (66)
                                                                              kxk kAµk
                             φ2 (x) ∝        hx, Aµi ,                                                                           (67)
We convert the ∝ to equality by applying proper scaling factors d1 and d2 as follows.
                                                                        2 !
                                                           x     Aµ
                      φ1 (x) = d1 kxk kAµk 1 +                 ,                                                                 (68)
                                                          kxk kAµk
                          φ2 (x)       = d2 hx, Aµi ,                                                                            (69)


                                                                26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In order to find the factors d1 and d2 , we require φ1 and φ2 to have unit norm in the sense of (6).
Starting with φ1 we proceed as,

                                                            2  2

                                                x     Aµ
                                Z
          2        2        2                 2
  kφ1 k       =   d1 kAµk               kxk         , 1+         p(x) dx                                     (70)
                             R2                kxk kAµk
                                                           2  2                                  2  2       !
                   2      2   1     2          x      Aµ                 1  2         x     Aµ
              =   d1 kAµk       kxk     1+        ,                   + kxk     1+       ,                   (71)
                              2               kxk kAµk          x=Aµ     2           kxk   kAµk       x=−Aµ
                                                        2  2
                   2      2     2          x     Aµ
              =   d1 kAµk kxk       1+        ,                                                              (72)
                                          kxk kAµk           x=Aµ
                                                     2  2
                   2     4            Aµ      Aµ
              =   d1 kAµk     1+           ,                                                                 (73)
                                    kAµk kAµk
                                      2
                   2      4        2
              =   d1 kAµk     1+1       .                                                                    (74)


Setting the above to 1 and solving in d1 yields,


                                                                             1
                                                                  d1 =           ,                                (75)
                                                                          2kAµk2


and consequently,


                                                                                  D                E2
                                                                                       x     Aµ
                                                                  kxk 1 +             kxk , kAµk
                                          φ1 (x) =                                                        .       (76)
                                                                                  2kAµk



Similarly for φ2 we proceed as,

                                                            Z
                                    2                                         2
                        kφ2 k            =            d22         hx, Aµi p(x) dx                                 (77)
                                                             R2
                                                             1                             1
                                                                          2                         2
                                         =            d22        hx, Aµi x=Aµ +              hx, Aµi x=−Aµ        (78)
                                                           2                               2
                                                                   2
                                         =            d22 hAµ, Aµi                                                (79)
                                         =            d22 kAµk4 .                                                 (80)


Setting the above to 1 and solving in d2 yields,


                                                                                1
                                                                   d2 =             ,                             (81)
                                                                              kAµk2


and consequently,



                                                                           x   Aµ
                                                      φ2 (x) =               ,                      .             (82)
                                                                         kAµk kAµk

                                                                          27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.2   E IGENVALUES



To find the eigenvalues, we simply put the eigenfunctions in their defining equation (1). Starting with
φ1 we proceed as below.


             Z
                   k(x, z) φ1 (z) p(z) dz                                                               (83)
              R2
             Z                                           2
                    ∗                         x   z
        =          a kxk kzk        1+          ,            φ1 (z) p(z) dz                             (84)
              R2                             kxk kzk
                                                                        D                E2
                                                                             z     Aµ
                                                              kzk 1 +       kzk , kAµk
             Z                                           2
                                              x   z
        =          a∗ kxk kzk       1+          ,                                             p(z) dz   (85)
              R2                             kxk kzk         kAµk                 2
                                                                        D                E2 !
                                                                             z     Aµ
                                            kzk 1 +                         kzk , kAµk
                                         2
             1 ∗                x   z
        =      a kxk kzk 1 +      ,                                                                     (86)
             2                 kxk kzk     kAµk                                   2
                                                                                               z=Aµ
                                                                  D         E2 !
                                                                    z   Aµ
                                                         kzk 1 + kzk , kAµk
                                                          2
               1 ∗                             x   z
             +   a kxk kzk          1+           ,                                                      (87)
               2                              kxk kzk   kAµk          2
                                                                                z=−Aµ
                                                              D           E2 !
                                                         2 1 + Aµ , Aµ
             1 ∗                           x        Aµ          kAµk kAµk
        =      a kxk kAµk            1+      ,                                                          (88)
             2                            kxk kAµk                            2
                                                             D            E2 !
                                                       2 1 + −Aµ , Aµ
             1 ∗                        x     −Aµ              k−Aµk kAµk
          +    a kxk k − Aµk 1 +           ,                                   (89)
             2                        kxk k −Aµ k                  2
                                                 2                         2 !
           1 ∗                     x     Aµ                  x     −Aµ
        =    a kxk kAµk    1+         ,            + 1+          ,             (90)
           2                     kxk kAµk                   kxk k −Aµ k
                                            2 !
                               x     Aµ
        = a∗ kxk kAµk 1 +        ,                                             (91)
                              kxk kAµk
                                                 2 !
             ∗      2 kxk            x      Aµ
        = 2a kAµk             1+         ,                                     (92)
                     2kAµk          kxk kAµk
        =    2a∗ kAµk2 φ1 (x) .                                                                         (93)


Therefore,


                                               λ1 = 2a∗ kAµk2 .                                         (94)


                                                       28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Similarly for φ2 we have,
              Z
                  k(x, z) φ2 (z) p(z) dz                                                         (95)
                R2
              Z                                            2
                                                x   z
          =          a∗ kxk kzk       1+          ,             φ2 (z) p(z) dz                   (96)
                R2                             kxk kzk
              Z                                            2
                      ∗                         x   z               z   Aµ
          =          a kxk kzk        1+          ,                   ,            p(z) dz       (97)
                R2                             kxk kzk            kAµk kAµk
                                                     2                             !
               1 ∗                     x       z           z        Aµ
          =      a kxk kzk     1+          ,                    ,                                (98)
               2                      kxk kzk            kAµk kAµk
                                                                             z=Aµ
                                                      2                    !
                 1 ∗                     x       z           z       Aµ
              +     a kxk kzk 1 +            ,                    ,                              (99)
                 2                     kxk kzk            kAµk kAµk
                                                                              z=−Aµ
                                                         2                     !
               1 ∗                        x       Aµ           Aµ       Aµ
          =        a kxk kAµk 1 +              ,                     ,                          (100)
               2                        kxk kAµk              kAµk kAµk
                                                                2                     !
                 1 ∗                             x    −Aµ                −Aµ      Aµ
              +     a kxk k − Aµk 1 +               ,                           ,               (101)
                 2                             kxk k −Aµ k             k − Aµk kAµk
                                                         2 !
               1 ∗                        x       Aµ
          =        a kxk kAµk 1 +              ,                                                (102)
               2                        kxk kAµk
                                                                    2 !
                 1                                  x    −Aµ
              +     − a∗ kxk k − Aµk 1 +              ,                                         (103)
                 2                                 kxk k −Aµ k
                                                         2                           2 !
               1 ∗                        x       Aµ                     x     Aµ
          =      a kxk kAµk      1+            ,           − 1−             ,                   (104)
               2                        kxk kAµk                        kxk kAµk
                                                    !
               1 ∗                   x     Aµ
          =      a kxk kAµk 4          ,                                                        (105)
               2                    kxk kAµk

                              x      Aµ
          =   2a∗ kAµk2           ,                                                             (106)
                            kAµk kAµk
          =   2a∗ kAµk2 φ2 (x) .                                                                (107)
Therefore,
                                                λ2 = 2a∗ kAµk2 .                                (108)

F    P ROOF OF L INEAR K ERNEL T HEOREM
An eigenfunction φ of the kernel operator associated with kernel k(x, z) = hx, zi must satisfy,
                             Z
                                  hx, zi φ(z)p(z) dz = λ φ(x)                                (109)
                                  Rn
Following our earlier setup, we proceed with a 2-dimensional input this becomes,
                                     Z
                                          hx, zi φ(z)p(z) dz                                    (110)
                                        n
                                     ZR
                                =         (x1 z1 + x2 z2 ) φ(z)p(z) dz                          (111)
                                           R2
                                  = a1 x1 + a2 x2 ,                                             (112)
                                                                       R
where a1 and a2 are the result of the definite integrals of form R2 xi f (z) dz, for i = 1, 2. Observe
that each ai is thus constant in x and z. Plugging the above expression into (109) yields,
                                       a1 x1 + a2 x2        =    λ φ(x) ,                       (113)


                                                       29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Thus the eigenfunction has the form,
                                                1
                                     φ(x) =       (a1 x1 + a2 x2 ) .                        (114)
                                                λ
In order to figure out the values of a1 and a2 we plug the obtained eigenfunction form into (109)
again, for both φ(x) and φ(z),
                  Z
                       hx, zi φ(z)p(z) dz = λ φ(x)                                          (115)
                     2
                  ZR
                                        1                              1
              ⇒        (x1 z1 + x2 z2 ) (a1 z1 + a2 z2 ) p(z) dz = λ (a1 x1 + a2 x2 )       (116)
                     2                  λ                              λ
                  ZR
              ⇒        (x1 z1 + x2 z2 ) (a1 z1 + a2 z2 ) p(z) dz = λ (a1 x1 + a2 x2 )       (117)
                    R2
                               (i)       (i)       (i)        (i)
                  X
              ⇒        πi (x1 µ1 + x2 µ2 ) (a1 µ1 + a2 µ2 ) = λ (a1 x1 + a2 x2 ) ,          (118)
                     i

where in the last line we use the assumption that the covariance matrix of each Gaussian source is
small, and thus we can resort to a Laplace-like approximation of the integral. To have the above
identity hold true at any x we need to require that,
                                        (i)      (i)     (i)
                                X
                                    πi µ1 (a1 µ1 + a2 µ2 ) = λ a1                           (119)
                                 i
                                        (i)        (i)       (i)
                               X
                                     πi µ2 (a1 µ1 + a2 µ2 )        =   λ a2                 (120)
                                 i
                                                                                            (121)
or in matrix form,
                                                        

                                  (i) 2
                                "                #
                                         (i) (i) 
                         
                         X      µ1     µ1  µ  2    a1     a1
                            πi (i) (i)    (i) 2   a2 = λ a2
                                                                                           (122)
                                µ µ      µ
                         
                          i
                               | 1 2 {z 2
                                                  
                                                 }
                                            Ci
                         |             {z                }
                                       C

The equation can be compactly expressed as,
                                                 Ca = λa .                                  (123)
Thus, any solution a must be an eigenvector of C. In the sequel we discuss how to obtain the
eigenvectors of C. Observe that each matrix C i is a rank-one symmetric matrix that can be written
            T
as µ(i) µ(i) . In particular, in our 2-d problem with 2 Gaussian mixtures, where π1 = π2 = 1/2 and
µ(1) = Aµ and µ(2) = −Aµ, the above equation can be expressed as below.

                                  1                1
                                    (Aµ)(Aµ)T + (−Aµ)(−Aµ)T a = λa                           (124)
                                  2                2
                          ⇒ (Aµ)(Aµ)T a = λa ,                                              (125)
Thus,
                                                 a ∝ Aµ .                                   (126)
Recall from (114) that,
                                                   1
                                            φ(x) =   ha, xi .                               (127)
                                                   λ
Plugging the solution for a into the above yields the eigenfunction,
                                            φ(x) ∝ hAµ, xi ,                                (128)
We convert the ∝ to equality by applying proper scaling factors c as follows.
                                        φ(x) = c hAµ, xi ,                                  (129)


                                                    30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In order to find the scale factor c, we require φ to have unit norm in the sense of (6).
                                      Z
                                                     2
                      kφk2 = c2           (hAµ, xi) p(x) dx                                  (130)
                                        R2
                                    c2           2      c2          2
                              =         (hAµ, xi)x=Aµ +    (hAµ, xi)x=−Aµ                    (131)
                                     2                  2
                                                2
                              =     c2 (hAµ, xi)x=Aµ                                         (132)
                                    2            2 2
                              =     c (kAµk ) .                                              (133)
Setting the above to 1 and solving in c yields,
                                                          1
                                                 c =          ,                              (134)
                                                        kAµk2
and consequently,
                                                  hAµ, xi
                                             φ(x) =        .                               (135)
                                                   kAµk2
For finding the eigenvalue associated with φ we plug this form into (109) for both φ(x) and φ(z)
and then solve in λ.
              Z
                     hx, zi φ(z)p(z) dz = λ φ(x)                                           (136)
                  n
              ZR
                             hAµ, zi                  hAµ, xi
         ⇒           hx, zi        2
                                     p(z) dz = λ                                           (137)
                R n          kAµk                      kAµk2
              1             hAµ, zi           1         hAµ, zi                   hAµ, xi
         ⇒          hx, zi                  +    hx, zi                    = λ             (138)
              2             kAµk2 z=Aµ 2                 kAµk2 z=−Aµ               kAµk2
                          hAµ, Aµi             hAµ, xi
         ⇒ hx, Aµi                      = λ                                                (139)
                            kAµk2               kAµk2
         ⇒    kAµk2       =    λ.                                                            (140)

G    O PTIMAL P REDICTION
Consider the task of finding a function f (x) that best approximates a given function y(x) via the
following regression setup.
                                       Z                   2
                                     1
                               L =           f (x) − y(x) p(x)dx                            (141)
                                     2 Rn
Suppose we are interested in expressing f using the bases induced by the kernel k, that is the
eigenfunctions of the linear operator associated with k whose eigenvaules are non-zero. That is,
                                                X
                                       f (x) =      ak φk (x) ,                               (142)
                                                        k

where φk is an eigenfunction, and k runs over eigenfunctions with non-zero eigenvalue. We now
show that the function f which minimizes the regression loss L has the form,
                                     X
                          f (x) =        ak φk (x)                                       (143)
                                             k
                                         XZ
                                    =                  φk (z)y(z) p(z)dzφk (x) .             (144)
                                             k   Rn

We start from,
                                      Z                 2
                                    1
                         L =              f (x) − y(x) p(x)dx                                (145)
                                    2 Rn
                                      Z  X                     2
                                    1
                              =               ak φk (x) − y(x) p(x)dx .                      (146)
                                    2 Rn
                                                 k


                                                        31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Thus,
                          Z
            ∂                      X
               L =                        ak φk (x) − y(x) aj φj (x) p(x)dx                                   (147)
           ∂aj             Rn        k
                          Z        X
                   =                      ak aj φk (x)φj (x) − aj φj (x)y(x) p(x)dx                           (148)
                           Rn        k
                           X               Z                                 Z
                   =               ak aj            φk (x)φj (x) p(x)dx − aj              φj (x)y(x) p(x)dx   (149)
                              k                Rn                                    Rn
                                      Z
                   =      a2j − aj             φj (x)y(x) p(x)dx .                                            (150)
                                          Rn
Zero-crossing,                                       Z
                                           aj =               φj (x)y(x) p(x)dx .                             (151)
                                                         Rn
Thus,
                                                    X
                                  f (x)    =              ak φk (x)                                           (152)
                                                     k
                                                    XZ
                                           =                       φk (z)y(z) p(z)dzφk (x)                    (153)
                                                     k        Rn

In particular, if we replace p(z) by our pair of Gaussian densities with small covariance, and set y(x)
to 1 and 0 depending on whether x is drawn from the positive or negative component of the mixture,
we arrive at,
                      Z                            Z
           X        1                            1                                1X
 f (x) =     φi (x)       φi (z) (1) p+ (z) dz +        φi (z) (0) p− (z) dz    =     φi (x)φi (Aµ) ,
           i
                    2  R2                        2   R2                           2 i
                                                                                                 (154)
where p+ and p− denote class-conditional normal distributions.

H     S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS
H.1     L INEAR K ERNEL

Theorem 5 In a linear network, |ζ1 | − |ζ2 | is always zero for any choice of m ≥ 1 and regardless of
the values of a1 and a2 .

Recall the definitions,
                                    1X
                  f (x)       =          φi (x)φi (Aµ)                                                        (155)
                                    2 i
                                    1X
                 gB (x) ,                φi (x)φi (BAµ)                                                       (156)
                                    2 i
                                    Z
                                                f (x)                gB (x)
                   γ(b) ,               qR                     qR                    p(x) dx .                (157)
                                     R2        f 2 (t) p(t) dt       g 2 (t) p(t) dt
                                           R 2                   R 2  B

For linear kernel, we had only one eigenfunction with the form,
                                                                     hAµ, xi
                                                    φ1 (x) =                 .                                (158)
                                                                      kAµk2
Replacing that, in the above definitions yields,
                                                 1 hAµ, xi hAµ, Aµi    1 hAµ, xi
                              f (x)       =              2       2
                                                                    =                                         (159)
                                                 2 kAµk     kAµk       2 kAµk2
                                                 1 hAµ, xi hAµ, BAµi
                           gB (x)         =                          .                                        (160)
                                                 2 kAµk2     kAµk2

                                                                   32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


It is easy to obtain,
                        Z                                        Z
                                   2                     1   1
                               f (x)p(x)           =                 (hAµ, xi)2 p(x) dx             (161)
                          Rn                             4 kAµk4 Rn
                                                         1   1                     1
                                                   =             2(hAµ, Aµi)2 = ,                   (162)
                                                         4 kAµk4                   2
and,
                                          1 (hAµ, BAµi)2
                  Z                                            Z
                        g 2 (x)p(x)           =                    (hAµ, xi)2 p(x) dx               (163)
                  Rn                      4      kAµk8          Rn
                                          1 (hAµ, BAµi)2
                                    =                         2(hAµ, Aµi)2                          (164)
                                          4      kAµk8
                                          1 (hAµ, BAµi)2
                                    =                         .                                     (165)
                                          2      kAµk4
Plugging these results into the definition of γ yields,
                              Z
                                            f (x)                gB (x)
                 γ(b) ,           qR                      qR                    p(x) dx             (166)
                               R2
                                       R2
                                          f 2 (t) p(t) dt       g 2 (t) p(t) dt
                                                             R2 B
                                       Z     1 hAµ,xi 1 hAµ,xi hAµ,BAµi
                                             2 kAµk2 2 kAµk2      kAµk2
                            =                                           p(x) dx                     (167)
                                        R2      √1       √1  |hAµ,BAµi|
                                                  2        2    kAµk2
                                             1 hAµ,xi 1 hAµ,xi
                                       Z
                                             2 kAµk2 2 kAµk2         sign(hAµ, BAµi)
                            =                                                            p(x) dx    (168)
                                        R2      √1                        √1
                                                  2                         2
                                                                 Z
                                       sign(hAµ, BAµi)
                            =                                           (hAµ, xi)2 p(x) dx          (169)
                                            2kAµk4                 R2
                            =          sign(hAµ, BAµi)                                              (170)
                            =          sign(b1 a21 µ21 + b2 a22 µ22 ) .                             (171)
Recall that,
                                                              ∂m
                                                    ζi ,          γ       .                         (172)
                                                              ∂bm
                                                                i     b=1
It is easy to see that when for any m ≥ 1,
                              ∂m             b1 a21 µ21 + b2 a22 µ22 6= 0

                                         0
                                   γ =                                    .                         (173)
                              ∂bim       NaN b1 a21 µ21 + b2 a22 µ22 = 0
To find ζ1 and ζ2 we need to evaluate the above at the point b1 = b2 = 1. Since by definition, µi 6= 0
and ai 6= 0, it easy follows that ζ1 = ζ2 = 0 and thus |ζ1 | = |ζ2 | for any m ≥ 0.

H.2    R E LU L INEAR K ERNEL

Theorem 6 In a ReLU network, |ζ1 | − |ζ2 | = 0 for any 1 ≤ m ≤ 8. The first non-zero |ζ1 | − |ζ2 |
happens at m = 9 and has the following form,
                                      5670
                     |ζ1 | − |ζ2 | =         (a1 a2 µ1 µ2 )8 (a21 µ21 − a22 µ22 ) .        (174)
                                     kAµk18

Recall the definitions,
                                       1X
                   f (x)       =            φi (x)φi (Aµ)                                           (175)
                                       2 i
                                       1X
                 gB (x) ,                   φi (x)φi (BAµ)                                          (176)
                                       2 i
                                       Z
                                                   f (x)                gB (x)
                   γ(b) ,                  qR                     qR                    p(x) dx .   (177)
                                        R2        f 2 (t) p(t) dt       g 2 (t) p(t) dt
                                              R 2                   R 2  B



                                                                33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For ReLU kernel, we had only two eigenfunctions with the form,
                           D           E2
                              x    Aµ
                  kxk  1 +       ,
                             kxk kAµk

                                                                   x   Aµ

      φ1 (x) =                                ,      φ2 (x) =        ,       .                                              (178)
                 kAµk           2                                kAµk kAµk
Replacing them in the above definitions yields,
                         D            E2             D              E2
                            x    Aµ                     Aµ       Aµ
             1 kxk   1 +       ,
                           kxk kAµk       kAµk   1 +        ,
                                                       kAµk kAµk          1 hAµ, xi hAµ, Aµi
 f (x) =                                                               +                 (179)
             2 kAµk           2           kAµk            2               2 kAµk2     kAµk2
                                           2                           2
             1 kxk            x      Aµ                 Aµ        Aµ          1 hAµ, xi
        =              1+        ,              1+            ,            +             (180)
             8 kAµk          kxk kAµk                  kAµk kAµk              2 kAµk2
                                           2
             1 kxk            x      Aµ                    1 hAµ, xi
        =              1+        ,              1+1 +                                    (181)
             8 kAµk          kxk kAµk                      2 kAµk2
                                           2
             1 kxk            x      Aµ            1 hAµ, xi
        =              1+        ,              +              ,                         (182)
             4 kAµk          kxk kAµk              2 kAµk2
and,
                                 D                 E2  D          E2
                   1 kxk 1 +
                                      x
                                        , Aµ             BAµ   Aµ
                                           kBAµk 1 + kBAµk , kAµk
                                     kxk kAµk                          1 hAµ, xi hAµ, BAµi
    gB (x)   =                                                       +                         (183)
                   2 kAµk         2         kAµk            2          2 kAµk2     kAµk2
                                                2                      2
                   1 kxk kBAµk                                               1 hAµ, xi hAµ, BAµi

                                       x   Aµ               BAµ   Aµ
             =                   1+      ,            1+        ,          +                     .
                                                                                               (184)
                   8   kAµk2          kxk kAµk             kBAµk kAµk        2 kAµk2     kAµk2

It is easy to obtain,
                                        1 kxk                  2         1 hAµ, xi  2
                     2                               x     Aµ     2
                   f (x)       =               1+       ,            +                                                      (185)
                                       4 kAµk       kxk kAµk             2 kAµk2
                                           1 kxk                  2
                                                         x   Aµ         1 hAµ, xi
                                      +2          1+       ,                        ,                                       (186)
                                           4 kAµk      kxk kAµk         2 kAµk2
and therefore,
  Z                                          1 kAµk            2
                                                                             1 hAµ, Aµi  2
                                                 Aµ      Aµ         2
      f 2 (x)p(x) dx           =       2               , 1+           +2                        +(187)
                                                                                                   0
     Rn                         4 kAµk          kAµk kAµk                    2 kAµk2
                                1         2        1  2
                          = 2      1+1       +2                                                  (188)
                                4                  2
                          = 1.                                                                   (189)
It in a similar way, one can compute Rn g 2 (x)p(x) dx. Plugging these into the definition of γ yields,
                                    R


                                                                      1
 γ(b) =       r
                                                     2(a2 µ 2 +a2 µ2 )3 (a2 b2 µ2 +a2 b2 µ2 )
             2 8a8 b4 µ8 +8a6 b2 a2 (b +b )2 µ6 µ2 +a4 a41(b1 +b 2)22(b2 +10b
                                                                          1 1 1     2 2 2
                                                                                b +b2 )µ4 µ4 +8a2 a6 b2 (b +b )2 µ2 µ6 +8a8 b4 µ8
                    1 1   1    1 1 2       1   2   1 2   1 2   1    2   1     1 2   2   1 2     1 2 2    1   2    1   2   2 2   2
                                                                                                                            (190)
 It is messy but straightforward to write the derivatives of γ w.r.t. b1 and b2 evaluated at b1 = b2 = 1
(which gives ζ1 and ζ2 ) to see that for any derivative of order m ≤ 8 the above yields ζ1 = ζ2 and at
m = 9 one obtains,
                                          5670
                         |ζ1 | − |ζ2 | =          (a1 a2 µ1 µ2 )8 (a21 µ21 − a22 µ22 ) .           (191)
                                         kAµk18

I     Q UADRATIC A PPROXIMATION VS R E LU K ERNEL
The paper presents an analytical form that characterizes the trade-off between predictivity and
availability in a single-layer ReLU model for classifying two Gaussian sources.
In order to keep the theoretical analysis tractable, we the following approximations. First, we used
an asymptotic approximation to the covariance matrix by having the size of the covariance going


                                                                   34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                       Quadratic            ReLU
Figure I.1: Plot of sign((|ζ1 | − |ζ2 |)(a1 − a2 )) for ReLU and Quadratic NTK models trained on 50 training
samples from positive N (µ, C) and negative N (−µ, C) classes. Here, µ = (µ1 , µ2 ), covariance is C = σ 2 I,
where µ1 = 1 and σ = 0.01. Top and bottom figures respectively correspond to µ2 = 10 are µ = 0.1.


to zero. Second, use replaced the ReLU kernel function by a quadratic approximation. A natural
question is, whether the predictions made by our theory are sensitive to these approximations. More
precisely, if we work with the actual ReLU kernel and a real covariance matrix, whether observe
similar predictions.
We verify this here by learning a model from finite training data in the NTK regime. The latter
amounts to performing a kernel regression with kernel specified by the NTK. The result of the
simulation is provided in Figure I.1 and confirms that the approximations used in the theory are not
affecting the actual predictions, in the sense that it matches the trend of the predictions made by the
theory from Figure 5.
The left panel in Figure I.1 still uses quadratic kernel. However, it is generated by actual predictions
from a model trained by finite training data, whose distribution is a real covariance (as opposed to
an asymptotically small one). This confirms the closed-form expression derived from our theory
(predictions from Figure 5) match the simulation result.
The right panel of Figure I.1 goes further and replaces the quadratic kernel by the actual ReLU kernel.
Observe that this does not affect the trend of the predictions, hence showing there is not much lost by
switching between the ReLU kernel and its quadratic approximation.

NUM_PLOT_POINTS = 20        # Number of points used to plot the
 ,→ result (larger better but slower)
N_TRAIN_SAMPLES = 50        # Number of training points per
 ,→ Gaussian source
USE_QUAD        = True      # When to use ReLU or its quadratic
 ,→ approximation
MU_1            = 1.0
MU_2_List       = [10, 0.1]
SCALE_COV       = 0.0001    # Scale parameter s from the paper
COR             = 0.0       # Abs[COR] must be less than 1
EPS             = SCALE_COV/100 # Epsilon identity added before
 ,→ inverting kernel matrix
DELTA           = 0.05      # delta to approximate derivatives
 ,→ with finite different

import numpy as np
from matplotlib import pyplot as plt


def kernel(x1,x2):
    norm_x1=np.sqrt(np.dot(x1,x1))
    norm_x2=np.sqrt(np.dot(x2,x2))
    u=np.dot(x1/norm_x1,x2/norm_x2)


                                                     35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     if np.abs(u)>1.0:
         u=np.sign(u)
     if USE_QUAD:
         h=815.0/3072.0*(1 + u)**2
     else:
         h=(u*(np.pi-np.arccos(u))+np.sqrt(1-u**2))/np.pi
     return norm_x1*norm_x2*h


def kernel_predict(A,x,y,X,kernel_func):
    # do linear ridge regression to obtain coefficients c_1 to
     ,→ c_2n
    K=np.empty((2*N_TRAIN_SAMPLES,2*N_TRAIN_SAMPLES))
    for i in range(2*N_TRAIN_SAMPLES):
        for j in range(2*N_TRAIN_SAMPLES):
            K[i,j]=kernel_func(A@x[i],A@x[j])
    c = np.linalg.solve(K+EPS*np.identity(2*N_TRAIN_SAMPLES),y)

     # compute prediction vector
     K_pred=np.empty((2*N_TRAIN_SAMPLES,2*N_TRAIN_SAMPLES))
     for i in range(2*N_TRAIN_SAMPLES):
         for j in range(2*N_TRAIN_SAMPLES):
             K_pred[i,j]=kernel_func(A@X[i],A@x[j])
     return K_pred@c


### MAIN ###
sensitivity =
 ,→ np.empty((len(MU_2_List),NUM_PLOT_POINTS,NUM_PLOT_POINTS))
for MU_2_indx in range(len(MU_2_List)):
    MU_2 = MU_2_List[MU_2_indx]
    # generate 2d-gaussian data (n samples per class) for two
     ,→ classes: x0 and x1
    mean_class_0=np.array([MU_1, MU_2])
    mean_class_1=-mean_class_0
    cov=SCALE_COV*np.array([[1.0, COR],[COR, 1.0]])
    rng = np.random.default_rng()
    x0 = rng.multivariate_normal(mean_class_0, cov,
     ,→ size=N_TRAIN_SAMPLES)
    y0 = np.zeros(N_TRAIN_SAMPLES)
    x1 = rng.multivariate_normal(mean_class_1, cov,
     ,→ size=N_TRAIN_SAMPLES)
    y1 = np.ones(N_TRAIN_SAMPLES)
    x=np.concatenate((x0,x1),axis=0)
    y=np.concatenate((y0,y1),axis=0)
    X=x

     for i_a1 in range(NUM_PLOT_POINTS):
         print ('completion:',i_a1+1,'of',NUM_PLOT_POINTS)
         a1 = (4.0*(i_a1+1))/NUM_PLOT_POINTS
         for i_a2 in range(NUM_PLOT_POINTS):
             a2 = (4.0*(i_a2+1))/NUM_PLOT_POINTS
             A=np.diag([a1,a2])
             pred = kernel_predict(A,x,y,X,kernel)
             A_Perturbed = A + [[DELTA*np.abs(a1),0],[0,0]]
             pred_inc_a1 = kernel_predict(A_Perturbed,x,y,X,kernel)
             A_Perturbed = A + [[0,0],[0,DELTA*np.abs(a2)]]
             pred_inc_a2 = kernel_predict(A_Perturbed,x,y,X,kernel)
             # normalize prediction vectors


                                               36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 pred = pred/np.sqrt(np.dot(pred,pred))
                 pred_inc_a1 =
                  ,→ pred_inc_a1/np.sqrt(np.dot(pred_inc_a1,pred_inc_a1))
                 pred_inc_a2 =
                  ,→ pred_inc_a2/np.sqrt(np.dot(pred_inc_a2,pred_inc_a2))
                 sensitivity[MU_2_indx,i_a1,i_a2] = np.sign( (
                  ,→ np.abs(np.dot(pred,pred_inc_a1)-1.0) /
                  ,→ (DELTA*np.abs(a1))-np.abs(np.dot(pred,pred_inc_a2)-1.0)
                  ,→ / (DELTA*np.abs(a2)) ) * (a1-a2) )

# Plot Sensitivity
xv, yv = np.meshgrid(np.linspace(0, 4, NUM_PLOT_POINTS),
 ,→ np.linspace(0, 4, NUM_PLOT_POINTS))
fig, (ax1, ax2) = plt.subplots(2)
ax1.pcolormesh(xv, yv, sensitivity[0], vmin = -1, vmax = 1);
ax2.pcolormesh(xv, yv, sensitivity[1], vmin = -1, vmax = 1);
ax1.set_box_aspect(1)
ax2.set_box_aspect(1)
plt.show()


                                               37
