Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G ENERALIZED N EURAL C OLLAPSE FOR A L ARGE
N UMBER OF C LASSES
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Neural collapse provides an elegant mathematical characterization of learned last
         layer representations (a.k.a. features) and classifier weights in deep classification
         models. Such results not only provide insights but also motivate new techniques
         for improving practical deep models. However, most of the existing empirical and
         theoretical studies in neural collapse focus on the case that the number of classes
         is small relative to the dimension of the feature space. This paper extends neural
         collapse to cases where the number of classes is much larger than the dimension
         of feature space, which broadly occurs for language models, retrieval systems,
         and face recognition applications. We show that the features and classifier exhibit
         a generalized neural collapse phenomenon, where the minimum one-vs-rest mar-
         gins is maximized. We provide empirical study to verify the occurrence of gen-
         eralized neural collapse in practical deep neural networks. Moreover, we provide
         theoretical study to show that the generalized neural collapse provably occurs un-
         der unconstrained feature model with spherical constraint, under certain technical
         conditions on feature dimension and number of classes.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Over the past decade, deep learning algorithms have achieved remarkable progress across numerous
machine learning tasks and have significantly enhanced the state-of-the-art in many practical appli-
cations ranging from computer vision to natural language processing and retrieval systems. Despite
their tremendous success, a comprehensive understanding of the features learned from deep neural
networks (DNNs) is still lacking. The recent work Papyan et al. (2020); Papyan (2020) has empiri-
cally uncovered an intriguing phenomenon regarding the last-layer features and classifier of DNNs,
called Neural Collapse (N C) that can be briefly summarized as the following characteristics:
• Variability Collapse (N C 1 ): Within-class variability of features collapses to zero.
• Convergence to Simplex ETF (N C 2 ): Class-mean features converge to a simplex Equiangular
  Tight Frame (ETF), achieving equal lengths, equal pair-wise angles, and maximal distance in the
  feature space.
• Self-Duality (N C 3 ): Linear classifiers converge to class-mean features, up to a global rescaling.
Neural collapse provides a mathematically elegant characterization of learned representations or
features in deep learning based classification models, independent of network architectures, dataset
properties, and optimization algorithms. Building on the so-called unconstrained feature model
(Mixon et al., 2020) or the layer-peeled model (Fang et al., 2021), subsequent research (Zhu et al.,
2021; Lu & Steinerberger, 2020; Ji et al., 2021; Yaras et al.; Wojtowytsch et al., 2020; Ji et al.; Zhou
et al.; Han et al.; Tirer & Bruna, 2022; Zhou et al., 2022a; Poggio & Liao, 2020; Thrampoulidis
et al., 2022; Tirer et al., 2023; Nguyen et al., 2022) has provided theoretical evidence for the exis-
tence of the N C phenomenon when using a family of loss functions including cross-entropy (CE)
loss, mean-square-error (MSE) loss and variants of CE loss. Theoretical results regarding N C not
only contribute to a new understanding of the working of DNNs but also provide inspiration for
developing new techniques to enhance their practical performance in various settings, such as im-
balanced learning (Xie et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023b), transfer learning (Galanti et al., 2022a; Li
et al., 2022; Xie et al., 2022; Galanti et al., 2022b), continual learning (Yu et al., 2022; Yang et al.,
2023), loss and architecture designs (Chan et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2021), etc.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 (a) One-vs-rest distance: Case 1       (b) One-vs-rest distance: Case 2            (c) One-vs-one distance

Figure 1: In Generalized Neural Collapse (GN C), the optimal classifier weight {wk } is a Softmax
Code defined from maximizing the one-vs-rest distance (see Definition 2.1). (a, b) Illustration of the
one-vs-rest distance using the example of w1 -vs-{w2 , w3 , w4 } distance, under two configurations
of {wk }4k=1 in a two-dimensional space. The distance in Case 1 is larger than that in Case 2. (c)
Illustration of the one-vs-one distance used to define the Tammes problem (see Eq. (11)). We prove
GN C under technical conditions on Softmax Code and Tammes problem (see Section 3).

However, most of the existing empirical and theoretical studies in N C focus on the case that the
number of classes is small relative to the dimension of the feature space. Nevertheless, there are
many cases in practice where the number of classes can be extremely large, such as
• Person identification (Deng et al., 2019), where each identity is regarded as one class.
• Language models (Devlin et al., 2018), where the number of classes equals the vocabulary size1 .
• Retrieval systems (Mitra et al., 2018), where each document in the dataset represents one class.
• Contrastive learning (Chen et al., 2020a), where each training data can be regarded as one class.
In such cases, it is usually infeasible to have a feature dimension commensurate with the number of
classes due to computational and memory constraints. Therefore, it is crucial to develop a compre-
hensive understanding of the characteristics of learned features in such cases, particularly with the
increasing use of web-scale datasets that have a vast number of classes.
Contributions. This paper studies the geometric properties of the learned last-layer features and
the classifiers for cases where the number of classes can be arbitrarily large compared to the feature
dimension. Motivated by the use of spherical constraints in learning with a large number of classes,
such as person identification and contrastive learning, we consider networks trained with spherical
constraints on the features and classifiers. Our contributions can be summarized as follows.
• The Arrangement Problem: Generalizing N C to a Large Number of Classes. In Section 2
  we introduce the generalized N C (GN C) for characterizing the last-layer features and classifier.
  In particular, GN C 1 and GN C 3 state the same as N C 1 and N C 3 , respectively. GN C 2 states
  that the classifier weight is a Softmax Code, which generalizes the notion of a simplex ETF and is
  defined as the collection of points on the unit hyper-sphere that maximizes the minimum one-vs-all
  distance (see Figure 1 (a,b) for an illustration). Empirically, we verify that the GN C approximately
  holds in practical DNNs trained with a small temperature in CE loss. Furthermore, we conduct
  theoretical study in Section 3 to show that under the unconstrained features model (UFM) (Mixon
  et al., 2020; Fang et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2021) and with a vanishing temperature, the global
  solutions satisfy GN C under technical conditions on Softmax Code and solutions to the Tammes
  problem (Tammes, 1930), the latter defined as a collection of points on the unit hyper-sphere that
  maximizes the minimum one-vs-one distance (see Figure 1(c) for an illustration).
• The Assignment Problem: Implicit Regularization of Class Semantic Similarity. Unlike the
  simplex ETF (as in N C 2 ) in which the distance between any pair of vectors is the same, not all
  pairs in a Softmax Code (as in GN C 2 ) are of equal distant when the number of classes is greater
  than the feature space dimension. This leads to the “assignment” problem, i.e., the correspon-
    1
      Language models are usually trained to classify a token (or a collection of them) that is either masked in
the input (as in BERT (Devlin et al., 2018)), or the next one following the context (as in language modeling),
or a span of masked tokens in the input (as in T5 (Raffel et al., 2020)), etc. In such cases, the number of classes
is equal to the number of all possible tokens, i.e., the vocabulary size.


                                                        2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  dence between the classes and the weights in a Softmax Code. In Section 4, we show empirically
  an implicit regularization effect by the semantic similarity of the classes, i.e., conceptually similar
  classes (e.g., Cat and Dog) are often assigned to closer classifier weights in Softmax Code, com-
  pared to those that are conceptually dissimilar (e.g., Cat and Truck). Moreover, such an implicit
  regularization is beneficial, i.e., enforcing other assignments produces inferior model quality.
• Cost Reduction for Practical Network Training/Fine-tuning. The universality of alignment
  between classifier weights and class means (i.e., GN C 3 ) implies that training the classifier is
  unnecessary and the weight can be simply replaced by the class-mean features. Our experiments in
  Section 5 demonstrate that such a strategy achieves comparable performance to classical training
  methods, and even better out-of-distribution performance than classical fine-tuning methods with
  significantly reduced parameters.
Related work. The recent work Liu et al. (2023a) also introduces a notion of generalized N C for
the case of large number of classes, which predicts equal-spaced features. However, their work
focuses on networks trained with weight decay, for which empirical results in Appendix B.2 and
Yaras et al. (2023) show to not produce equal-length and equal-spaced features for a relatively large
number of classes. Due to limited space, we refer to Appendix B.2 for the detailed comparison
between different geometric properties of the learned features and classifiers for the weight decay
and spherical constraints formulations. Moreover, the work Liu et al. (2023a) relies on a specific
choice of kernel function to describe the uniformity. Instead, we concretely define GN C 2 through
the softmax code. When preparing this submission, we notice a concurrent work Gao et al. (2023)
that provides analysis for generalized N C, but again for networks trained with weight decay. In
addition, Gao et al. (2023) analyzes gradient flow for the corresponding UFM with a particular
choice of weight decay, while our work studies the global optimality of the training problem. The
work Zhou et al. (2022a) empirically shows that MSE loss is inferior to the CE loss when K > d+1,
but no formal analysis is provided for CE loss. Finally, the global optimality of the UFM with
spherical constraints has been studied in Lu & Steinerberger (2022); Yaras et al. (2023) but only for
the cases K ≤ d + 1 or K → ∞.

2     G ENERALIZED N EURAL C OLLAPSE FOR A L ARGE N UMBER OF C LASSES
In this section, we begin by providing a brief overview of DNNs and introducing notations used in
this study in Section 2.1. We will also introduce the concept of the UFM which is used in theoretical
study of the subsequent section. Next, we introduce the notion of Softmax Code for describing
the distribution of a collection of points on the unit sphere, which prepares us to present a formal
definition of Generalized Neural Collapse and empirical verification of its validity in Section 2.2.

2.1    BASICS C ONCEPTS OF DNN S

A DNN classifier aims to learn a feature mapping ϕθ (·) : RD → Rd with learnable parameters θ
that maps from input x ∈ RD to a deep representation called the feature ϕθ (x) ∈ Rd , and a linear
classifier W = [w1 w2 · · · wK ] ∈ Rd×K such that the output (also known as the logits)
ΨΘ (x) = W ⊤ ϕθ (x) ∈ RK can make a correct prediction. Here, Θ = {θ, W } represents all the
learnable parameters of the DNN.2
Given a balanced training set {(xk,i , yk )}i∈[n],k∈[K] ⊆ RD × RK , where xk,i is the i-th sample in
the k-th class and yk is the corresponding one-hot label with all zero entries except for unity in the
k-th entry, the network parameters Θ are typically optimized by minimizing the following CE loss
                 K    n
             1 XX                                                          exp(z /τ )
                                                                                 k
      min           LCE (ΨΘ (xk,i ) , yk , τ ) , LCE (z, yk , τ ) = − log PK               .                  (1)
      Θ     nK  i=1                                                        j=1 exp(zj /τ )
                k=1

In above, we assume that a spherical constraint is imposed on the feature and classifier weights
and that the logit zk is divided by the temperature parameter τ . This is a common practice when
    2
      We ignore the bias term in the linear classifier since (i) the bias term is used to compensate the global
mean of the features and vanishes when the global mean is zero (Papyan et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2021), (ii) it is
the default setting across a wide range of applications such as person identification (Wang et al., 2018b; Deng
et al., 2019), contrastive learning (Chen et al., 2020a; He et al., 2020), etc.


                                                        3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


dealing with a large number of classes (Wang et al., 2018b; Chang et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2020a).
Specifically, we enforce {wk , ϕΘ (xk,i )} ⊆ Sd−1 := {a ∈ Rd : ∥a∥2 = 1} for all i ∈ [n] and
k ∈ [K]. An alternative regularization is weight decay on the model parameters Θ, the effect of
which we study in Appendix B.
To simplify the   notation, we denote the oblique manifold embedded in Euclidean space by
OB(d, K) := W ∈ Rd×K | wk ∈ Sd−1 , ∀k ∈ [K] . In addition, we denote the last-layer fea-
tures by hk,i := ϕθ (xk,i ). We rewrite all the features in a matrix form as
        H := [H1       H2 · · · HK ] ∈ Rd×nK , with Hk := [hk,1 · · · hk,n ] ∈ Rd×n .
                           Pn
Also we denote by hk := n1 i=1 hk,i the class-mean feature for each class.
Unconstrained Features Model (UFM). The UFM (Mixon et al., 2020) or layer-peeled model
(Fang et al., 2021), wherein the last-layer features are treated as free optimization variables, are
widely used for theoretically understanding the N C phenomena. In this paper, we will consider the
following UFM with a spherical constraint on classifier weights W and unconstrained features H:
                  K    n
             1 XX
                    LCE W ⊤ hk,i , yk , τ

       min                                          s.t.   W ∈ OB(d, K), H ∈ OB(d, nK).             (2)
       W ,H nK
                i=1
                 k=1


2.2   G ENERALIZED N EURAL C OLLAPSE

We start by introducing the notion of softmax code which will be used for describing GN C.
Definition 2.1 (Softmax Code). Given positive integers d and K, a softmax code is an arrangement
of K points on a unit sphere of Rd that maximizes the minimal distance between one point and the
convex hull of the others:
                                                                .

           max       ρone-vs-rest (W ), where ρone-vs-rest (W ) = min dist wk , {wj }j∈[K]\k . (3)
        W ∈OB(d,K)                                                k

In above, the distance between a point v and a set W is defined as dist(v, W) = inf w∈conv(W) {∥v−
w∥}, where conv(·) denotes the convex hull of a set.

We now extend N C to the Generalized Neural Collapse (GN C) that captures the properties of the
features and classifiers at the terminal phase of training. With a vanishing temperature (i.e., τ → 0),
the last-layer features and classifier exhibit the following GN C phenomenon:
• Variability Collapse (GN C 1 ). All features of the same class collapse to the corresponding    class
                                                                              . 1
  mean. Formally, as used in Papyan et al. (2020), the quantity GN C 1 = K          tr ΣW Σ†B → 0,
                  1
                    PK          ⊤                  1
                                                     Pk Pn                                    ⊤
  where ΣB := K        k=1 hk hk and ΣW := nK            k=1     i=1 hk,i − hk     hk,i − hk     denote
  the between-class and within-class covariance matrices, respectively.
• Softmax Codes (GN C 2 ). Classifier weights converge to the softmax code in definition 2.1. This
                                          .
  property may be measured by GN C 2 = ρone-vs-rest (W ) → maxW ∈OB(d,K) ρone-vs-rest (W ).
• Self-Duality (GN C 3 ). Linear classifiers converge to the class-mean  features. Formally, this align-
                                     . 1 PK               ⊤

  ment can be measured by GN C 3 = K          k=1  1 − w  k h k   → 0.


Figure 2: Illustration of GN C and test accuracy across different temperatures τ in training a
ResNet18 on CIFAR100 with d = 10 and K = 100. “Optimal” in the second left figure refers to
maxW ∈OB(d,K) ρone-vs-rest (W ).

The main difference between GN C and N C lies in GN C 2 / N C 2 , which describe the configuration
of the classifier weight W . In N C 2 , the classifier weights corresponding to different classes are


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


described as a simplex ETF, which is a configuration of vectors that have equal pair-wise distance
and that distance is maximized. Such a configuration does not exist in general when the number of
classes is large, i.e., K > d + 1. GN C 2 introduces a new configuration described by the notion of
softmax code. By Definition 2.1, a softmax code is a configuration where each vector is maximally
separated from all the other points, measured by its distance to their convex hull. Such a definition
is motivated from theoretical analysis (see Section 3). In particular, it reduces to simplex ETF when
K ≤ d + 1 (see Theorem 3.3).
Interpretation of Softmax Code. Softmax Code abides a max-distance interpretation. Specifi-
cally, consider the features {hk,i }k∈[K],i∈[n] from n classes. In multi-class classification, one com-
monly used distance (or margin) measurement is the one-vs-rest (also called one-vs-all or one-vs-
other) distance (Murphy, 2022), i.e., the distance of class k vis-a-vis other classes. Noting that
the distance between two classes is equivalent to the distance between the convex hulls of the
data from each class (Murphy, 2022), the distance of class k vis-a-vis other classes is given by
dist({hk,i }i∈[n] , {hk′ ,i }k′ ∈[K]\k,i∈[n] ). From GN C 1 and GN C 3 we can rewrite the distance as

 dist {hk,i }i∈[n] , {hk′ ,i }k′ ∈[K]\k,i∈[n] = dist hk , {hk′ }k′ ∈[K]\k = dist wk , {wk′ }k′ ∈[K]\k .
                                                                                                      (4)
By noticing that the rightmost term is minimized in a Softmax Code, it follows from GN C 2 that
the learned features satisfy that their one-vs-rest distance minimized over all classes k ∈ [K] is
maximized. In other words, measured by one-vs-rest distance, the learned features are are maximally
separated. Finally, we mention that the separation of classes may be characterized by other measures
of distance as well, such as the one-vs-one distance (also known as the sample margin in Cao et al.
(2019); Zhou et al. (2022b)) which leads to the well-known Tammes problem, or the distances
captured in the Thomson problems Thomson (1904); Hars. We will discuss this in Section 3.2.
Experimental Verification of GN C. We verify the occurence of GN C by training a ResNet18 (He
et al., 2016) for image classification on the CIFAR100 dataset (Krizhevsky, 2009), and report the
results in Figure 2. To simulate the case of K > d + 1, we use a modified ResNet18 where the
feature dimension is 10. From Figure 2, we can observe that both GN C 1 and GN C 3 converge to 0,
and GN C 2 converges towards the spherical code with relatively small temperature τ . Additionally,
selecting a small τ is not only necessary for achieving GN C, but also for attaining high testing
performance. Due to limited space, we present experimental details and other experiments with
different architectures and datasets in Appendix B. In the next section, we provide a theoretical
justification for GN C under UFM in (2).

3     T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS OF GNC
In this section, we provide a theoretical analysis of GN C under the UFM in (2). We first show in
Section 3.1 that under appropriate temperature parameters, the solution to (2) can be approximated
by the solution to a “HardMax” problem, which is of a simpler form amenable for subsequent
analysis. We then provide a theoretical analysis of GN C in Section 3.2, by first proving the optimal
classifier forms a Softmax Code (GN C 2 ), and then establishing GN C 1 and GN C 3 under technical
conditions on Softmax Code and solutions to the Tammes problem. In addition, we provide insights
for the design of feature dimension d given a number of classes K by analyzing the upper and lower
bound for the one-vs-rest distance of a Softmax Code. All proofs can be found in Appendix C.

3.1   P REPARATION : THE A SYMPTOTIC CE L OSS

Due to the nature of the softmax function which blends the output vector, analyzing the CE loss
can be difficult even for the unconstrained features model. The previous work Yaras et al. (2023)
analyzing the case K ≤ d + 1 relies on the simple structure of the global solutions, where the
classifiers form a simplex ETF. However, this approach cannot be directly applied to the case K >
d + 1 due to the absence of an informative characterization of the global solution. Motivated by the
fact that the temperature τ is often selected as a small value (τ < 1, e.g., τ = 1/30 in Wang et al.
(2018b)) in practical applications (Wang et al., 2018b; Chen et al., 2020a), we consider the case of
τ → 0 where the CE loss (2) converges to the following “HardMax” problem:
                                                             .
      min       LHardMax (W , H), where LHardMax (W , H) = max max max            ⟨wk′ − wk , hk,i ⟩,
  W ∈OB(d,K)                                                   k∈[K] i∈[n] k′ ̸=k                     (5)
 H∈OB(d,nK)


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where ⟨·, ·⟩ denotes the inner-product operator. More precisely, we have the following result.
Lemma 3.1 (Convergence to the HardMax problem). For any positive integers K and n, we have
                                                             
                                K X n
                            1  X
                                       LCE W ⊤ hk,i , yk , τ  ⊆ arg min LHardMax (W , H). (6)

 lim sup  arg min
                                                             
   τ →0      W ∈OB(d,K)    nK      i=1                            W ∈OB(d,K)
                                 k=1
            H∈OB(d,nK)                                                    H∈OB(d,nK)

Our goal is not to replace CE with the HardMax function in practice. Instead, we will analyze the
HardMax problem in (5) to gain insight into the global solutions and the GN C phenomenon.

3.2   M AIN R ESULT: T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS OF GN C

GN C 2 and Softmax Code. Our main result for GN C 2 is the following.
Theorem 3.2 (GN C 2 ). Let (W ⋆ , H ⋆ ) be an optimal solution to (5). Then, it holds that W ⋆ is a
Softmax Code, i.e.,
                             W ⋆ = arg max ρone-vs-rest (W ).                                   (7)
                                             W ∈OB(d,K)

GN C 2 is described by the Softmax Code, which is defined from an optimization problem (see Defi-
nition 2.1). This optimization problem may not have a closed form solution in general. Nonetheless,
the one-vs-rest distance that is used to define Softmax Code has a clear geometric meaning, making
an intuitive interpretation of Softmax Code tractable. Specifically, maximizing the one-vs-rest dis-
tance results in the classifier weight vectors {wk⋆ } to be maximally distant. As shown in Figures 1a
and 1b for a simple setting of four classes in a 2D plane, the weight vectors {wk } that are uniformly
distributed (and hence maximally distant) have a larger margin than the non-uniform case.
For certain choices of (d, K) the Softmax Code bears a simple form.
Theorem 3.3. For any positive integers K and d, let W ⋆ ∈ OB(d, K) be a Softmax Code. Then,
              ⋆                                                      ⋆           2πk         2πk
 • d=  2: {wk } is uniformly distributed on the unit circle, i.e., {wk } = { cos( K +α), sin( K +
   α) } for some α;
                                                                 q
                                                                     K            1   ⊤
 • K ≤ d + 1: {wk⋆ } forms a simplex ETF, i.e., W ⋆ =               K−1 P (IK − K 1K 1K ) for some
   orthonomal P ∈ IRd×K ;
 • d + 1 < K ≤ 2d: ρone-vs-rest (W ⋆ ) = 1 which can be achieved when {wk⋆ } are a subset of
   vertices of a cross-polytope3 ;
For the cases of K ≤ d + 1, the optimal W ⋆ from Theorem 3.3 is the same as that of Lu & Steiner-
berger (2022). However, Theorem 3.3 is an analysis of the HardMax loss while Lu & Steinerberger
(2022) analyzed the CE loss.
GN C 1 and Within-class Variability Collapse. To establish the within-class variability collapse
property, we require a technical condition associated with the Softmax Code. Recall that Softmax
Codes are those that maximize the minimum one-vs-rest distance over all classes. We introduce
rattlers, which are classes that do not attain such a minimum.
Definition 3.4 (Rattler of Softmax Code). Given positive integers d and K, a rattler associated with
a Softmax Code W SC ∈ OB(d, K) is an index krattler ∈ [K] for which
                  min dist(wkSC , {wjSC }j∈[K]\k ) ̸= dist(wkSCrattler , {wjSC }j∈[K]\krattler ).     (8)
                 k∈[K]

In other words, rattlers are points in a Softmax Code with no neighbors at the minimum one-to-rest
distance. This notion is borrowed from the literature of the Tammes Problem (Cohn, 2022; Wang,
2009), which we will soon discuss in more detail4 .
We are now ready to present the main results for GN C 1 .
    3
      Indeed, any sphere code W that achieves equality in Rankin’s orthoplex bound (Fickus et al., 2017)
maxk̸=j ⟨wk , wj ⟩ ≥ 0 is a softmax code.
    4
      The occurrence of rattlers is rare: Among the 182 pairs of (d, K) for which the solution to Tammes
problem is known, only 31 have rattlers (Cohn, 2022). This has excluded the cases of d = 2 or K ≤ 2d where
there is no rattler. The occurrence of ratter in Softmax Code may be rare as well.


                                                        6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 3.5 (GN C 1 ). Let (W ⋆ , H ⋆ ) be an optimal solution to (5). For all k that is not a rattler
of W ⋆ , it holds that
                     ⋆ .

                    hk = h⋆k,1 = · · · = h⋆k,n = PSd−1 wk⋆ − P{wj⋆ }j∈[K]\k (wk⋆ ) ,               (9)
             .
where PW (v) = arg minw∈conv(W) {∥v − w∥2 } denotes the projection of v on conv(W).

The following result shows that the requirement in the Theorem 3.5 that k is not a rattler is satisfied
in certain cases.
Theorem 3.6. If d = 2, or K ≤ d + 1, Softmax Code has no rattler for all classes.

GN C 3 and Self-Duality. To motivate our technical conditions for establishing self-duality, assume
that any optimal solution (W ⋆ , H ⋆ ) to (5) satisfies self-duality as well as GN C 1 . This implies that
             arg min           LHardMax (W , H) =       arg min     max max max
                                                                             ′
                                                                               ⟨wk′ − wk , wk ⟩. (10)
 W ∈OB(d,K),H∈OB(d,nK)                               W ∈OB(d,nK) k∈[K] i∈[n] k ̸=k

After simplification we may rewrite the optimization problem on the right hand side equivalently as:
                                                               .
              max     ρone-vs-one (W ), where ρone-vs-one (W ) = min min
                                                                       ′
                                                                          dist(wk , wk′ ).     (11)
             W ∈OB(d,K)                                                k∈[K] k ̸=k

Eq. (11) is the well-known Tammes problem. Geometrically, the problem asks for a distribution
of K points on the unit sphere of IRd so that the minimum distance between any pair of points is
maximized. The Tammes problem is unsolved in general, except for certain pairs of (K, d).
Both the Tammes problem and the Softmax Code are problems of arranging points to be maximally
separated on the unit sphere, with their difference being the specific measures of separation. Com-
paring (11) and (3), the Tammes problem maximizes for all k ∈ [K] the one-vs-one distance, i.e.,
mink′ ̸=k dist(wk , wk′ ), whereas the Softmax Code maximizes the minimum one-vs-rest distance,
i.e., dist(wk , {wj }j∈[K]\k ). Both one-vs-one distance and one-vs-rest distances characterize the
separation of the weight vector wk from {wj }j∈[K]\k . As illustrated in Figure 1, taking k = 1, the
former is the distance between w1 and its closest point in the set {w2 , w3 , w4 }, in this case w2 (see
Figure 1c), whereas the later captures the minimal distance from w1 to the convex hull of the rest
vectors {w1 , w2 , w3 } (see Figure 1b).
Since the Tammes problem can be derived from the self-duality constraint on the HardMax problem,
it may not be surprising that the Tammes problem can be used to describe a condition for establishing
self-duality. Specifically, we have the following result.
Theorem 3.7 (GN C 3 ). For any K, d such that both Tammes problem and Softmax Code have no
rattler, the following two statements are equivalent:
 • Any optimal solution (W ⋆ , H ⋆ ) to (5) satisfies h⋆k,i = wk∗ , ∀i ∈ [n], ∀k ∈ [K];
 • The Tammes problem and the Softmax codes are equivalent, i.e.,
                             arg max ρone-vs-rest (W ) = arg max ρone-vs-one (W ).                       (12)
                           W ∈OB(d,K)                      W ∈OB(d,K)


In words, Theorem 3.7 states that GN C 3 holds if and only if the Tammes problem in (11) and the
Softmax codes are equivalent. As both the Tammes problem and Softmax Code maximize separation
between one vector and the others, though their notions of separation are different, we conjecture
that they are equivalent and share the same optimal solutions. We prove this conjecture for some
special cases and leave the study for the general case as future work5 .
Theorem 3.8. If d = 2, or K ≤ d + 1, the Tammes problem and the Softmax codes are equivalent.

3.3      I NSIGHTS FOR C HOOSING F EATURE D IMENSION d G IVEN C LASS N UMBER K

Given a class number K, how does the choice of feature dimension d affect the model performance?
Intuitively, smaller d reduces the separability between classes in a Softmax Code. We define this
rigorously by providing bounds for the one-vs-rest distance of a Softmax Code based on d and K.
   5
       We numerically verify the equivalence for all the cases with d ≤ 100 in Table 1 of Cohn & Kumar (2007).


                                                       7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                          p √
Theorem 3.9. Assuming K ≥ 2π ed and letting Γ(·) denote the Gamma function, we have
           √              2                                      √            1
        1    π Γ d+12
                         d−1
                                                                2 π Γ d+1
                                                                       2
                                                                             d−1

                  d
                             ≤    max     ρone-vs-rest (W ) ≤ 2        d
                                                                                 .  (13)
        2 K Γ 2 +1             W ∈OB(d,K)                        K Γ 2

The bounds characterize the separability for K classes
in d-dimensional space. Given the number of classes K
and desired margin ρ, the minimal feature dimension is
roughly an order of log(K 2 /ρ), showing classes separate
easily in higher dimensions. This also provides a justi-
fication for applications like face classification and self-
supervised learning, where the number of classes (e.g.,
millions of classes) could be significantly larger than the
dimensionality of the features (e.g., d = 512).
By conducting experiments on ResNet-50 with varying
feature dimensions for ImageNet classification, we fur-
                                                            Figure 3: Effect of feature dimension d
ther corroborate the relationship between feature dimen-
                                                            on (Left y-axis): ρone-vs-rest (W ⋆ ) and its
sion and network performance in Figure 3. First, we
                                                            upper/lower bounds (in Theorem 3.9),
observe that the curve of the optimal distance is closely
                                                            and (Right y-axis): training and test ac-
aligned with the curve of testing performance, indicating
                                                            curacies for ResNet-50 on ImageNet.
a strong correlation between distance and testing accu-
racy. Moreover, both the distance and performance curves exhibit a slow (exponential) decrease as
the feature dimension d decreases, which is consistent with the bounds in Theorem 3.9.

4    T HE A SSIGNMENT P ROBLEM : A N E MPIRICAL S TUDY
Unlike the case d ≥ K − 1 where the optimal classifier (simplex ETF) has equal angles between
any pair of the classifier weights, when d < K − 1, not all pairs of classifier weights are equally
distant with the optimal W (Softmax Code) predicted in Theorem 3.2. Consequently, this leads to
a “class assignment” problem. To illustrate this, we train a ResNet18 network with d = 2 on four
classes {Automobile, Cat, Dog, Truck} from CIFAR10 dataset that are selected due to their clear
semantic similarity and discrepancy. In this case, according to Theorem 3.3, the optimal classifiers
are given by [1, 0], [−1, 0], [0, 1], [0, −1], up to a rotation. Consequently, there are three distinct class
assignments, as illustrated in Figures 4b to 4d.
When doing standard training, the classifier consistently converges to the case where Cat and Dog
are closer together across 5 different trials; Figure 4a shows the learned features (dots) and classifier
weights (arrows) in one of such trials. This demonstrates the implicit algorithmic regularization in
training DNNs, which naturally attracts (semantically) similar classes and separates dissimilar ones.
We also conduct experiments with the classifier fixed to be one of the three arrangements, and
present the results in Figures 4b to 4d. Among them, we observe that the case where Cat and Dog
are far apart achieves a testing accuracy of 89.95%, lower than the other two cases with accuracies
of 91.90% and 92.13%. This demonstrates the important role of class assignment to the general-
ization of DNNs, and that the implicit bias of the learned classifier is benign, i.e., leads to a more
generalizable solutions. A comprehensive study of this phenomenon is deferred to future work.


(a) Trainable (91.45%)      (b) Fixed A1 (91.90%)        (c) Fixed A2 (92.13%)        (d) Fixed A3 (89.95%)

Figure 4: Assignment of classes to classifier weights for a ResNet18 with 2-dimensional feature
space trained on the 4 classes {Automobile, Cat, Dog, Truck} from CIFAR10. (a) Learned classifier.
(b-d) Classifiers fixed to be three different assignments. Test accuracy is reported in the bracket.
                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5   I MPLICATIONS FOR P RACTICAL N ETWORK T RAINING /F INE - TUNING

Since the classifier always converges to a simplex ETF when K ≤ d + 1, prior work proposes to fix
the classifier as a simplex ETF for reducing training cost (Zhu et al., 2021) and handling imbalance
dataset (Yang et al., 2022). When K > d + 1, the optimal classifier is also known to be a Softmax
Code according to GN C 2 . However, the same method as in prior work may become sub-optimal
due to the class assignment problem (see Section 4). To address this, we introduce the method
of class-mean features (CMF) classifiers, where the classifier weights are set to be the exponential
moving average of the mini-batch class-mean features during the training process. This approach is
motivated from GN C 3 which states that the optimal classifier converges to the class-mean features.
We explain the detail of CMF in Appendix B. As in prior work, CMF can reduce trainable parameters
as well. For instance, it can reduce 30.91% of total parameters in a ResNet18 for BUPT-CBFace-
50 dataset (Zhang & Deng, 2020). Here, we compare CMF with the standard training where the
classifier is learned together with the feature mapping, in both training from scratch and fine-tuning.
Training from Scratch. We train a ResNet18 on CIFAR100 by using a learnable classifier or the
CMF classifier. The learning curves in Figure 5 indicate that the approach with CMF classifier
achieves comparable performance to the classical training protocols.


               (a) ResNet                    (b) DenseNet                    (c) ResNeXt

Figure 5: Comparison of the learning curves (training and testing accuracies) with learned
classifiers vs. CMF classifiers trained with various networks on CIFAR100 dataset and d = 10.

Fine-tuning. To verify the effectiveness of the CMF classifiers on fine-tuning, we follow the setting
in Kumar et al. (2022) to measure the performance of the fine-tuned model on both in-distribution
(ID) task (i.e., CIFAR10 Krizhevsky (2009)) and OOD task (STL10 Coates et al. (2011)). We
compare the standard approach that fine-tunes both the classifier (randomly initialized) and the pre-
trained feature mapping with our approach (using the CMF classifier). Our experiments show that
the approach with CMF classifier achieves slightly better ID accuracy (98.00% VS 97.00%) and
a better OOD performance (90.67% VS 87.42%). The improvement of OOD performance stems
from the ability to align the classifier with the class-means through the entire process, which better
preserves the OOD property of the pre-trained model. Our approach also simplifies the two-stage
approach of linearly probing and subsequent full fine-tuning in Kumar et al. (2022).


6   C ONCLUSION

In this work, we have introduced generalized neural collapse (GN C) for characterizing learned last-
layer features and classifiers in DNNs under an arbitrary number of classes and feature dimensions.
We empirically validate the GN C phenomenon on practical DNNs that are trained with a small tem-
perature in the CE loss and subject to spherical constraints on the features and classifiers. Building
upon the unconstrained features model we have proven that GN C holds under certain technical con-
ditions. GN C could offer valuable insights for the design, training, and generalization of DNNs. For
example, the minimal one-vs-rest distance provides implications for designing feature dimensions
when dealing with a large number of classes. Additionally, we have leveraged GN C to enhance
training efficiency and fine-tuning performance by fixing the classifier as class-mean features. Fur-
ther exploration of GN C in other scenarios, such as imbalanced learning, is left for future work. It is
also of interest to further study the problem of optimally assigning classifiers from Softmax Code for
each class, which could shed light on developing techniques for better classification performance.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Stephen P Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex optimization. Cambridge university press, 2004.
Andrea Braides. A handbook of γ-convergence. In Handbook of Differential Equations: stationary
  partial differential equations, volume 3, pp. 101–213. Elsevier, 2006.
Kaidi Cao, Colin Wei, Adrien Gaidon, Nikos Arechiga, and Tengyu Ma. Learning imbalanced
  datasets with label-distribution-aware margin loss. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 32, 2019.
Constantin Carathéodory. Über den variabilitätsbereich der fourier’schen konstanten von positiven
  harmonischen funktionen. Rendiconti Del Circolo Matematico di Palermo (1884-1940), 32(1):
  193–217, 1911.
Kwan Ho Ryan Chan, Yaodong Yu, Chong You, Haozhi Qi, John Wright, and Yi Ma. Redunet: A
 white-box deep network from the principle of maximizing rate reduction. The Journal of Machine
 Learning Research, 23(1):4907–5009, 2022.
Wei-Cheng Chang, X Yu Felix, Yin-Wen Chang, Yiming Yang, and Sanjiv Kumar. Pre-training
 tasks for embedding-based large-scale retrieval. In International Conference on Learning Repre-
 sentations, 2019.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 1597–1607. PMLR, 2020a.
Xinlei Chen and Kaiming He. Exploring simple siamese representation learning. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 15750–15758, 2021.
Xinlei Chen, Haoqi Fan, Ross Girshick, and Kaiming He. Improved baselines with momentum
  contrastive learning, 2020b.
Adam Coates, Andrew Ng, and Honglak Lee. An analysis of single-layer networks in unsupervised
  feature learning. In Geoffrey Gordon, David Dunson, and Miroslav Dudı́k (eds.), Proceedings
  of the Fourteenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 15 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 215–223, Fort Lauderdale, FL, USA, 11–13 Apr
  2011. PMLR. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v15/coates11a.html.
Henry Cohn. Small spherical and projective codes. 2022.
Henry Cohn and Abhinav Kumar. Universally optimal distribution of points on spheres. Journal of
  the American Mathematical Society, 20(1):99–148, 2007.
Jiankang Deng, Jia Guo, Niannan Xue, and Stefanos Zafeiriou. Arcface: Additive angular margin
   loss for deep face recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
   and pattern recognition, pp. 4690–4699, 2019.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Cong Fang, Hangfeng He, Qi Long, and Weijie J Su. Exploring deep neural networks via layer-
  peeled model: Minority collapse in imbalanced training. Proceedings of the National Academy
  of Sciences, 118(43):e2103091118, 2021.
Matthew Fickus, John Jasper, Dustin G Mixon, and Cody E Watson. A brief introduction to equi-
 chordal and equi-isoclinic tight fusion frames. In Wavelets and Sparsity XVII, volume 10394, pp.
 186–194. SPIE, 2017.
Tomer Galanti, András György, and Marcus Hutter. Generalization bounds for transfer learning with
  pretrained classifiers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.12532, 2022a.
Tomer Galanti, András György, and Marcus Hutter. On the role of neural collapse in transfer learn-
  ing. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022b.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Peifeng Gao, Qianqian Xu, Peisong Wen, Huiyang Shao, Zhiyong Yang, and Qingming Huang. A
  study of neural collapse phenomenon: Grassmannian frame, symmetry, generalization, 2023.
XY Han, Vardan Papyan, and David L Donoho. Neural collapse under mse loss: Proximity to and
 dynamics on the central path. In International Conference on Learning Representations.
Laszlo Hars. Numerical solutions of the thomson-p problems.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition, 2015.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.
Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for
  unsupervised visual representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 9729–9738, 2020.
Wenlong Ji, Yiping Lu, Yiliang Zhang, Zhun Deng, and Weijie J Su. An unconstrained layer-peeled
 perspective on neural collapse. In International Conference on Learning Representations.
Wenlong Ji, Yiping Lu, Yiliang Zhang, Zhun Deng, and Weijie J Su. An unconstrained layer-peeled
 perspective on neural collapse. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.02796, 2021.
Alex Krizhevsky. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. pp. 32–33, 2009. URL
  https://www.cs.toronto.edu/˜kriz/learning-features-2009-TR.pdf.
Ananya Kumar, Aditi Raghunathan, Robbie Jones, Tengyu Ma, and Percy Liang. Fine-tuning can
  distort pretrained features and underperform out-of-distribution, 2022.
Xiao Li, Sheng Liu, Jinxin Zhou, Xinyu Lu, Carlos Fernandez-Granda, Zhihui Zhu, and Qing Qu.
  Principled and efficient transfer learning of deep models via neural collapse. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2212.12206, 2022.
Erik Lindgren, Sashank Reddi, Ruiqi Guo, and Sanjiv Kumar. Efficient training of retrieval models
  using negative cache. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:4134–4146, 2021.
Weiyang Liu, Longhui Yu, Adrian Weller, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Generalizing and decoupling
 neural collapse via hyperspherical uniformity gap. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.06484, 2023a.
Xuantong Liu, Jianfeng Zhang, Tianyang Hu, He Cao, Yuan Yao, and Lujia Pan. Inducing neural
  collapse in deep long-tailed learning. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
  Statistics, pp. 11534–11544. PMLR, 2023b.
Jianfeng Lu and Stefan Steinerberger. Neural collapse with cross-entropy loss. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2012.08465, 2020.
Jianfeng Lu and Stefan Steinerberger. Neural collapse under cross-entropy loss. Applied and Com-
   putational Harmonic Analysis, 59:224–241, 2022.
Bhaskar Mitra, Nick Craswell, et al. An introduction to neural information retrieval. Foundations
  and Trends® in Information Retrieval, 13(1):1–126, 2018.
Dustin G. Mixon, Hans Parshall, and Jianzong Pi. Neural collapse with unconstrained features,
  2020.
Michael H. Moore.    Vector packing in finite dimensional vector spaces. Linear Alge-
 bra and its Applications, 8(3):213–224, 1974. ISSN 0024-3795. doi: https://doi.org/
 10.1016/0024-3795(74)90067-6. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
 article/pii/0024379574900676.
Kevin P Murphy. Probabilistic machine learning: an introduction. MIT press, 2022.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Duc Anh Nguyen, Ron Levie, Julian Lienen, Gitta Kutyniok, and Eyke Hüllermeier. Memorization-
  dilation: Modeling neural collapse under noise. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.05530, 2022.
Vardan Papyan. Traces of class/cross-class structure pervade deep learning spectra. Journal of
  Machine Learning Research, 21(252):1–64, 2020.
Vardan Papyan, XY Han, and David L Donoho. Prevalence of neural collapse during the terminal
  phase of deep learning training. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(40):
  24652–24663, 2020.
Tomaso Poggio and Qianli Liao. Explicit regularization and implicit bias in deep network classifiers
  trained with the square loss. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00072, 2020.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(1):5485–5551, 2020.
Akshay Rangamani, Marius Lindegaard, Tomer Galanti, and Tomaso A Poggio. Feature learning
  in deep classifiers through intermediate neural collapse. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 28729–28745. PMLR, 2023.
R Tyrrell Rockafellar and Roger J-B Wets. Variational analysis, volume 317. Springer Science &
  Business Media, 2009.
Pieter Merkus Lambertus Tammes. On the origin of number and arrangement of the places of exit
  on the surface of pollen-grains. Recueil des travaux botaniques néerlandais, 27(1):1–84, 1930.
Joseph John Thomson. Xxiv. on the structure of the atom: an investigation of the stability and periods
  of oscillation of a number of corpuscles arranged at equal intervals around the circumference of
  a circle; with application of the results to the theory of atomic structure. The London, Edinburgh,
  and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science, 7(39):237–265, 1904.
Christos Thrampoulidis, Ganesh Ramachandra Kini, Vala Vakilian, and Tina Behnia. Imbalance
  trouble: Revisiting neural-collapse geometry. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems, 35:27225–27238, 2022.
Tom Tirer and Joan Bruna. Extended unconstrained features model for exploring deep neural col-
  lapse. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 21478–21505. PMLR, 2022.
Tom Tirer, Haoxiang Huang, and Jonathan Niles-Weed. Perturbation analysis of neural collapse. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 34301–34329. PMLR, 2023.
Feng Wang, Xiang Xiang, Jian Cheng, and Alan Loddon Yuille. Normface: L2 hypersphere embed-
  ding for face verification. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM international conference on Multime-
  dia, pp. 1041–1049, 2017.
Feng Wang, Jian Cheng, Weiyang Liu, and Haijun Liu. Additive margin softmax for face verifica-
  tion. IEEE Signal Processing Letters, 25(7):926–930, 2018a.
Hao Wang, Yitong Wang, Zheng Zhou, Xing Ji, Dihong Gong, Jingchao Zhou, Zhifeng Li, and Wei
  Liu. Cosface: Large margin cosine loss for deep face recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE
  conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 5265–5274, 2018b.
Jeffrey Wang. Finding and investigating exact spherical codes. Experimental Mathematics, 18(2):
   249–256, 2009.
Stephan Wojtowytsch et al. On the emergence of simplex symmetry in the final and penultimate
  layers of neural network classifiers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.05420, 2020.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Liang Xie, Yibo Yang, Deng Cai, and Xiaofei He. Neural collapse inspired attraction-repulsion-
  balanced loss for imbalanced learning. Neurocomputing, 2023.
Shuo Xie, Jiahao Qiu, Ankita Pasad, Li Du, Qing Qu, and Hongyuan Mei. Hidden state variability of
  pretrained language models can guide computation reduction for transfer learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2210.10041, 2022.
Yibo Yang, Liang Xie, Shixiang Chen, Xiangtai Li, Zhouchen Lin, and Dacheng Tao. Do we really
  need a learnable classifier at the end of deep neural network? arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.09081,
  2022.
Yibo Yang, Haobo Yuan, Xiangtai Li, Zhouchen Lin, Philip Torr, and Dacheng Tao. Neural col-
  lapse inspired feature-classifier alignment for few-shot class incremental learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.03004, 2023.
Can Yaras, Peng Wang, Zhihui Zhu, Laura Balzano, and Qing Qu. Neural collapse with normalized
  features: A geometric analysis over the riemannian manifold. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems.
Can Yaras, Peng Wang, Zhihui Zhu, Laura Balzano, and Qing Qu. Neural collapse with normalized
  features: A geometric analysis over the riemannian manifold, 2023.
Xinyang Yi, Ji Yang, Lichan Hong, Derek Zhiyuan Cheng, Lukasz Heldt, Aditee Kumthekar, Zhe
  Zhao, Li Wei, and Ed Chi. Sampling-bias-corrected neural modeling for large corpus item recom-
  mendations. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, pp. 269–277,
  2019.
Chong You. Sparse methods for learning multiple subspaces from large-scale, corrupted and im-
  balanced data. PhD thesis, Johns Hopkins University, 2018.
Longhui Yu, Tianyang Hu, Lanqing Hong, Zhen Liu, Adrian Weller, and Weiyang Liu. Continual
  learning by modeling intra-class variation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.05398, 2022.
Yaodong Yu, Kwan Ho Ryan Chan, Chong You, Chaobing Song, and Yi Ma. Learning diverse and
  discriminative representations via the principle of maximal coding rate reduction. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:9422–9434, 2020.
Yaobin Zhang and Weihong Deng. Class-balanced training for deep face recognition. In Proceedings
  of the ieee/cvf conference on computer vision and pattern recognition workshops, pp. 824–825,
  2020.
Yuhao Zhang, Hang Jiang, Yasuhide Miura, Christopher D Manning, and Curtis P Langlotz. Con-
  trastive learning of medical visual representations from paired images and text. In Machine Learn-
  ing for Healthcare Conference, pp. 2–25. PMLR, 2022.
Jinxin Zhou, Chong You, Xiao Li, Kangning Liu, Sheng Liu, Qing Qu, and Zhihui Zhu. Are all
   losses created equal: A neural collapse perspective. In Advances in Neural Information Process-
   ing Systems.
Jinxin Zhou, Xiao Li, Tianyu Ding, Chong You, Qing Qu, and Zhihui Zhu. On the optimization
   landscape of neural collapse under mse loss: Global optimality with unconstrained features. In
   International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 27179–27202. PMLR, 2022a.
Xiong Zhou, Xianming Liu, Deming Zhai, Junjun Jiang, Xin Gao, and Xiangyang Ji. Learning
  towards the largest margins. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.11589, 2022b.
Zhihui Zhu, Tianyu Ding, Jinxin Zhou, Xiao Li, Chong You, Jeremias Sulam, and Qing Qu. A ge-
  ometric analysis of neural collapse with unconstrained features. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:29820–29834, 2021.


                                                 13
