Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


M AXIMUM E NTROPY H ETEROGENEOUS -AGENT
R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
 Jiarong Liu1вҷҜвҲ—, Yifan Zhong1,2вҲ— , Siyi Hu3 ,
 Haobo Fu4 , Qiang Fu4 , Xiaojun Chang3 , Yaodong Yang1вҖ 
 1
   Institute for AI, Peking University, 2 National Key Laboratory of General AI, BIGAI,
 3
   University of Technology Sydney, 4 Tencent AI Lab

                                              A BSTRACT
          Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has been shown effective for coop-
          erative games in recent years. However, existing state-of-the-art methods face
          challenges related to sample complexity, training instability, and the risk of con-
          verging to a suboptimal Nash Equilibrium. In this paper, we propose a unified
          framework for learning stochastic policies to resolve these issues. We embed
          cooperative MARL problems into probabilistic graphical models, from which
          we derive the maximum entropy (MaxEnt) objective for MARL. Based on the
          MaxEnt framework, we propose Heterogeneous-Agent Soft Actor-Critic (HASAC)
          algorithm. Theoretically, we prove the monotonic improvement and convergence
          to quantal response equilibrium (QRE) properties of HASAC. Furthermore, we
          generalize a unified template for MaxEnt algorithmic design named Maximum
          Entropy Heterogeneous-Agent Mirror Learning (MEHAML), which provides any
          induced method with the same guarantees as HASAC. We evaluate HASAC on six
          benchmarks: Bi-DexHands, Multi-Agent MuJoCo, StarCraft Multi-Agent Chal-
          lenge, Google Research Football, Multi-Agent Particle Environment, and Light
          Aircraft Game. Results show that HASAC consistently outperforms strong base-
          lines, exhibiting better sample efficiency, robustness, and sufficient exploration.

1    I NTRODUCTION
Cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) is a complex problem characterized by the
difficulty of coordinating individual agent policy improvements to enhance overall performance of
the entire team. As a result, traditional independent learning methods in MARL often lead to poor
convergence properties (30; 3). To alleviate these difficulties, the centralized training decentralized
execution (CTDE) paradigm (5; 19) assumes that global states and teammatesвҖҷ actions and policies
are accessible during the training phase. This approach leads to the development of competent
multi-agent policy gradient algorithms (40; 37; 38; 43; 42) as well as value decomposition algorithms
(27; 24; 41; 26; 33) . Furthermore, heterogeneous-agent mirror learning (HAML) (15) provides a
template for rigorous algorithmic design, which guarantees any induced algorithm of monotonic
improvement of joint objective and convergence to Nash equilibrium (NE) (22).
Despite the theoretical soundness of the HAML framework, HAML-derived algorithms suffer from
two main challenges. First, these methods face challenges attributed to either sample complexity or
training instability. On-policy algorithms, including HAPPO and HATRPO (13), require new sample
data for each gradient step, which becomes very expensive as task complexity and agent numbers
increase. Off-policy algorithms, on the other hand, observe training instability and hyperparameter
sensitivity (45). Moreover, HAML-derived algorithms suffer from insufficient exploration, which
can lead to suboptimal NE convergence. This is primarily due to the standard MARL objective they
maximize, where there always exists a deterministic convergence solution (15; 28) and stochasticity is
not inherently encouraged. Since the presence of multiple NEs is a frequently observed phenomenon
in many multi-agent games, these methods can fail to explore sufficiently and prematurely converge
to a suboptimal NE, as we will show in Section 3.2.
A possible solution to these challenges is to let agents learn stochastic behaviors in a sample-efficient
way. Similar to the case of single-agent RL (7), in cooperative MARL problems, stochastic policies
enable effective exploration of the reward landscape, mastery of multiple ways of performing the
  вҲ—
    Equal contribution. вҷҜ Work done during internship at Institute for AI, Peking University. вҖ  Corresponding to
<yaodong.yang@pku.edu.cn>. See our page at https://sites.google.com/view/meharl.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


task, and robustness when facing prediction errors (46). Unfortunately, while a number of methods
have achieved great success in single-agent RL settings (46; 7; 9; 17), solving such stochastic
policy learning problems in cooperative MARL is challenging. Existing CTDE methods offer no
convergence guarantee for learning stochastic policies in general cases. Recently, FOP (44) applies
maximum entropy framework to multi-agent settings via value decomposition. However, FOP only
provides convergence to the global optimum when a task satisfies the Individual-Global-Optimal
(IGO) assumption, which limits its applicability in general cooperative MARL problems.
In this paper, we propose the first theoretically-justified actor-critic framework for learning stochastic
policies in cooperative MARL. Firstly, we model cooperative MARL as a probabilistic graphical
inference problem (Figure 2), where stochastic policies arise as optimal solutions. Performing
variational inference in this model leads us to derive the maximum entropy (MaxEnt) MARL objective.
To maximize this objective, we introduce heterogeneous-agent soft policy iteration (HASPI) which
ensures the properties of monotonic improvement and convergence to quantal response equilibrium
(QRE), which is the solution concept corresponding to stochastic policies in game theory (20; 6).
The key insight behind this theory is the joint soft policy decomposition proposition. Based on
HASPI, we derive the heterogeneous-agent soft actor-critic (HASAC) algorithm. Furthermore, we
generalize the HASPI procedure to the Maximum Entropy Heterogeneous-Agent Mirror Learning
(MEHAML) template, which offers a unified solution to MaxEnt MARL problems and provides the
same theoretical guarantees for any induced methods as HASAC. We test HASAC on six benchmarks:
Multi-Agent MuJoCo (MAMuJoCo) (4), Bi-DexHands (2), StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge (SMAC)
(25), Google Research Football (GRF) (16), Multi-Agent Particle Environment (MPE) (19), and
Light Aircraft Game (LAG) (23). Across the majority of benchmark tasks, HASAC consistently
outperforms strong baselines, exhibiting the advantages of stochastic policies, namely improved
robustness, higher sample efficiency, and sufficient exploration.
2    R ELATED W ORK
Multi-agent policy gradient (MAPG) methods have been shown effective for multi-agent cooperation
tasks (5; 19). Yu et al. (42) discovers the effectiveness of PPO in multi-agent scenarios and introduces
MAPPO. It inspires CoPPO (39), which preserves monotonic improvement property with a simul-
taneous update scheme, HAPPO / HATRPO (13), which proves monotonic improvement and NE
convergence property with a sequential update scheme, and A2PO (34), which preserves per-agent
monotonic improvement property. Guarantees of HAPPO / HATRPO are enhanced by HAML (15),
which abstracts a general theoretical framework and leads to several practical algorithms. While these
methods are effective on challenging benchmarks, we show in Section 3.2 that due to the standard
objective they optimize, they tend to converge rapidly to a suboptimal NE when in proximity to it.
Notably, the idea of NE can be considered as a notion of local optimum in cooperative MARL settings,
and has been studied in many prior works (29; 36; 13; 15). To alleviate suboptimal NE convergence
problem, we propose to learn stochastic policies, which maximize the MaxEnt MARL objective that
we derive from probabilistic graphical models. We adopt QRE (20; 6; 11) as the solution concept in
MaxEnt MARL framework, which generalizes NE when payoffs are perturbed by additional noise.
MaxEnt algorithms have achieved great success in single-agent RL. SQL (7) and SAC (8) learn
optimal MaxEnt policies through soft Q-iteration and soft policy iteration respectively. They refresh
SOTA performance, showcasing the robustness and effective exploration of stochastic policy. Levine
(17) reviews these algorithms from a control as inference perspective. Unfortunately, learning MaxEnt
policies with theoretical guarantees remains a challenge in cooperative MARL settings. MASQL (36)
adopts a multi-agent actor-critic architecture similar to MADDPG (19), extending SQL to multi-agent
settings without providing any theoretical guarantees. FOP (44), on the other hand, is a decomposed
actor-critic method (4; 35), which utilizes the decomposed critic instead of the centralized critic to
learn individual policies. It factorizes the optimal joint policy of MaxEnt MARL under the IGO
assumption (see Appendix A.2 for details), which leads to poor performance in complex scenarios. To
overcome the constraint of IGO, MACPF (32) learns optimal joint policy during training phase and
distills independent policies from the optimal joint policy to fulfill decentralized execution. Such a
procedure can be considered as offline imitating learning, where independent policies strive to mimic
the behaviors produced by the optimal joint policy, but they still lack the guarantee of converging
to the optimum. In contrast, our approach is the first MaxEnt actor-critic method with theoretical
guarantee, presenting an improvement to HAML-based algorithms. We augment the objective with
entropy, propose HASPI, prove its monotonic improvement and QRE (20; 6; 11) convergence property
without restrictive assumption, derive HASAC, and establish MEHAML template.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3     P RELIMINARIES
3.1       C OOPERATIVE M ULTI -AGENT R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
We consider a cooperative Markov game (18) formulated by a tuple вҹЁN , S, Q                A, r, P, Оі, dвҹ©. Here,
                                                                                            n
N = {1, . . . , n} denotes the set of n agents, S is the finite state space, A = i=1 Ai is the joint
                           i
action space, where A denotes the finite action space of agent i, r : S Г— A вҶ’ R is the joint reward
function, P : S Г— A Г— S вҶ’ [0, 1] is the transition probability function, Оі вҲҲ [0, 1) is the discount
factor, and d вҲҲ P(X) (where P(X) denotes the set of probability distributions over a set X ) is
initial state distribution. In this work, we use the notation P(X) to denote the power set of a set
X and Sym(n) to denote the set of permutations of integers {1, . . . , n}, known as the symmetric
group. At time step t вҲҲ {1, . . . , T }, each agent i вҲҲ N is at state st вҲҲ S and then takes independent
actions ait вҲј ПҖ i (В·i |st ), where ПҖ i is the policy of agent i. Let at = a1t , . . . , ant вҲҲ A denotes the
                                Qn       i i

joint action and ПҖ (В·|st ) = i=1 ПҖ В· |st denotes the joint policy. We denote the policy space of

agent i as О i вүң Г—sвҲҲS ПҖ i В·i |s |вҲҖs вҲҲ S , and the joint policy space as О  вүң О 1 , . . . , О n . The
agents receive a joint reward r (st , at ) and move to the next state st+1 вҲј P (В·|st , at ). The initial state
distribution d, the joint policy ПҖ, and the transition kernel P induce a marginal state distribution at
                                                                                                PT
time t, denoted by ПҒtПҖ . We define the (unnormalized) marginal state distribution ПҒПҖ вүң t=1 ПҒtПҖ . The
standard joint objective of all agents is to maximize the expected total reward, defined as1
                                                                                     " T                 #
                                                                                      X
                                           Jstd (ПҖ) = Es1:T вҲјПҒ1:T
                                                              ПҖ ,a1:T вҲјПҖ
                                                                                               r (st , at ) .                                (1)
                                                                                         t=1


3.2       L IMITATIONS OF E XISTING C OOPERATIVE MARL M ETHODS

Existing MAPG methods maximizing the standard joint objective (Equation 1), such as MAPPO and
HAPPO, may fail to find the optimal NE and converge prematurely. We analyze this problem by
considering a singe-state 2-agent cooperative matrix game as shown in Figure 1.
                           Agent 1                                        Agent 1                                              Agent 1
                     A       B       C                              A         B      C                                     A     B       C
                A    5       -20     -20                       A   0.36    0.12     0.12                               A   1      0      0
                                                                                                             Agent 2
      Agent 2


                                                     Agent 2


                B    -20     10      -20                       B   0.12    0.04     0.04                               B   0      0      0
                C    -20     -20     20                        C   0.12    0.04     0.04                               C   0      0      0


                (a) Reward matrix                      (b) Initial joint policy ПҖ                                (c) Final joint policy ПҖ
Figure 1: A single-state 2-agent cooperative matrix game. (a) is the reward matrix of joint actions. (b) represents
the initial joint policy ПҖ formed by both agents taking the individual policy ПҖ = {0.6, 0.2, 0.2}. (c) represents
the final joint policy ПҖ that MAPPO and HAPPO converge to, deterministically choosing action (A, A).
Agents each choose from three possible actions {A, B, C} and receive a joint reward. In this case,
(A, A), (B, B), (C, C) are three different NEs with rewards of 5, 10, 20, with (C, C) being the
optimal NE. To simulate common scenarios where finding the global optima is challenging and, due
to the learning in the early stages, agents are updated towards some reasonably good local optima
initially, we consider a setting where agents assign a higher probability to action (A, A), as shown in
Figure 1b. By exact calculation (see Appendix B), we find traditional algorithms like MAPPO and
HAPPO converge rapidly towards the suboptimal point (A, A), failing to identify the Pareto-optimal
equilibria (C, C), as shown in Figure 1c, which is also corroborated by our experiment (Section 5.1).
The explanation is that maximizing the standard joint objective (Equation 1) leads to convergence
towards the deterministic policies exploiting the local optimum they have explored so far (28).
Specifically, the standard objective discourages any unilateral deviation from the local optimum as it
will result in a decrease in the joint reward. As a result, agents tend to deterministically converge to
the suboptimal NE. To address this issue, we propose to learn stochastic behaviors, which always
preserve the probability of selecting currently underexplored actions, and will eventually converge
to the QRE where action probability is proportional to the exponential of action value. We will
show in the experimental section that our method could successfully converge to the Pareto-optimal
equilibrium (C, C), even when it has a higher probability of choosing action (A, A) initially.
   1
     We write ai , a, and s when we refer to the action, joint action, and state as to values, and ai , a, and s as to
random variable.


                                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4      M ETHOD
In this section, we establish maximum entropy heterogeneous-agent reinforcement learning - a
framework for learning stochastic policies in cooperative MARL settings, which alleviates the
suboptimal convergence problem mentioned in Section 3.2. We name it heterogeneous-agent (HA)
as it is a substantial improvement to HARL (45), its Proposition 1 builds upon the prior advantage
decomposition lemma (13), and it is generally applicable to HA settings. This framework encompasses
three key components, including the derivation of MaxEnt MARL objective from a probabilistic
inference perspective in Section 4.1, the HASPI procedure and HASAC algorithm in Section 4.2, and
the unified MEHAML template for theoretically-justified algorithmic design in Section 4.3.

4.1     M AXIMUM E NTROPY M ULTI -AGENT R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
To formalize the idea of learning stochastic policies
ПҖ (В·|st ), we embed cooperative MARL problem into the
PGM (Figure 2). Following Levine (17), we introduce                             O1               O2           O3
an additional optimality variable Ot , which takes on bi-
nary values indicating the optimality of joint actions taken
by all agents. Specifically, Ot = 1 denotes that time                                  n               n            n
step t is optimal, and we model it as p(Ot = 1|st , at ) вҲқ                       ai1             ai2          ai3
exp(r(st , at )). Then we use structured variational infer-
               QT                 i       P p(П„ |O1:T =
ence tohapproximate the posterior distribution
                                              T
1) вҲқ p(s1 ) t=1 p(st+1 |st , at ) exp         t=1 r(s t , at )    s1            s2             s3          В·В·В·
over trajectory П„ with the distribution q(П„ ) =
      QT
q(s1 ) t=1 q(st+1 |st , at )q(at |st ), where we fix the envi- Figure 2: The probabilistic graphical model
ronment dynamics q(s1 ) = p(s1 ) and q(st+1 |st , at ) = for cooperative MARL.
p(st+1 |st , at ) to avoid risk-seeking behaviors (17). This
inference procedure leads to the maximum entropy (MaxEnt) objective of MARL (see Appendix C):
                                                    " T                         n
                                                                                                      !#
                                                     X                          X
                   J(ПҖ) = Es1:T вҲјПҒ1:T
                                  ПҖ ,a1:T вҲјПҖ
                                                             r (st , at ) + Оұ          H ПҖ i (В·|st )     ,              (2)
                                                      t=1                       i=1

where Оұ is the temperature constant that trades off between reward and entropy maximization, and
when Оұ = 0, the objective is reduced to standard MARL.
Augmenting standard MARL objective with an entropy term (Equation 2) aligns with the solution
concept of quantal response equilibrium (QRE) proposed by McKelvey & Palfrey (20), which is a
generalization of the standard notion of Nash equilibrium (NE) in game theory. In a QRE, payoffs are
perturbed by additive disturbances (entropy term in our case) so that players do not deterministically
choose the strategy with the highest observed payoff, but rather assign the probability mass in its
strategies according to every strategyвҖҷs payoff (6). The following Theorem 1 shows that the QRE
policies of MaxEnt objective can be represented as Boltzmann distributions:
Theorem 1 (Representation of QRE). A joint policy ПҖQRE вҲҲ О  is a QRE if none of the agents can
increase the maximum entropy objective (Equation 2) by unilaterally altering its policy, i.e.,

                                                                  вҲ’i
                                    вҲҖi вҲҲ N , вҲҖПҖ i вҲҲ О i , J ПҖ i , ПҖQRE   вүӨ J ПҖQRE .

Then the QRE policies are given by

                                                exp ОұвҲ’1 EaвҲ’i вҲјПҖвҲ’i QПҖQRE s, ai , aвҲ’i


                          i
                вҲҖi вҲҲ N , ПҖQRE       ai |s := P                    QRE
                                                                                                     ,                  (3)
                                                     exp   Оұ вҲ’1 E            QПҖQRE (s, bi , aвҲ’i )
                                              bi вҲҲAi             aвҲ’i вҲјПҖ вҲ’i      QRE

where the soft Q-functions are defined as follows,
                                                 "вҲһ                             n
                                                                                                      !               #
                                                  X                             X
    QПҖ (s, a) = r (s, a) + Ea1:вҲһ вҲјПҖ,s1:вҲһ вҲјP             Оіt   r (st , at ) + Оұ          H ПҖ i (В·|st )    s0 = s, a0 = a .
                                                  t=1                           i=1
                                                                                                                        (4)

Proof can be found in Appendix D. Theorem 1 illustrates the connection between QRE policies and
an energy-based model, where the term Оұ1 QПҖQRE (s, a) serves as the negative energy. When Оұ > 0,


                                                             4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the QRE policies (Equation 3) are no longer deterministic but rather can represent all the ways of
performing a task. This suggests that the inclusion of entropy term makes the policy ПҖQRE stochastic,
enabling more effective exploration of the environment (21), which is consistent with our initial goal
of learning stochastic policies in MARL settings.

4.2     H ETEROGENEOUS -AGENT S OFT ACTOR -C RITIC

In this subsection, we develop heterogeneous-agent soft policy iteration (HASPI) to maximize MaxEnt
objective (Equation 2), which alternates between joint soft policy evaluation and heterogeneous-agent
soft policy improvement, and then derive HASAC based on this theory.

4.2.1    H ETEROGENEOUS -AGENT S OFT P OLICY I TERATION
In joint soft policy evaluation step of HASPI, we compute soft Q-value from any Q(s, a) : SГ—A вҶ’ R
by repeatedly applying a soft Bellman backup operator О“ПҖ given by:
                                     О“ПҖ Q(s, a) вүң r(s, a) + ОіEsвҖІ вҲјP [V (sвҖІ )] ,                                    (5)
                                                  "               n
                                                                                   #
                                                                 X
                                                                          i i

                               where V (s) = EaвҲјПҖ Q(s, a) + Оұ        H ПҖ В· |s        .                             (6)
                                                                                 i=1
is the soft value function. We can obtain the soft Q-function of any joint policy ПҖ as shown in Lemma
4.1. Notably, the same method for updating soft Q-function has been proposed in FOP (44) since it is
the straightforward application of soft Bellman equation.
Lemma 4.1 (Joint Soft Policy Evaluation). Consider the soft Bellman backup operator О“ПҖ and a
mapping Q0 : S Г— A вҶ’ R with |A| < вҲһ, and define Qk+1 = О“ПҖ Qk . Then the sequence Qk will
converge to the joint soft Q-function ПҖ as k вҶ’ вҲһ.
Proof can be found in E.1. In policy improvement step, we show that the joint policy ПҖ can be
updated based on individual policy updates. To this end, we first introduce the following definition.
Definition 1. Let i1:m = {i1 , . . . , im } вҠҶ N be an ordered subset of agents, and let вҲ’i1:m refer to
its complement. We write ik when we refer to the k th agent in the ordered subset. Correspondingly,
the multi-agent soft Q-function is defined as
                                                           "                                    #
                                                                                     X
                                                                          вҲ’i1:m
        QiПҖ1:m       s, a   i1:m
                                       вүң EaвҲ’i1:m вҲјПҖвҲ’i1:m    QПҖ s, ai1:m
                                                                        ,a        +Оұ      i i
                                                                                       H ПҖ В· |s   .                (7)
                                                                                             iвҲҲвҲ’i1:m


In the case where m = n, QiПҖ1:n s, ai1:n takes the form QПҖ (s, a), representing the joint soft
Q-function. When m = 0, i.e., i1:m = вҲ…, the function represents the soft value function VПҖ (s).
With this notation defined, we introduce a pivotal proposition that shows the joint soft policy update
can be decomposed into a multiplication of sequential local policy updates.
Proposition 1 (Joint Soft Policy Decomposition). Let ПҖ be a joint policy, and i1:n вҲҲ Sym(n) be an
agent permutation. Suppose that, for each state s and every m = 1, . . . , n,
                                         пЈ«                                                                     пЈ¶
                                                           exp E i1:mвҲ’1 i1:mвҲ’1 Оұ1 QiПҖ1:m  s, ai1:mвҲ’1 , В·im

                                                                                      old
   im                                                           a      вҲјПҖnew
  ПҖnew = arg         min           DKL пЈӯПҖ im       В·im |s вҲҘ                                                    пЈё , (8)
                 ПҖ im вҲҲО im                                      E i1:mвҲ’1 i1:mвҲ’1 [ZПҖold (s, ai1:mвҲ’1 )]
                                                                      a      вҲјПҖnew

         i1:mвҲ’1                                 i1:mвҲ’1
where a               is drawn from the policy ПҖnew    (В·|s) and the partition function ZПҖold             s, ai1:mвҲ’1
normalizes the distribution. Then the joint policy satisfies the following:
                                                                                 1
                                                                                               !
                                                                           exp     Q
                                                                                 Оұ ПҖold
                                                                                        (s, В·)
                                       ПҖnew = arg min DKL      ПҖ (В·|s) вҲҘ                           .               (9)
                                                   ПҖвҲҲО                            ZПҖold (s)

Proof can be found in E.2. Proposition 1 holds significance due to the crucial insight it provides,
suggesting that a MaxEnt MARL problem can be considered as a sum of n MaxEnt RL problems.
It indicates an effective heterogeneous-agent approach to improving the joint soft policy in multi-
agent learning, where each agent optimizes individual KL-divergence sequentially leading to the
optimization of joint soft policy. To formally extend the above process into a policy improvement
procedure with theoretical guarantees of monotonic improvement and convergence to QRE, we
propose the heterogeneous-agent soft policy improvement as formalized below.


                                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma 4.2 (Heterogeneous-Agent Soft Policy Improvement). Let i1:n вҲҲ Sym(n) be an agent
                                                         im
permutation, and for every m = 1, . . . , n, let policy ПҖold вҲҲ О im and ПҖnew
                                                                        im
                                                                            be the optimizer of the
minimization problem defined in Equation 8. Then QПҖnew (s, a) вүҘ QПҖold (s, a) for all (s, a) вҲҲ S Г— A
with |A| < вҲһ and J (ПҖnew ) вүҘ J (ПҖold ).

Proof can be found in E.3. Lemma 4.2 guarantees that soft Q-function and MaxEnt objective
monotonically increase at each policy improvement step. Next, we propose heterogeneous-agent soft
policy iteration, which alternates between joint soft policy evaluation and heterogeneous-agent soft
policy improvement, and prove that joint policy ПҖ converges to a QRE.
Theorem 2 (Heterogeneous-Agent Soft Policy Iteration). For any joint policy ПҖ вҲҲ О , if we
repeatedly apply joint soft policy evaluation
                                     Qn       and heterogeneous-agent soft policy improvement from
ПҖ i вҲҲ О i . Then the joint policy ПҖ = i=1 ПҖ i converges to ПҖQRE in Theorem 1.

Proof can be found in E.4. To obtain such theoretical results, the updating approach in Proposition 1
plays a pivotal role. Lemma 4.2 ensures that, through the updates in Proposition 1, soft Q-function
increases monotonically, leading to convergence of the policies. Eventually, none of the agents is
motivated to make an update (Equation 8) at convergence, thereby establishing a QRE.

4.2.2       P RACTICAL A LGORITHM
In practice, large continuous domains require us to derive a practical approximation to the procedure
above. We will use function approximators for both centralized soft Q-function QОё (st , at ) and
tractable decentralized policies ПҖП•imim aitm |st , for each agent im , parameterized respectively by Оё
and П•im , and alternate between optimizing both networks with stochastic gradient descent.
The centralized soft Q-function parameters can be trained to minimize the Bellman residual

                                             1                                                          2
                 JQ (Оё) = E(st ,at )вҲјD         QОё (st , at ) вҲ’ r (st , at ) + ОіEst+1 вҲјP [VОёМ„ (st+1 )]       ,
                                             2
where the soft value function is implicitly parameterized through the soft Q-function parameters via
Equation 6. Then we draw a permutation i1:n вҲҲ Sym(n) and sequentially update the policy of each
agent im according to Equation 8. The policy parameters can be learned by directly minimizing the
expected KL-divergence in Equation 8 disregarding the constant log-partition function
                          пЈ®                                                                                                    пЈ№
                                                                   h                                                         i
                                                                                                               i
JПҖim (П•im ) = Est вҲјD пЈ°E i1:mвҲ’1           i            i     i       Оұ log ПҖП•im
                                                                             im  aitm |st вҲ’ QiПҖ1:m
                                                                                                old ;Оё
                                                                                                         st , at1:mвҲ’1 , aitm пЈ» .
                              at     вҲјПҖ 1:mвҲ’1
                                         i    ,atm вҲјПҖ m
                                                      i
                                           1:mвҲ’1            П• m
                                         П•new
                                                                                                                        (10)
We refer to the above procedure as HASAC and Appendix F for its full pseudocode.

4.3      M AXIMUM E NTROPY H ETEROGENEOUS -AGENT M IRROR L EARNING

In addition to updating policies by directly minimizing the KL-divergence in Equation 8, we aim
to propose a generalized HASPI procedure that provides a range of solutions to MaxEnt MARL
problem. To this end, we start by introducing the necessary     definitions of the operators proposed in
HAML (15): the drift functional (HADF) DiПҖ ПҖМӮ i |s, ПҖМ„ j1:m which, intuitively, is a notion of distance
between ПҖ i and ПҖМӮ i , given that agents j1:m just updated to ПҖМ„ j1:m ; the neighborhood operator UПҖi ПҖ i
which forms a region around the policy ПҖ i ; as well as a sampling distribution ОІПҖ вҲҲ P (S) that is
continuous in ПҖ (see detailed definitions in Appendix A.3). As shown in (15; 14), these operators
allow for effective abstraction of standard RL and MARL methods due to their generality.
We present the generalized HASPI using these operators. In heterogeneous-agent soft policy improve-
ment step, we redefine the operator that agents optimize as follows,
Definition 2. Let i вҲҲ N , j 1:m вҲҲ P(вҲ’i), and Di be a HADF of agent i. The maximum entropy
heterogeneous-agent mirror operator (MEHAMO) integrates the soft Q-function as
     (ПҖМӮ i )
h                 i                             h                                              i
    MDi ,ПҖМ„j1:m VПҖ (s) вүң Eaj1:m вҲјПҖМ„j1:m ,ai вҲјПҖМӮi QjПҖ1:m ,i (s, aj1:m , ai ) вҲ’ Оұ log ПҖМӮ i ai |s вҲ’DiПҖ ПҖМӮ i |s, ПҖМ„ j1:m .

Then we propose MEHAML Algorithm template 1 to formalize generalized heterogeneous-agent
soft policy iteration. Notably, HAML is a special instance of our template when Оұ = 0.


                                                               6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1: Maximum Entropy Heterogeneous-Agent Mirror Learning

Initialise a joint policy ПҖ0 = ПҖ01 , . . . , ПҖ0n ;
for k = 0, 1, В· В· В· do
     Compute the soft Q-function QПҖk (s, a) for all state-(joint)action pairs (s, a);
     Update QПҖk (s, a) according to the soft Bellman equation (Equation 5);
     |                                      {z                              }
                               Joint Soft Policy Evaluation
    Draw a permutaion i1:n of agents at random;
    for m = 1 : n do
                        im                                          (ПҖim )
        Make an update ПҖk+1 =           arg max EsвҲјОІПҖk             M im i1:mвҲ’1 VПҖk (s) ;
                                           im                            DПҖ ,ПҖk+1
                                    ПҖ im вҲҲUПҖ    ПҖ im
                                             k ( k )
        |                                          {z                                   }
                         (Generalized) Heterogeneous-Agent Soft Policy Improvement
   end
end
Output: A limit-point joint policy ПҖвҲһ
Despite the presence of a drift penalty and a neighborhood constraint, optimizing the MEHAMO
sequentially is sufficient to guarantee the same desired properties as HASPI. We establish the complete
list of the core MEHAML properties in Theorem 3, which confirms that any method derived from
Algorithm 1 has the desired properties of monotonic improvement of the MaxEnt objective and QRE
convergence (detailed proof can be found in Appendix G).
Theorem 3 (The Core Theorem of MEHAML). Let ПҖ0 вҲҲ О , and the sequence of joint policies
      вҲһ
(ПҖk )k=0 be obtained by a MEHAML algorithm 1 induced by Di , U i , вҲҖi вҲҲ N , and ОІПҖ . Then, the
joint policies induced by the algorithm enjoy the following list of properties (1) Attain the monotonic
improvement property J (ПҖk+1 ) вүҘ J (ПҖk ), (2) Their value functions converge to a quantal response
value function limkвҶ’вҲһ VПҖk = V QRE , (3) Their expected returns converge to a quantal response
return limkвҶ’вҲһ J (ПҖk ) = J QRE , (4) Their Пү-limit set consists of quantal response equilibria.
Proof sketch. We divide the proof into four steps. In Step 1, we show that the sequence of soft value
function (VПҖk )kвҲҲN increases monotonically and converges to a limit point. In Step 2, we show the
existence of limit points ПҖМ„ of (ПҖk )kвҲҲN , and that they are fixed points of the MEHAML update. In the
most important Step 3, we prove that ПҖМ„ is also a fixed point of soft policy iteration by leveraging the
concavity of MEHAMO. Step 4 finalizes the proof, proving that fixed points of soft policy iteration
are QRE policies.
By selecting appropriate HADFs and neighborhood operators that satisfy the definitions, Algo-
rithm 1 has the potential to generate various   theoretically-justified algorithms to solve MaxEnt
MARL problem. The drifts DiПҖ ПҖМӮ i |s, ПҖМ„ j1:m can serve as soft constraints, such as KL-divergence,
controlling the distance between ПҖМӮ i and ПҖ i when the agents j1:m have just updated to ПҖМ„ j1:m . Ad-
ditionally, the neighborhood operators U i can generate small policy-space subsets, serving as hard
constraints, then the
                     resultant policy improvement will remain within a small range due to the fact
that ПҖ i вҲҲ UПҖi ПҖ i , вҲҖi вҲҲ N , ПҖ i вҲҲ О i . Therefore, algorithms equipped with appropriate HADFs
and neighborhoods can learn stochastic policies in a stable and coordinated manner. In summary,
MEHAML provides a template for generating theoretically sound, stable, monotonically improving
algorithms that enable agents to learn stochastic policies to solve multi-agent cooperation tasks.

5    E XPERIMENTS
To demonstrate the advantages of the stochastic policies learned by HASAC, we conduct compre-
hensive experiments on the matrix game in Section 3.2 and six benchmarks вҖ” MAMuJoCo (4),
Bi-DexHands (2), SMAC (25), GRF (16), MPE (19), and LAG (23)2 . It is important to note that
while HASAC is originally designed for continuous actions, we employ a Gumbel-Softmax (10) to
ensure that HASAC would work for discrete actions. Compared to existing SOTA MAPG methods,
HASAC achieves the best performance in 31 out of 35 tasks across all benchmarks. In addition to
final performance, experimental results (see full experimental details and hyperparameter in Appendix
   2
     HASAC achieves best performance on fully cooperative MPE and LAG tasks. See Appendix H.2.5 and
H.2.6 for full results.


                                                          7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      (a) Matrix Game               (b) Catch Abreast          (c) Two Catch Underarm                (d) Lift Underarm


  (e) 3x2-Agent HalfCheetah      (f) 6x1-Agent Walker2d           (g) RPS (2 agents)                (h) Corner (11 agents)
                 Figure 3: Performance comparisons on selected tasks of multiple benchmarks.
     Map           Difficulty    HASAC        HAPPO       HATRPO        MAPPO            QMIX             FOP        Timesteps
  8m_vs_9m           Hard        97.5(1.2)   83.8(4.1)     92.5(3.7)    87.5(4.0)      92.2(1.0)      23.4(1.6)         1e7
  5m_vs_6m           Hard        90.0(3.9)   77.5(7.2)     75.0(6.5)   75.0(18.2)      77.3(3.3)      46.9(5.3)         1e7
     3s5z            Hard       100.0(0.0)   97.5(1.2)     93.8(1.2)    96.9(0.7)      89.8(2.5)      93.0(0.8)         1e7
 10m_vs_11m          Hard        95.0(3.1)   87.5(6.7)     98.8(0.6)    96.9(4.8)      95.3(2.2)       12.5(6.2)        1e7
    MMM2          Super Hard     97.5(2.4)   88.8(2.0)     97.5(6.4)    93.8(4.7)      87.5(2.5)      37.5(28.1)        2e7
 3s5z_vs_3s6z     Super Hard     82.5(4.1)   66.2(3.1)    72.5(14.7)   70.0(10.7)      87.5(12.6)       0.0(0.0)        2e7
    corridor      Super Hard    90.0(10.8)   92.5(13.9)    88.8(2.7)    97.5(1.2)       82.8(4.4)       0.0(0.0)        2e7
   6h_vs_8z       Super Hard     95.0(3.1)   76.2(3.1)     78.8(0.6)    85.0(2.0)      7.0(27.0)       0.0(0.0)         4e7
Table 1: Median evaluate winning rate and standard deviation on eight SMAC maps for different methods. All
values within 1 standard deviation of the maximum score rate are marked in bold.
H) show the following advantages of stochastic policies: (1) HASAC exhibits similar performance
across different random seeds and higher training stability , (2) HASAC shows higher learning speed
compared to existing algorithms, and (3) HASAC improves agentsвҖҷ exploration, which facilitates
policies to escape from suboptimal equilibria and converge towards a higher reward equilibrium.

5.1   E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS

Matrix Game. We show the results of HASAC, HAPPO, MAPPO over 200 learning episodes in
matrix game (Figure 1a). HASAC escapes local optima and achieves the Pareto optimum due to the
learned stochastic policies, while the other two methods fall into the suboptimal NE (Figure 3a).
Bi-DexHands. Bi-DexHands offers numerous bimanual manipulation tasks that match various
human skill levels. In the challenging Catch Abreast, Two Catch Underarm, and Lift Underarm tasks
(Figure 3b, 3c, and 3d), all on-policy methods fail within 10m steps due to low sample efficiency.
HATD3 (45), on the other hand, exhibits very high variability and prematurely converges to local
optima. In contrast, HASAC outperforms the other five methods by a large margin. It also exhibits
higher convergence speed and improved robustness, demonstrating the benefits of stochastic policies.
Multi-Agent MuJoCo. We compare our method to HAPPO, MAPPO, and HATD3 in ten MAMu-
JoCo tasks (see Appendix H.2.2). Figure 3e, 3f, and the other results in Appendix H.2.2 demonstrate
that HASAC enjoys superior performance over the three rivals both in terms of reward values and
learning speed. ItвҖҷs worth noting that, although both HATD3 and HASAC are off-policy algorithms,
we generally observe that HASAC learns faster with higher sample efficiency compared to HATD3.
This is because the exploration mechanism of HATD3 involves adding Gaussian noise to a determin-
istic policy, resulting in lower exploration efficiency, requiring more samples to explore the reward
landscape. In contrast, HASAC, due to its inherent encouragement of exploration within stochastic
policies, can effectively explore the entire reward landscape, thus learning better behaviors rapidly.
StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge. We evaluate our method on four hard and four super-hard
maps. As shown in Table 1, HASAC achieves over 90% win rates in 7 out of 8 maps and outperforms
other strong baselines in most maps. Notably, in particularly challenging tasks such as 5m_vs_6m,
3s5z_vs_3s5z, and 6h_vs_8z, we observe that HAPPO and HATRPO would converge towards
suboptimal NE. In addition, FOP is unable to learn meaningful joint policy in super-hard tasks due to
its reliance on the IGO assumption. By contrast, HASAC consistently achieves superior performance


                                                           8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               (a) Stochastic vs. deterministic                      (b) Effect of different Оұ on Ant 4x2                       (c) Effect of different Оұ on matrix game
Figure 4: Performance comparison between HASAC with different hyperparameters on Ant-v2 4x2 task and
matrix game. (a) The comparison indicates that stochastic policy can lead to better equilibrium and stabilize
training. (b) & (c) HASAC converges to different QRE with different temperature parameter Оұ.
                         Agent 1                              Agent 1                                          Agent 1                                         Agent 1
                     A     B       C                      A     B       C                                A       B        C                              A       B        C
               A     1      0      0                  A   0      0       0                         A   0.0025 0.0025     0.02                       A   0.01    0.01     0.1
                                           Agent 2


                                                                                                                                         Agent 2
                                                                                     Agent 2
    Agent 2


               B     0      0      0                  B   0      0       0                         B   0.0025 0.0025     0.02                       B   0.01    0.01     0.1
               C     0      0      0                  C   0      0       1                         C    0.02    0.02     0.91                       C   0.1      0.1     0.56
              (a) HASAC: Оұ = 1                       (b) HASAC: Оұ = 5                              (c) HASAC: Оұ = 10                               (d) HASAC: Оұ = 15
                                   Figure 5: Different temperature Оұ leads to convergence of different QRE.
and shows the ability to identify higher reward equilibria due to its extensive exploration. We also
observe that HASAC has better stability and higher learning speed across most maps.
Google Research Football. We compare HASAC with QMIX, MAPPO, and HAPPO. As shown
in Figure 3g and 3h, we generally observe that both MAPPO and HAPPO tend to converge to a
non-optimal NE on the two challenging tasks, while HASAC exhibits the ability to attain a higher
reward equilibrium by learning stochastic policies which effectively enhance exploration.

5.2                A BLATION STUDY

We investigate the benefits of stochastic policies learned by HASAC and empirically show how dif-
ferent temperature Оұ values affect the stochasticity of policies, leading to different QRE convergence.
Stochasticity. HASAC learns stochastic policies through maximizing the MaxEnt objective (Equa-
tion 2). We compare it to a deterministic variant which utilizes deterministic policies with fixed
Gaussian exploration noise to maximize standard MARL objective. The results in Figure 4a show
that HASAC achieves a higher reward equilibrium and demonstrates better stability compared to the
deterministic variant, which exhibits high variance across the different runs. These findings highlight
the importance of learning stochastic policies, which can improve robustness, facilitate escape from
suboptimal equilibria, and converge to higher reward equilibrium.
Analysis of temperature Оұ. We further show the effect of temperature Оұ on the stochasticity of
policies. As illustrated in Figure 4b (we report ОұвҲ’1 in legend), 4c, and 5, when Оұ is large, policies
predominantly emphasize maximizing entropy, leading to poor performance due to the failure to
exploit the reward signal. Conversely, when Оұ is small, MaxEnt objective almost degrades to standard
objective, leading to suboptimal equilibrium due to inadequate exploration. A proper Оұ achieves a
trade-off between exploration and exploitation, eventually resulting in better performance. To obtain
appropriate Оұ, we implement both fixed and auto-tuned (see Appendix H.1 for details) Оұ in practice.

6              C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose maximum entropy heterogeneous-agent reinforcement learning (MEHARL)
вҖ” a unified framework for learning stochastic policies in MARL. This framework comprises three key
components, including the PGM derivation of MaxEnt MARL, the HASAC algorithm with monotonic
improvement and QRE convergence properties, and the unified MEHAML template that provides
any induced MaxEnt method with the same theoretical guarantees as HASAC. To demonstrate the
advantages of stochastic policies, we evaluate HASAC on both discrete and continuous control
tasks, confirming its superior performance and improved robustness and exploration. For future
work, we aim to explore appropriate drift functionals and neighborhood operators to design more
principled MaxEnt MARL algorithms that can further enhance performance and stability in multi-
agent cooperation tasks.


                                                                                               9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Acknowledgements. This work is sponsored by National Natural Science Foundation of China
(62376013) and Beijing Municipal Science & Technology Commission (Z231100007423015).

R EFERENCES
 [1] Lawrence M Ausubel and Raymond J Deneckere. A generalized theorem of the maximum.
     Economic Theory, 3(1):99вҖ“107, 1993.
 [2] Yuanpei Chen, Tianhao Wu, Shengjie Wang, Xidong Feng, Jiechuang Jiang, Stephen Marcus
     McAleer, Yiran Geng, Hao Dong, Zongqing Lu, Song-Chun Zhu, and Yaodong Yang. Towards
     human-level bimanual dexterous manipulation with reinforcement learning, 2022.
 [3] Caroline Claus and Craig Boutilier. The dynamics of reinforcement learning in cooperative
     multiagent systems. AAAI/IAAI, 1998(746-752):2, 1998.
 [4] Christian Schroeder de Witt, Bei Peng, Pierre-Alexandre Kamienny, Philip Torr, Wendelin
     BГ¶hmer, and Shimon Whiteson. Deep multi-agent reinforcement learning for decentralized
     continuous cooperative control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.06709, 19, 2020.
 [5] Jakob Foerster, Gregory Farquhar, Triantafyllos Afouras, Nantas Nardelli, and Shimon Whiteson.
     Counterfactual multi-agent policy gradients. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial
     intelligence, volume 32, 2018.
 [6] Jacob K Goeree, Charles A Holt, and Thomas R Palfrey. Stochastic game theory for social
     science: A primer on quantal response equilibrium. In Handbook of Experimental Game Theory,
     pp. 8вҖ“47. Edward Elgar Publishing, 2020.
 [7] Tuomas Haarnoja, Haoran Tang, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Reinforcement learning with
     deep energy-based policies. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1352вҖ“1361.
     PMLR, 2017.
 [8] Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
     maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor, 2018.
 [9] Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Kristian Hartikainen, George Tucker, Sehoon Ha, Jie Tan,
     Vikash Kumar, Henry Zhu, Abhishek Gupta, Pieter Abbeel, et al. Soft actor-critic algorithms
     and applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.05905, 2018.
[10] Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. Categorical reparameterization with gumbel-softmax.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.01144, 2016.
[11] TS Kozitsina, IV Kozitsin, and IS Menshikov. Quantal response equilibrium for the prisonerвҖҷs
     dilemma game in markov strategies. Scientific reports, 12(1):4482, 2022.
[12] Jakub Grudzien Kuba, Muning Wen, Linghui Meng, Haifeng Zhang, David Mguni, Jun Wang,
     Yaodong Yang, et al. Settling the variance of multi-agent policy gradients. Advances in Neural
     Information Processing Systems, 34:13458вҖ“13470, 2021.
[13] Jakub Grudzien Kuba, Ruiqing Chen, Muning Wen, Ying Wen, Fanglei Sun, Jun Wang, and
     Yaodong Yang. Trust region policy optimisation in multi-agent reinforcement learning, 2022.
[14] Jakub Grudzien Kuba, Christian Schroeder de Witt, and Jakob Foerster. Mirror learning: A
     unifying framework of policy optimisation, 2022.
[15] Jakub Grudzien Kuba, Xidong Feng, Shiyao Ding, Hao Dong, Jun Wang, and Yaodong Yang.
     Heterogeneous-agent mirror learning: A continuum of solutions to cooperative marl. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2208.01682, 2022.
[16] Karol Kurach, Anton Raichuk, Piotr StanМҒczyk, MichaЕӮ Zajac,Лӣ Olivier Bachem, Lasse Espeholt,
     Carlos Riquelme, Damien Vincent, Marcin Michalski, Olivier Bousquet, et al. Google research
     football: A novel reinforcement learning environment. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference
     on artificial intelligence, volume 34, pp. 4501вҖ“4510, 2020.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


[17] Sergey Levine. Reinforcement learning and control as probabilistic inference: Tutorial and
     review, 2018.
[18] Michael L Littman. Markov games as a framework for multi-agent reinforcement learning. In
     Machine learning proceedings 1994, pp. 157вҖ“163. Elsevier, 1994.
[19] Ryan Lowe, Yi I Wu, Aviv Tamar, Jean Harb, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Igor Mordatch.
     Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments. Advances in neural
     information processing systems, 30, 2017.
[20] Richard D McKelvey and Thomas R Palfrey. Quantal response equilibria for normal form
     games. Games and economic behavior, 10(1):6вҖ“38, 1995.
[21] Ofir Nachum, Mohammad Norouzi, Kelvin Xu, and Dale Schuurmans. Bridging the gap between
     value and policy based reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing
     systems, 30, 2017.
[22] John Nash. Non-cooperative games. Annals of mathematics, pp. 286вҖ“295, 1951.
[23] Xiaoteng Ma QihanLiu, Yuhua Jiang. Light aircraft game: A lightweight, scalable, gym-
     wrapped aircraft competitive environment with baseline reinforcement learning algorithms.
     https://github.com/liuqh16/CloseAirCombat, 2022.
[24] Tabish Rashid, Mikayel Samvelyan, Christian Schroeder de Witt, Gregory Farquhar, Jakob
     Foerster, and Shimon Whiteson. Qmix: Monotonic value function factorisation for deep
     multi-agent reinforcement learning, 2018.
[25] Mikayel Samvelyan, Tabish Rashid, Christian Schroeder De Witt, Gregory Farquhar, Nan-
     tas Nardelli, Tim GJ Rudner, Chia-Man Hung, Philip HS Torr, Jakob Foerster, and Shimon
     Whiteson. The starcraft multi-agent challenge. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.04043, 2019.
[26] Kyunghwan Son, Daewoo Kim, Wan Ju Kang, David Earl Hostallero, and Yung Yi. Qtran:
     Learning to factorize with transformation for cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning,
     2019.
[27] Jianyu Su, Stephen Adams, and Peter A. Beling. Value-decomposition multi-agent actor-critics,
     2020.
[28] Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. The
     MIT Press, second edition, 2018. URL http://incompleteideas.net/book/
     the-book-2nd.html.
[29] Brian Swenson, Ryan Murray, and Soummya Kar. On best-response dynamics in potential
     games. SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, 56(4):2734вҖ“2767, 2018.
[30] Ming Tan. Multi-agent reinforcement learning: Independent vs. cooperative agents. In Proceed-
     ings of the tenth international conference on machine learning, pp. 330вҖ“337, 1993.
[31] J Terry, Benjamin Black, Nathaniel Grammel, Mario Jayakumar, Ananth Hari, Ryan Sullivan,
     Luis S Santos, Clemens Dieffendahl, Caroline Horsch, Rodrigo Perez-Vicente, et al. Pettingzoo:
     Gym for multi-agent reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
     Systems, 34:15032вҖ“15043, 2021.
[32] Jiangxing Wang, Deheng Ye, and Zongqing Lu. More centralized training, still decentralized
     execution: Multi-agent conditional policy factorization, 2023.
[33] Jianhao Wang, Zhizhou Ren, Terry Liu, Yang Yu, and Chongjie Zhang. Qplex: Duplex dueling
     multi-agent q-learning, 2021.
[34] Xihuai Wang, Zheng Tian, Ziyu Wan, Ying Wen, Jun Wang, and Weinan Zhang. Order matters:
     Agent-by-agent policy optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.06205, 2023.
[35] Yihan Wang, Beining Han, Tonghan Wang, Heng Dong, and Chongjie Zhang. {DOP}: Off-
     policy multi-agent decomposed policy gradients. In International Conference on Learning
     Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=6FqKiVAdI3Y.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


[36] Ermo Wei, Drew Wicke, David Freelan, and Sean Luke. Multiagent soft q-learning. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:1804.09817, 2018.
[37] Ying Wen, Yaodong Yang, Rui Luo, and Jun Wang. Modelling bounded rationality in multi-
     agent interactions by generalized recursive reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.09216, 2019.
[38] Ying Wen, Yaodong Yang, Rui Luo, Jun Wang, and Wei Pan. Probabilistic recursive reasoning
     for multi-agent reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.09207, 2019.
[39] Zifan Wu, Chao Yu, Deheng Ye, Junge Zhang, Hankz Hankui Zhuo, et al. Coordinated proximal
     policy optimization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:26437вҖ“26448,
     2021.
[40] Yaodong Yang, Rui Luo, Minne Li, Ming Zhou, Weinan Zhang, and Jun Wang. Mean field
     multi-agent reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
     5571вҖ“5580. PMLR, 2018.
[41] Yaodong Yang, Jianye Hao, Ben Liao, Kun Shao, Guangyong Chen, Wulong Liu, and Hongyao
     Tang. Qatten: A general framework for cooperative multiagent reinforcement learning, 2020.
[42] Chao Yu, Akash Velu, Eugene Vinitsky, Jiaxuan Gao, Yu Wang, Alexandre Bayen, and Yi Wu.
     The surprising effectiveness of ppo in cooperative multi-agent games. Advances in Neural
     Information Processing Systems, 35:24611вҖ“24624, 2022.
[43] Haifeng Zhang, Weizhe Chen, Zeren Huang, Minne Li, Yaodong Yang, Weinan Zhang, and Jun
     Wang. Bi-level actor-critic for multi-agent coordination. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
     on Artificial Intelligence, volume 34, pp. 7325вҖ“7332, 2020.
[44] Tianhao Zhang, Yueheng Li, Chen Wang, Guangming Xie, and Zongqing Lu. Fop: Factorizing
     optimal joint policy of maximum-entropy multi-agent reinforcement learning. In International
     Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 12491вҖ“12500. PMLR, 2021.
[45] Yifan Zhong, Jakub Grudzien Kuba, Siyi Hu, Jiaming Ji, and Yaodong Yang. Heterogeneous-
     agent reinforcement learning, 2023.
[46] Brian D Ziebart. Modeling purposeful adaptive behavior with the principle of maximum causal
     entropy. Carnegie Mellon University, 2010.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Appendix
Table of Contents
     A Preliminaries                                                                             14
       A.1 Table of Acronyms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   14
       A.2 Individual-Global-Optimal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     14
       A.3 Definitions and Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     15
       A.4 Proofs of Useful Lemmas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     15

     B Exact Calculation of Matrix Game                                                          18

     C Derivation of MaxEnt MARL Objective                                                       21

     D Proofs of Representation of QRE                                                           22

     E Proofs of Heterogeneous-Agent Soft Policy Iteration                                       24
       E.1 Proof of Joint Soft Policy Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     24
       E.2 Proof of Joint Soft Policy Decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      24
       E.3 Proof of Heterogeneous-Agent Soft Policy Improvement . . . . . . . . . . . .          25
       E.4 Proof of Heterogeneous-Agent Soft Policy Iteration . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        26

     F Pseudocode of HASAC                                                                       27

     G Proofs of The Core Theorem of MEHAML                                                      28

     H Experimental Details                                                                      34
       H.1 Automatically Adjusting Temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     34
       H.2 Experimental Setup and Additional Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     34
       H.3 Hyper-parameter Settings for Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      37

     I   Ablation Study on Sequential Updates                                                    42


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     P RELIMINARIES

A.1   TABLE OF ACRONYMS

Table 2 lists the main acronyms used in this paper.

                                Table 2: The acronyms used in this paper.

      Acronym         Meaning
      A2PO            Agent-by-agent Policy Optimization
      CoPPO           Coordinated Proximal Policy Optimization
      CTDE            Centralized training decentralized execution
      FOP             Factorizing Optimal Joint Policy
      GRF             Google Research Football
      HA              Heterogeneous-Agent
      HADF            Heterogeneous-agent drift functional
      HAML            Heterogeneous-Agent Mirror Learning
      HAPPO           Heterogeneous-Agent Proximal Policy Optimization
      HARL            Heterogeneous-Agent Reinforcement Learning
      HASAC           Heterogeneous-Agent Soft Actor-Critic
      HASPI           Heterogeneous-agent soft policy iteration
      HATD3           Heterogeneous-Agent Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient
      HATRPO          Heterogeneous-Agent Trust Region Policy Optimization
      IGO             Individual-Global-Optimal
      LAG             Light Aircraft Game
      MACPF           Multi-Agent Conditional Policy Factorization
      MADDPG          Multi-Agent Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient
      MAMuJoCo        Multi-Agent MuJoCo
      MAPG            Multi-agent policy gradient
      MAPPO           Multi-Agent Proximal Policy Optimization
      MARL            Multi-agent reinforcement learning
      MASQL           Multi-Agent Soft Q-Learning
      MaxEnt          Maximum entropy
      MEHAML          Maximum Entropy Heterogeneous-Agent Mirror Learning
      MEHAMO          Maximum Entropy Heterogeneous-Agent Mirror Operator
      MEHARL          Maximum Entropy Heterogeneous-Agent Reinforcement Learning
      MPE             Multi-Agent Particle Environment
      NE              Nash equilibrium
      PGM             Probabilistic Graphical Model
      PPO             Proximal Policy Optimization
      QRE             Quantal response equilibrium
      RL              Reinforcement learning
      RPS             Run pass and shoot with keeper
      SAC             Soft Actor-Critic
      SMAC            StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge
      SQL             Soft Q-Learning



A.2   I NDIVIDUAL -G LOBAL -O PTIMAL

The Individual-Global-Optimal (IGO) assumption is introduced in (44) and can be stated as below.
Definition 3 (IGO). For an optimal joint policy ПҖвӢҶ (a|s) : S Г— A вҶ’ [0, 1], if there exist individual
optimal policies [ПҖвӢҶi (ai |s) : S Г— Ai вҶ’ [0, 1]]ni=1 , such that the following holds:
                                                      n
                                                      Y
                                       ПҖвӢҶ (a|s) =           ПҖвӢҶi (ai |s),
                                                      i=1

then, we say that [ПҖ i ] satisfy IGO for ПҖ under s.


                                                      14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The main limitation of IGO arises from the fact that during training, each agentвҖҷs policy is updated
based solely on its local Q-function, thereby ignoring the actions of other agents. As discussed by
Wang et al. (32), when multiple agents need to collaborate in decision-making, they may fail to
reach a consensus, updating their policies in the direction that increases their local Q-functions, but
eventually resulting in a decrease in the global Q-function.

A.3    D EFINITIONS AND A SSUMPTIONS

Throughout the proofs, we make the following regularity assumption introduced by Kuba et al. (13):
Assumption 1. There exists О· вҲҲ R, such that 0 < О· вүӘ 1, and for every agent i вҲҲ N , the  policy
space О i is О·-soft; that means that for every ПҖ i вҲҲ О i , s вҲҲ S, and ai вҲҲ Ai , we have ПҖ i ai |s вүҘ О·.

In the following, we provide the essential definitions of the two key components, originally proposed
by Kuba et al. (15), that serve as the building blocks of the MEHAML framework. Additionally, we
present the definitions of soft advantage function and a notion of distance that will be utilized in the
proof of Lemma A.2.
Definition 4. Let i вҲҲ N , a heterogeneous-agent drift functional (HADF) Di of i consists of a map,
which is defined as
                  Di : О  Г— О  Г— P(вҲ’i) Г— S вҶ’ DiПҖ В·|s, ПҖМ„ j1:m : P Ai вҶ’ R ,



such that for all arguments, under notation DiПҖ ПҖМӮ i |s, ПҖМ„ j1:m вүң DiПҖ ПҖМӮ i В·i |s |s, ПҖМ„ j1:m ,

            1. DiПҖ ПҖМӮ i |s, ПҖМ„ j1:m вүҘ DiПҖ ПҖ i |s, ПҖМ„ j1:m = 0 (non-negativity),

            2. DiПҖ ПҖМӮ i |s, ПҖМ„ j1:m has all GГўteaux derivatives zero at ПҖМӮ i = ПҖ i (zero gradient),

We say that the    HADF is positive if DiПҖ ПҖМӮ i |ПҖМ„ j1:m = 0, вҲҖs вҲҲ S implies ПҖМӮ i = ПҖ i , and trivial if
DiПҖ ПҖМӮ i |ПҖМ„ j1:m = 0, вҲҖs вҲҲ S for all ПҖ, ПҖМ„ j1:m , and ПҖМӮ i .

Definition
              5. Let i вҲҲ N . We say that, U i : О Г—О i вҶ’ P О i is a neighborhood operator if вҲҖПҖ i вҲҲ О i ,
UПҖi ПҖ i contains a closed ball, i.e., there exists a state-wise monotonically   non-decreasing metric
ПҮ : О i Г—О i вҶ’ R such that вҲҖПҖ i вҲҲ О i there exists Оҙ i > 0 such that ПҮ ПҖ i , ПҖМ„ i вүӨ Оҙ i =вҮ’ ПҖМ„ i вҲҲ UПҖi ПҖ i .
Definition 6. Let i1:m = {i1 , . . . , im }  вҠҶ N and j1:k = {j1 , . . . , jk } вҠҶ N be disjoint ordered
subsets of agents, and let QiПҖ1:m s, ai1:m be the multi-agent soft Q-function. Then the multi-agent
soft advantage function is defined as
              AiПҖ1:m s, aj1:k , ai1:m вүң QПҖ   j1:k ,i1:m
                                                        s, aj1:k , ai1:m вҲ’ QjПҖ1:k s, aj1:k .

                                                                                                  (11)
Definition 7. Let X be a finite set and p : X вҶ’ R, q : X вҶ’ R be two maps. Then, the notion of
distance between p and q that we adopt is given by вҲҘp вҲ’ qвҲҘ вүң maxxвҲҲX |p(x) вҲ’ q(x)|.

A.4    P ROOFS OF U SEFUL L EMMAS
Lemma A.1 (Multi-Agent Advantage Decomposition). Let ПҖ be a joint policy, and i1 , . . . , im be an
arbitrary ordered subset of agents. Then, for any state s and joint action ai1:m ,
                                               Xm
                                                   i
                              AiПҖ1:m s, ai1:m =   AПҖj s, ai1:jвҲ’1 , aij .                              (12)
                                                 j=1


Proof. (The lemma is proposed in (12) and we quote the proof from Kuba et al. (12)) By the definition
of multi-agent soft advantage function,
    AiПҖ1:m s, ai1:m = QiПҖ1:m s, ai1:m вҲ’ VПҖ (s)

                         m h                                         m
                        X      i               i                 i X        i
                             QПҖ1:j s, ai1:j вҲ’ QПҖ1:jвҲ’1 s, ai1:jвҲ’1 =       AПҖj s, ai1:jвҲ’1 , aij ,

                      =
                        j=1                                               j=1

which finishes the proof.


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The continuity of QПҖ is a crucial requirement for proving Theorem 3 later. Now we first prove
that the inclusion of an additional entropy term does not affect the continuity of QПҖ , which is the
state-action value function in the single-agent setting, where ПҖ denotes the policy of a single agent.
And finally, we generalize the result to QПҖ in MARL.
Lemma A.2 (Continuity of QПҖ ). Let ПҖ be a policy. Then QПҖ (s, a) is continuous in ПҖ.

Proof. Let ПҖ and ПҖМӮ be two policies. Then we have
|QПҖ (s, a) вҲ’ QПҖМӮ (s, a)|
                                                                                                                                                                                     !!
                                 X                                X                                                                  X
=      r(s, a) + Оі                         P (sвҖІ |s, a)                        ПҖ(aвҖІ |sвҖІ )QПҖ (sвҖІ , aвҖІ ) вҲ’ Оұ                                     ПҖ (aвҖІ |sвҖІ ) log ПҖ (aвҖІ |sвҖІ )
                                     sвҖІ                             aвҖІ                                                                aвҖІ
                                                                                                                                                                                     !!
                                 X                                X                                                                  X
                                                 вҖІ                                     вҖІ       вҖІ             вҖІ           вҖІ                           вҖІ       вҖІ       вҖІ       вҖІ
вҲ’ r(s, a) + Оі                             P (s |s, a)                      ПҖМӮ(a |s )QПҖМӮ (s , a ) вҲ’ Оұ                                       ПҖМӮ (a |s ) log ПҖМӮ (a |s )
                                 sвҖІ                               aвҖІ                                                                 aвҖІ
       X                                    X
=Оі               P (sвҖІ |s, a)                            [ПҖ(aвҖІ |sвҖІ )QПҖ (sвҖІ , aвҖІ ) вҲ’ ПҖМӮ(aвҖІ |sвҖІ )QПҖМӮ (sвҖІ , aвҖІ )]
           sвҖІ                                aвҖІ
                                                                                                                             !
      X
                     вҖІ       вҖІ                       вҖІ     вҖІ               вҖІ       вҖІ                     вҖІ       вҖІ
 вҲ’Оұ             [ПҖ (a |s ) log ПҖ (a |s ) вҲ’ ПҖМӮ (a |s ) log ПҖМӮ (a |s )]
      aвҖІ
      X                                    X
вүӨОі              P (sвҖІ |s, a)                         |ПҖ(aвҖІ |sвҖІ )QПҖ (sвҖІ , aвҖІ ) вҲ’ ПҖМӮ(aвҖІ |sвҖІ )QПҖМӮ (sвҖІ , aвҖІ )|
       sвҖІ                                   aвҖІ
                                                                                                                             !
     X
                     вҖІ       вҖІ                    вҖІ       вҖІ                вҖІ       вҖІ                     вҖІ       вҖІ
+Оұ          |ПҖ (a |s ) log ПҖ (a |s ) вҲ’ ПҖМӮ (a |s ) log ПҖМӮ (a |s )|
      aвҖІ
      X                                    X
=Оі              P (sвҖІ |s, a)                         |ПҖ(aвҖІ |sвҖІ )QПҖ (sвҖІ , aвҖІ ) вҲ’ ПҖМӮ(aвҖІ |sвҖІ )QПҖ (sвҖІ , aвҖІ )
       sвҖІ                                   aвҖІ
+ ПҖМӮ(aвҖІ |sвҖІ )QПҖ (sвҖІ , aвҖІ ) вҲ’ ПҖМӮ(aвҖІ |sвҖІ )QПҖМӮ (sвҖІ , aвҖІ )|
                                                                                                                                                                                     !
      X
                         вҖІ       вҖІ                    вҖІ       вҖІ                    вҖІ       вҖІ                 вҖІ           вҖІ                 вҖІ     вҖІ               вҖІ       вҖІ
+Оұ              |(ПҖ (a |s ) вҲ’ ПҖМӮ (a |s )) log ПҖ (a |s ) + ПҖМӮ (a |s ) (log ПҖ (a |s ) вҲ’ log ПҖМӮ (a |s ))|
      aвҖІ
      X                                    X
вүӨОі              P (sвҖІ |s, a)                         (|ПҖ(aвҖІ |sвҖІ )QПҖ (sвҖІ , aвҖІ ) вҲ’ ПҖМӮ(aвҖІ |sвҖІ )QПҖ (sвҖІ , aвҖІ )|
       sвҖІ                                   aвҖІ
+ |ПҖМӮ(aвҖІ |sвҖІ )QПҖ (sвҖІ , aвҖІ ) вҲ’ ПҖМӮ(aвҖІ |sвҖІ )QПҖМӮ (sвҖІ , aвҖІ )|)
                                                                                                                                                                                         !
      X
                         вҖІ       вҖІ                    вҖІ       вҖІ                    вҖІ       вҖІ                         вҖІ       вҖІ                  вҖІ        вҖІ               вҖІ       вҖІ
+Оұ              (|ПҖ (a |s ) вҲ’ ПҖМӮ (a |s )| |log ПҖ (a |s )| + |ПҖМӮ (a |s )| |log ПҖ (a |s ) вҲ’ log ПҖМӮ (a |s )|)
      aвҖІ
      X                                    X                                                                                          X
=Оі              P (sвҖІ |s, a)                         |ПҖ(aвҖІ |sвҖІ ) вҲ’ ПҖМӮ(aвҖІ |sвҖІ )| В· |QПҖ (sвҖІ , aвҖІ )| +                                             ПҖМӮ(aвҖІ |sвҖІ ) |QПҖ (sвҖІ , aвҖІ ) вҲ’ QПҖМӮ (sвҖІ , aвҖІ )|
       sвҖІ                                   aвҖІ                                                                                            aвҖІ
                                                                                                                                                                                         !
      X
+Оұ              (|ПҖ (aвҖІ |sвҖІ ) вҲ’ ПҖМӮ (aвҖІ |sвҖІ )| |log ПҖ (aвҖІ |sвҖІ )| + |ПҖМӮ (aвҖІ |sвҖІ )| |log ПҖ (aвҖІ |sвҖІ ) вҲ’ log ПҖМӮ (aвҖІ |sвҖІ )|)
      aвҖІ
      X                                    X                                                       X
вүӨОі              P (sвҖІ |s, a)                         вҲҘПҖ вҲ’ ПҖМӮвҲҘ В· Qmax +                                  ПҖМӮ(aвҖІ |sвҖІ ) вҲҘQПҖ вҲ’ QПҖМӮ вҲҘ
       sвҖІ                                   aвҖІ                                                     aвҖІ
                                                                                                                                 !
      X
                                                                       вҖІ       вҖІ
+Оұ              (вҲҘПҖ вҲ’ ПҖМӮвҲҘ В· logmax ПҖ + ПҖМӮ (a |s ) вҲҘ log ПҖ вҲ’ log ПҖМӮвҲҘ)
      aвҖІ
 вүӨ ОіQmax В· |A| В· вҲҘПҖ вҲ’ ПҖМӮвҲҘ + Оі вҲҘQПҖ вҲ’ QПҖМӮ вҲҘ + ОұОі logmax ПҖ В· |A| В· вҲҘПҖ вҲ’ ПҖМӮвҲҘ + ОұОівҲҘ log ПҖ вҲ’ log ПҖМӮвҲҘ
Hence, we get
вҲҘQПҖ вҲ’ QПҖМӮ вҲҘ вүӨ ОіQmax В·|A|В·вҲҘПҖвҲ’ПҖМӮвҲҘ+Оі вҲҘQПҖ вҲ’ QПҖМӮ вҲҘ+ОұОі logmax ПҖВ·|A|В·вҲҘПҖвҲ’ПҖМӮвҲҘ+ОұОівҲҘ log ПҖвҲ’log ПҖМӮвҲҘ,


                                                                                                        16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


which implies
                          Оі В· |A| В· (Qmax + Оұ logmax ПҖ) В· вҲҘПҖ вҲ’ ПҖМӮвҲҘ + ОұОівҲҘ log ПҖ вҲ’ log ПҖМӮвҲҘ
          вҲҘQПҖ вҲ’ QПҖМӮ вҲҘ вүӨ
                                                      1вҲ’Оі
By continuity of ПҖ and log ПҖ, for any arbitrary Пө > 0, we can find Оҙ1 > 0 such that вҲҘПҖ вҲ’ ПҖМӮвҲҘ < Оҙ1
implies вҲҘПҖ вҲ’ ПҖМӮвҲҘ < 2ОіВ·|A|В·(Q(1вҲ’Оі)Пө
                            max +Оұ log   ПҖ) and Оҙ2 > 0 such that вҲҘПҖ вҲ’ ПҖМӮвҲҘ < Оҙ2 implies вҲҘ log ПҖ вҲ’
                                       max

log ПҖМӮвҲҘ < (1вҲ’Оі)Пө
             2ОұОі . Taking Оҙ = min (Оҙ1 , Оҙ2 ) , when вҲҘПҖ вҲ’ ПҖМӮвҲҘ < Оҙ we get вҲҘQПҖ вҲ’ QПҖМӮ вҲҘ < Пө, which
finishes the proof.
Corollary 1. From Lemma A.2 we obtain that the following functions are continuous in ПҖ :
                                               P
          (1) the state value function VПҖ (s) = a (ПҖ(a|s)QПҖ (s, a) вҲ’ ПҖ(a|s) log ПҖ(a|s)),
           (2) the advantage function AПҖ (s, a) = QПҖ (s, a) вҲ’ VПҖ (s),
           (3) and the expected total reward J(ПҖ) = EsвҲјПҒ0 [VПҖ (s)].
Corollary 2 (Continuity in MARL). All the results about continuity in ПҖ extend to MARL. Policy ПҖ
can be replaced with joint policy ПҖ; as ПҖ is Lipschitz-continuous in agent i вҖҷs policy ПҖ i , the above
continuity results extend to continuity in ПҖ i . Thus, we will quote them in our proofs for MARL.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B    E XACT C ALCULATION OF M ATRIX G AME
In this section, we provide an exact calculation of the matrix game in Section 3.2. The initial policies
of the matrix game represent the scenario where due to the exploration and learning in the early
stages, agents may have explored a locally optimal solution (in this example action (A, A)) and
assigned a high probability to it. The matrix game aims to show that both MAPPO and HAPPO will
converge towards this local optimum in expectation, while HASAC, owing to its optimization of the
maximum entropy objective, has the potential to escape this local optimum and converge towards a
superior solution.
We start by analyzing MAPPO. For both parameter-sharing and non-parameter-sharing versions of
MAPPO, the policy is optimizing the following objective:


                                                                  ПҖ i (ai |s)

                      i
                     ПҖnew = arg max EsвҲјПҒПҖold ,aвҲјПҖold                          A
                                                                   i (ai |s) ПҖold
                                                                                  (s, a)  , i = 1, 2   (13)
                               ПҖi                                ПҖold

Note that we omit ratio-clipping in this tabular case, as this is simpler and does not affect the final
result. In this 2-agent single-state matrix game, s вҲј ПҒПҖold can be ignored as there is only one state.
Value function VПҖold (s) can be calculated exactly:


     VПҖold (s) = EaвҲјПҖold [QПҖold (s, a)]
               = EaвҲјПҖold [r(s, a)]
               = 0.36 Г— 5 + 0.04 Г— 10 + 0.04 Г— 20 + 4 Г— 0.12 Г— (вҲ’20) + 2 Г— 0.04 Г— (вҲ’20)
               = вҲ’8.2

Similarly, the advantage function AПҖold (s, a) can be calculated exactly as shown in Figure 6.
                                                             Agent 1
                                                      A           B      C
                                                 A   13.2     -11.8     -11.8
                                       Agent 2


                                                 B   -11.8       18.2   -11.8

                                                 C   -11.8    -11.8     28.2


              Figure 6: Advantage values AПҖold (s, a) for all joint actions in the first iteration.

Expanding objective 13, we get


     i                                                                          ПҖ i (ai = A|s)
    ПҖnew = arg max (0.36 Г— 13.2 + 0.12 Г— (вҲ’11.8) Г— 2) Г—
                ПҖi                                                                     0.6
                                                                           ПҖ i (ai = B|s)
                         + (0.12 Г— (вҲ’11.8) + 0.04 Г— 18.2 + 0.04 Г— (вҲ’11.8)) Г—
                                                                                   0.2
                                                                              ПҖ i (ai = C|s)
                   + (0.12 Г— (вҲ’11.8) + 0.04 Г— (вҲ’11.8) + 0.04 Г— (28.2)) Г—
                                                                                     0.2
         = arg max 3.2 Г— ПҖ i (ai = A|s) + (вҲ’5.8) Г— ПҖ i (ai = B|s) + (вҲ’3.8) Г— ПҖ i (ai = C|s)
                ПҖi


This will encourage ПҖ i to assign a higher probability to action A and lower probabilities to action
B and C. The updated policies will further encourage choosing action A in subsequent iterations.
Finally, the policies will converge to the deterministic policies ПҖ i = (1, 0, 0), i = 1, 2.
For HAPPO, the agents update their policies sequentially. Without loss of generality, we assume
they update in the order of Agent 1 and Agent 2. Agent 1 updates its policy according to objective
                                                   1
13 and increases the probability of action A. Let ПҖnew = (p1 , p2 , p3 ), s.t. p1 > 0.6, p2 < 0.2, p3 <
    P3
0.2, j=1 pj = 1. Agent 2 updates its policy according to the following objective:


                                                          18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                       ПҖ 2 (a2 |s) ПҖnew
                                                    1
                                                        (a1 |s)

 2
ПҖnew = arg max EsвҲјПҒПҖold ,aвҲјПҖold                                 A
                                        2 (a2 |s) ПҖ 1 (a1 |s) ПҖold (s, a)
            ПҖ2                         ПҖold         old
                                                                                               ПҖ 2 (a2 = A|s)
     = arg max (0.6 Г— p1 Г— 13.2 + 0.6 Г— p2 Г— (вҲ’11.8) + 0.6 Г— p3 Г— (вҲ’11.8)) Г—
            ПҖ2                                                                                        0.6
                                                                                ПҖ 2 (a2 = B|s)
                   + (0.2 Г— p1 Г— (вҲ’11.8) + 0.2 Г— p2 Г— 18.2 + 0.2 Г— p3 Г— (вҲ’11.8)) Г—
                                                                                       0.2
                                                                                  ПҖ 2 (a2 = C|s)
                + (0.2 Г— p1 Г— (вҲ’11.8) + 0.2 Г— p2 Г— (вҲ’11.8) + 0.2 Г— p3 Г— (28.2)) Г—
                                                                                         0.2
     = arg max (13.2 Г— p1 вҲ’ 11.8 Г— p2 вҲ’ 11.8 Г— p3 ) Г— ПҖ 2 (a2 = A|s)
            ПҖ2
                  (вҲ’11.8 Г— p1 + 18.2 Г— p2 вҲ’ 11.8 Г— p3 ) Г— ПҖ 2 (a2 = B|s)
                  (вҲ’11.8 Г— p1 вҲ’ 11.8 Г— p2 + 28.2 Г— p3 ) Г— ПҖ 2 (a2 = C|s)


Since (13.2 Г— p1 вҲ’ 11.8 Г— p2 вҲ’ 11.8 Г— p3 ) > 3.2, (вҲ’11.8 Г— p1 + 18.2 Г— p2 вҲ’ 11.8 Г— p3 ) <
вҲ’5.8, (вҲ’11.8 Г— p1 вҲ’ 11.8 Г— p2 + 28.2 Г— p3 ) < вҲ’3.8, this will encourage assigning higher probability
to action A and lower probability to action B and C. Similar to MAPPO, the updated policies
will further encourage choosing action A in subsequent iterations. Finally, the policies converge to
ПҖ i = (1, 0, 0), i = 1, 2.
By contrast, HASAC is possible to escape the local optimum and converge to better stochastic
policies, as we show below. Without loss of generality, we assume the update order is Agent 1 and
Agent 2. We first consider the update of Agent 1, who optimizes the following objective:


                   1
                                                    QПҖold (s, a1 , a2 ) вҲ’ Оұ log ПҖ 1 (a1 |s)

                  ПҖnew = arg max Ea1 вҲјПҖ1 ,a2 вҲјПҖold
                                               2
                            ПҖ1
                                                    r(s, a1 , a2 ) вҲ’ Оұ log ПҖ 1 (a1 |s)

                       = arg max Ea1 вҲјПҖ1 ,a2 вҲјПҖold
                                               2
                              ПҖ1


Parametrizing ПҖ 1 = (p1 , p2 , p3 ), we get


           1
          ПҖnew = arg max вҲ’ 5p1 вҲ’ 14p2 вҲ’ 12p3 вҲ’ Оұp1 log p1 вҲ’ Оұp2 log p2 вҲ’ Оұp3 log p3 ,
                      ПҖ1
                             s.t. p1 + p2 + p3 = 1

The solutions corresponding to different Оұ are listed in the left part of Table 3.

                              After the first update            Convergent (both)
                    Оұ        p1        p2         p3          p1       p2        p3
                    1      0.9990 0.0001 0.0009             1.0000 0.0000 0.0000
                    2      0.9603 0.0107 0.0290             1.0000 0.0000 0.0000
                    5      0.7083 0.1171 0.1747             0.9849 0.0075 0.0076
                    10     0.5254 0.2136 0.2609             0.0221 0.0224 0.9555
                    15     0.4596 0.2522 0.2882             0.1278 0.1354 0.7368
                    20     0.4269 0.2722 0.3009             0.2514 0.2790 0.4697

Table 3: Exact calculation results for HASAC update. On the left we show the policy after the first update; on
the right we show the policies of ПҖ 1 and ПҖ 2 after convergence.

As Оұ increases, the policy is encouraged to be stochastic, trading off between stochasticity and reward
maximization. With appropriate Оұ, the policies will be able to assign higher probabilities to action B


                                                      19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and C, thereby retaining the exploration of them. It then encourages more exploration of action B
and C in subsequent updates. Finally, the convergent policies predominantly choose action C while
still being stochastic, as shown in the right part of Table 3.
Thus, we show the benefit of stochastic policies and that in expectation, with appropriate Оұ, HASAC
is capable of escaping local optimum and converging to better stochastic policies. We note that
the exact calculation results are generally consistent with the empirical results in Section 5.2 (this
can be easily checked by computing the joint action probabilities and comparing with Table 5). An
observation is that when Оұ = 5, theoretically it is not sufficient for escaping local optimum but
empirically it already results in learning the optimal actions (C, C). This may be due to the fact that
in practical implementation, HASAC learns a centralized Q-function by sampling from the replay
buffer, which introduces some randomness that causes slight deviations between the experimental
results and the exact calculated ones.


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C    D ERIVATION OF M AX E NT MARL O BJECTIVE
In this section, we derive the maximum entropy objective of MARL (Equation 2) by performing
variational inference in Figure 2. In structured variational inference, our objective is to approximate
some distribution p(y) with another, usually simpler distribution q(y). In our case, we aim to
approximate p(П„ ), given by
                               "        T
                                                            #      T
                                                                                !
                                       Y                         X
                       p(П„ ) = p(s1 )      p(st+1 |st , at ) exp     r(st , at ) ,                 (14)
                                             t=1                                t=1

via the distribution
                       T
                       Y                                            T
                                                                    Y                         n
                                                                                              Y
                                                                                                    q im aitm |st ,

      q(П„ ) = q(s1 )         q(st+1 |st , at )q(at |st ) = q(s1 )         q(st+1 |st , at )                           (15)
                       t=1                                          t=1                       m=1

where the joint  policy q(at |st ) follows a fully independent factorization q(at |st ) =
Qn
  m=1 q
         im
                aitm |st as we assume that agents are independent of each other under CTDE paradigm.
To avoid risk-seeking behavior, we fix the environment dynamics, i.e., q(s1 ) = p(s1 ) and
q(st+1 |st , at ) = p(st+1 |st , at ). In structured variational inference, approximate inference is per-
formed by optimizing the variational lower bound (also called the evidence lower bound). In our case,
the evidence is that Ot = 1, вҲҖt вҲҲ {1, . . . , T } and the posterior is conditioned on the initial state s1 .
The variational lower bound is given by
                               Z Z
        log p(O1:T ) = log             p(O1:T , s1:T , a1:T )ds1:T da1:T
                               Z Z
                                                               q(s1:T , a1:T )
                         = log         p(O1:T , s1:T , a1:T )                  ds1:T da1:T
                                                               q(s1:T , a1:T )

                                                               p(O1:T , s1:T , a1:T )
                         = log E(s1:T ,a1:T )вҲјq(s1:T ,a1:T )
                                                                  q(s1:T , a1:T )
                         вүҘ E(s1:T ,a1:T )вҲјq(s1:T ,a1:T ) [log p(O1:T , s1:T , a1:T ) вҲ’ log q(s1:T , a1:T )] ,
where the inequality on the last line is obtained via JensenвҖҷs inequality. Substituting the definitions of
p(П„ ) and q(П„ ) from Equations 14 and 15, and according to q(st+1 |st , at ) = p(st+1 |st , at ), the bound
reduces to
                                                    " T                n
                                                                                             !#
                                                     X                 X
                                                                         log q im aitm |st

      log p (O1:T ) вүҘ E(s1:T ,a1:T )вҲјq(s1:T ,a1:T )     r (st , at ) вҲ’                           ,      (16)
                                                         t=1                      m=1

Optimizing this lower bound with respect to the policy q(at |st ) corresponds exactly to the following
maximum entropy objective:
                                         " T                       n
                                                                                    !#
                                           X                      X
                                                                           i

              J(ПҖ) = Es1:T вҲјПҒ1:T
                             ПҖ ,a1:T вҲјПҖ
                                                 r (st , at ) + Оұ     H ПҖ (В·|st )      ,            (2)
                                                     t=1                         i=1

where we multiply a temperature parameter Оұ to the entropy term to assign relative importance to
entropy and reward maximization (9).


                                                           21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D       P ROOFS OF R EPRESENTATION OF QRE
Theorem 1 (Representation of QRE). A joint policy ПҖQRE вҲҲ О  is a QRE if none of the agents can
increase the maximum entropy objective (Equation 2) by unilaterally altering its policy, i.e.,

                                                                      вҲ’i
                                        вҲҖi вҲҲ N , вҲҖПҖ i вҲҲ О i , J ПҖ i , ПҖQRE   вүӨ J ПҖQRE .

Then the QRE policies are given by

                                                    exp ОұвҲ’1 EaвҲ’i вҲјПҖвҲ’i QПҖQRE s, ai , aвҲ’i


                           i
                 вҲҖi вҲҲ N , ПҖQRE          ai |s := P                    QRE
                                                                                                         ,                   (3)
                                                         exp   Оұ вҲ’1 E            QПҖQRE (s, bi , aвҲ’i )
                                                   i
                                                  b вҲҲA i             aвҲ’i вҲјПҖ вҲ’i           QRE


where the soft Q-functions are defined as follows,
                                                       "вҲһ                                n
                                                                                                            !               #
                                                        X                                X
                                                                  t                               i
  QПҖ (s, a) = r (s, a) + Ea1:вҲһ вҲјПҖ,s1:вҲһ вҲјP                     Оі       r (st , at ) + Оұ         H ПҖ (В·|st )    s0 = s, a0 = a .
                                                        t=1                              i=1
                                                                                                                             (4)

Proof. First, we consider the following constrained policy optimization problem to agent i: for a
given state s вҲҲ S,
                                                                           n
                                                                           X X
                                                                                         ПҖ j aj |s log ПҖ j aj |s ,

                 max
                  i
                     E    ai вҲјПҖ i ,aвҲ’i вҲјПҖ вҲ’i    [QПҖ (s, a)] вҲ’ Оұ
                   ПҖ
                                                                           j=1 aj вҲҲAj
                                                        X
                                                                ПҖ i ai |s = 1.

                                                s.t.
                                                       ai вҲҲAi

We consider its associated Lagrangian function as follows,
                                                              n
                                                              X X                                          X
L(ПҖ i , О») = Eai вҲјПҖi ,aвҲ’i вҲјПҖвҲ’i [QПҖ (s, a)] вҲ’ Оұ                                ПҖ j aj |s log ПҖ j aj |s + О»(   ПҖ i ai |s вҲ’ 1)

                                                              j=1 aj вҲҲAj                                       ai вҲҲAi
                 n
                XY                                             Xn    X                                      X
                         ПҖ j aj |s QПҖ (s, a) вҲ’ Оұ                               ПҖ j aj |s log ПҖ j aj |s + О»(   ПҖ i ai |s вҲ’ 1).

          =
               aвҲҲA j=1                                          j=1 aj вҲҲAj                                      ai вҲҲAi

Then we consider the derivative of L(ПҖ i , О») with respect to ПҖ i , we obtain
              вҲӮL(ПҖ i , О»)           X        Y
                                                  ПҖ j aj |s QПҖ (s, ai , aвҲ’i ) вҲ’ Оұ log ПҖ i ai |s вҲ’ Оұ + О».

                           =
              вҲӮПҖ i (ai |s)
                               aвҲ’i вҲҲAвҲ’i jМё=i
          i
    вҲӮL(ПҖ ,О»)                                      i
Let вҲӮПҖ i (ai |s) = 0, we know the optimal policy ПҖвӢҶ satisfies the following condition,


                                                                    О»
                 ПҖвӢҶi ai |s = exp(ОұвҲ’1 EaвҲ’i вҲјПҖвҲ’i QПҖ s, ai , aвҲ’i ) exp( вҲ’ 1).

                                                                    Оұ

Furthermore, since ai вҲҲAi ПҖвӢҶi ai |s = 1, we know optimal lagrange multiplier О»вӢҶ satisfies
                    P

                                        О»вӢҶ    X
                                                  exp(ОұвҲ’1 EaвҲ’i вҲјПҖвҲ’i QПҖ s, ai , aвҲ’i ),

                        exp(1 вҲ’            )=
                                        Оұ     i i
                                                a вҲҲA

i.e.,                                                                                            !
                                              X
                                                                вҲ’1                     i   вҲ’i

                       О»вӢҶ =     1 вҲ’ log                exp(Оұ          EaвҲ’i вҲјПҖвҲ’i QПҖ s, a , a     ) Оұ.
                                             ai вҲҲAi
Finally, we obtain the optimal policy as follows,
                                        exp(ОұвҲ’1 EaвҲ’i вҲјПҖвҲ’i QПҖ s, ai , aвҲ’i )

                         ПҖвӢҶi    i

                               a |s = P             вҲ’1 E вҲ’i              i   вҲ’i
                                                                                  .
                                       bi вҲҲAi exp(Оұ     a вҲјПҖ вҲ’i [QПҖ (s, b , a )])


                                                                      22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hence, when each agent can not increase the maximum entropy objective by unilaterally changing its
policy, policies take the following form,
                                                                 n
                                                                 X X
          i
              ai |s = arg max Eai вҲјПҖi ,aвҲ’i вҲјПҖвҲ’i QПҖQRE (s, a) вҲ’ Оұ     ПҖ j aj |s log ПҖ j aj |s

вҲҖi вҲҲ N , ПҖQRE
                                               QRE
                            ПҖ i (В·|s)                               j=1 aj вҲҲAj

                                      exp(ОұвҲ’1 EaвҲ’i вҲјПҖвҲ’i QПҖQRE s, ai , aвҲ’i )

                     = ПҖвӢҶi ai |s = P
                                                      QRE
                                                                                 ,
                                           exp(Оұ вҲ’1 E                   i   вҲ’i
                                     i
                                    b вҲҲA i           a вҲјПҖ вҲ’i QПҖQRE (s, b , a ) )
                                                      вҲ’i
                                                             QRE


which finishes the proof.


                                                23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E     P ROOFS OF H ETEROGENEOUS -AGENT S OFT P OLICY I TERATION
In this section, we introduce heterogeneous-agent soft policy iteration and prove its properties of
monotonic improvement and convergence to the QRE policies.

E.1    P ROOF OF J OINT S OFT P OLICY E VALUATION

For joint soft policy evaluation, we will repeatedly apply soft Bellman operator О“ПҖ to Q(s, a) until
convergence, where:
                               О“ПҖ Q(s, a) вүң r(s, a) + ОіEsвҖІ вҲјP [V (sвҖІ )]                        (17)
                                          "              n
                                                                          #
                                                       X
                                                            H ПҖ i В·i |s

                           V (s) = EaвҲјПҖ Q(s, a) + Оұ                         .                  (18)
                                                                       i=1

In this way, as shown in lemma 4.1, we can get QПҖ for any joint policy ПҖ.
Lemma 4.1 (Joint Soft Policy Evaluation). Consider the soft Bellman backup operator О“ПҖ and a
mapping Q0 : S Г— A вҶ’ R with |A| < вҲһ, and define Qk+1 = О“ПҖ Qk . Then the sequence Qk will
converge to the joint soft Q-function ПҖ as k вҶ’ вҲһ.
                                                                                                    Pn
                                                                                                             ПҖ i В·i |sвҖІ

Proof. We define the reward with entropy term as rПҖ (s, a) вүң r(s, a)+EsвҖІ вҲјP                          i=1 H                      .
We can then express the update rule as:
                               Q(s, a) вҶҗ rПҖ (s, a) + ОіEsвҖІ вҲјP,aвҖІ вҲјПҖ [Q(sвҖІ , aвҖІ )]
and apply the standard convergence results for policy evaluation (28).

E.2    P ROOF OF J OINT S OFT P OLICY D ECOMPOSITION

After we get QПҖ (s, a), we draw a permutation i1:n вҲҲ Sym(n) and update each agentвҖҷs policy ПҖ im
according to the following optimization proposition:
Proposition 1 (Joint Soft Policy Decomposition). Let ПҖ be a joint policy, and i1:n вҲҲ Sym(n) be an
agent permutation. Suppose that, for each state s and every m = 1, . . . , n,
                               пЈ«                                                                       пЈ¶
                                                   exp E i1:mвҲ’1 i1:mвҲ’1 Оұ1 QiПҖ1:m  s, ai1:mвҲ’1 , В·im

                                                                              old
   im                                                   a      вҲјПҖ
  ПҖnew = arg     min       DKL пЈӯПҖ im       В·im |s вҲҘ              new                                   пЈё , (8)
               ПҖ im вҲҲО im                                E i1:mвҲ’1 i1:mвҲ’1 [ZПҖold (s, ai1:mвҲ’1 )]
                                                             a           вҲјПҖnew

                                                    i
where ai1:mвҲ’1 is drawn from the policy ПҖnew  1:mвҲ’1
                                                   (В·|s) and the partition function ZПҖold s, ai1:mвҲ’1
normalizes the distribution. Then the joint policy satisfies the following:
                                                                             1
                                                                                          !
                                                                       exp     Q
                                                                             Оұ ПҖold
                                                                                    (s, В·)
                             ПҖnew = arg min DKL         ПҖ (В·|s) вҲҘ                             .                           (9)
                                           ПҖвҲҲО                                ZПҖold (s)


Proof. First, we use LiПҖmim (ПҖ im (В·|s)) to denote
                         old
                 пЈ«                                                                          пЈ¶
                                   exp Eai1:mвҲ’1 вҲјПҖi1:mвҲ’1 Оұ1 QiПҖ1:m

                                                                  old
                                                                       s, ai1:mвҲ’1 , В·im
           DKL пЈӯПҖ im В·im |s вҲҘ
                                                      new                                   пЈё.
                                            Eai1:mвҲ’1 вҲјПҖi1:mвҲ’1 [ZПҖold (s, ai1:mвҲ’1 )]
                                                                 new


Suppose that there exists a policy ПҖМ„ Мё= ПҖnew , such that LПҖold (ПҖМ„(В·|s)) < LПҖold (ПҖnew (В·|s)), we have
                               n
                               X                                               n
                                                                               X
                                     H ПҖМ„ i В·i |s > EaвҲјПҖnew [QПҖold (s, a)] + Оұ      i
                                                                                        В·i |s . (19)

    EaвҲјПҖМ„ [QПҖold (s, a)] + Оұ                                                     H ПҖnew
                               i=1                                                           i=1

From Equation 8, we have LiПҖmim (ПҖnew
                                  im
                                      (В·|s)) вүӨ LiПҖmim (ПҖМ„ im (В·|s)) for every m = 1, . . . , n, i.e.,
                             old                   old


            Eai1:mвҲ’1 вҲјПҖi1:mвҲ’1 ,aim вҲјПҖim QiПҖ1:m   (s, ai1:mвҲ’1 , aim ) вҲ’ Оұ log ПҖnew
                                                                                im
                                                                                      aim |s

                                             old
                       new           new

            вүҘ Eai1:mвҲ’1 вҲјПҖi1:mвҲ’1 ,aim вҲјПҖМ„im QiПҖ1:m     (s, ai1:mвҲ’1 , aim ) вҲ’ Оұ log ПҖМ„ im aim |s .

                                                  old
                              new


                                                          24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                             h                     i
                                                               i
Subtracting both sides of the inequality by Eai1:mвҲ’1 вҲјПҖi1:mвҲ’1 QПҖ1:mвҲ’1
                                                                 old  (s, ai1:mвҲ’1 ) gives
                                                                  new


            Eai1:mвҲ’1 вҲјПҖi1:mвҲ’1 ,aim вҲјПҖim AiПҖmold (s, ai1:mвҲ’1 , aim ) вҲ’ Оұ log ПҖnew
                                                                             im
                                                                                   aim |s

                       new           new
                                                                                                         (20)
            вүҘ Eai1:mвҲ’1 вҲјПҖi1:mвҲ’1 ,aim вҲјПҖМ„im AiПҖmold (s, ai1:mвҲ’1 , aim ) вҲ’ Оұ log ПҖМ„ im aim |s .

                             new


Combining this with Lemma A.1 gives
               "                n
                                                 #
                               X
                                     i
                                         В·i |s

      EaвҲјПҖnew AПҖold (s, a) + Оұ    H ПҖnew
                                          i=1
           n h
           X                                                                               i
              Eai1:mвҲ’1 вҲјПҖi1:mвҲ’1 ,aim вҲјПҖim AiПҖmold (s, ai1:mвҲ’1 , aim ) вҲ’ Оұ log ПҖnew
                                                                               im
                                                                                   aim |s

         =
                                   new             new
            m=1
        by Inequality 20
             n h
            X                                                                                  i
                Eai1:mвҲ’1 вҲјПҖi1:mвҲ’1 ,aim вҲјПҖМ„im AiПҖmold (s, ai1:mвҲ’1 , aim ) вҲ’ Оұ log ПҖМ„ im aim |s

         вүҘ
                                   new
            m=1
                   "                      n
                                                                #
                                          X
                                                 H ПҖМ„ i В·i |s

         = EaвҲјПҖМ„ AПҖold (s, a) + Оұ                                 .
                                           i=1



The resulting inequality can be equivalently rewritten as
                             n
                             X                                                n
                                                                              X
                                    H ПҖМ„ i В·i |s вүӨ EaвҲјПҖnew [QПҖold (s, a)] + Оұ      i
                                                                                       В·i |s , (21)

  EaвҲјПҖМ„ [QПҖold (s, a)] + Оұ                                                      H ПҖnew
                             i=1                                                     i=1

which contradicts Equation 19. Hence, for all ПҖ вҲҲ О , LПҖold (ПҖnew (В·|s)) вүӨ LПҖold (ПҖ(В·|s)), i.e.,
                                                                          !
                                                     exp Оұ1 QПҖold (s, В·)
                     ПҖnew = arg min DKL ПҖ (В·|s) вҲҘ                           ,
                                ПҖвҲҲО                          ZПҖold (s)

which finishes the proof.



E.3   P ROOF OF H ETEROGENEOUS -AGENT S OFT P OLICY I MPROVEMENT

Then the soft Q-function and joint maximum entropy objective (Equation 2) has monotonic improve-
ment property as formalized below.
Lemma 4.2 (Heterogeneous-Agent Soft Policy Improvement). Let i1:n вҲҲ Sym(n) be an agent
                                                         im
permutation, and for every m = 1, . . . , n, let policy ПҖold вҲҲ О im and ПҖnew
                                                                        im
                                                                            be the optimizer of the
minimization problem defined in Equation 8. Then QПҖnew (s, a) вүҘ QПҖold (s, a) for all (s, a) вҲҲ S Г— A
with |A| < вҲһ and J (ПҖnew ) вүҘ J (ПҖold ).

Proof. From Proposition 1, we have
                                                           1
                                                                         !
                                                     exp   Оұ QПҖold (s, В·)
          ПҖnew = arg min DKL             ПҖ (В·|s) вҲҘ                           = arg min LПҖold (ПҖ(В·|s)).
                       ПҖвҲҲО                                  ZПҖold (s)               ПҖвҲҲО 


It must be the case that LПҖold (ПҖnew (В·|s)) вүӨ LПҖold (ПҖold (В·|s)). Hence
                             n
                             X                                                n
                                                                              X
                                       i
                                           В·i |s вүҘ EaвҲјПҖold [QПҖold (s, a)] + Оұ      i
                                                                                       В·i |s = VПҖold (s).

EaвҲјПҖnew [QПҖold (s, a)] + Оұ          H ПҖnew                                      H ПҖold
                             i=1                                                       i=1
                                                                                                         (22)


                                                           25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Last, considering the soft Bellman equation, the following holds:
QПҖold (s, a) = r(s, a) + ОіEsвҖІ вҲјP [VПҖold (sвҖІ )]
                                 "                            n
                                                                                 #
                                                             X
                                                    вҖІ                i    i вҖІ

             вүӨ r(s, a) + ОіEsвҖІ вҲјP EaвҲјПҖnew [QПҖold (s , a)] + Оұ      H ПҖnew В· |s ) (by Inequality 22)
                                                                            i=1
            ..
             .
                 вүӨ QПҖnew (s, a),
                                                                                            (23)
where we have repeatedly expanded QПҖold on the RHS by applying the soft Bellman equation and the
bound in Inequality 22. Convergence to QПҖnew follows from Lemma 4.1.
We use it to prove the claim as follows,                       n
                                                               X
                                                                         i
                                                                             В·i |s

             VПҖnew (s) = EaвҲјПҖnew [QПҖnew (s, a)] + Оұ                   H ПҖnew
                                                                i=1
                                                               n
                                                               X
                                                                         i
                                                                             В·i |s (by Inequality 23)

                          вүҘ EaвҲјПҖnew [QПҖold (s, a)] + Оұ                H ПҖnew
                                                               i=1
                                                              n
                                                              X
                                                                        i
                                                                            В·i |s (by Inequality 22)

                          вүҘ EaвҲјПҖold [QПҖold (s, a)] + Оұ               H ПҖold
                                                               i=1
                   = VПҖold (s).
Subsequently, the monotonic improvement property of the joint maximum entropy return follows
naturally, as
                           J (ПҖnew ) = EsвҲјd [VПҖnew (s)] вүҘ EsвҲјd [VПҖold (s)] = J (ПҖold ) .

E.4    P ROOF OF H ETEROGENEOUS -AGENT S OFT P OLICY I TERATION

The full heterogeneous-agent soft policy iteration algorithm alternates between the joint soft policy
evaluation and the heterogeneous-agent soft policy improvement steps, and it will provably converge
to the QRE policies.
Theorem 2 (Heterogeneous-Agent Soft Policy Iteration). For any joint policy ПҖ вҲҲ О , if we
repeatedly apply joint soft policy evaluation
                                     Qn       and heterogeneous-agent soft policy improvement from
ПҖ i вҲҲ О i . Then the joint policy ПҖ = i=1 ПҖ i converges to ПҖQRE in Theorem 1.

Proof. Let ПҖk be the joint policy at iteration k.
First, by Lemma 4.2, we have that QПҖk (s, a) вүӨ QПҖk+1 (s, a), and that the soft Q-function is upper-
bounded by Qmax for all ПҖ вҲҲ О  (both reward and entropy are bounded). Hence, the sequence
converges to some limit point ПҖМ„.
Then, considering this limit point joint policy ПҖМ„, it must be the case that
                           вҲҖi вҲҲ N , вҲҖПҖ i вҲҲ О i , LiПҖМ„i (ПҖМ„ i (В·|s)) вүӨ LiПҖМ„i (ПҖ i (В·|s)).
And we have
                 ПҖМ„ i В·i |s = arg max Eai вҲјПҖi QiПҖМ„ s, ai вҲ’ Оұ log ПҖ i ai |s

                                       ПҖ i (В·i |s)вҲҲP(Ai )

                                   =      arg max Eai вҲјПҖi ,aвҲ’i вҲјПҖМ„вҲ’i [QПҖМ„ (s, a)]
                                       ПҖ i (В·i |s)вҲҲP(Ai )                                               (24)
                                         n
                                         X X
                                                       ПҖ j aj |s log ПҖ j aj |s , вҲҖi вҲҲ N .

                                   вҲ’Оұ
                                         j=1 aj вҲҲAj
Last, following the proof of Theorem 1, we have
                                      exp ОұвҲ’1 EaвҲ’i вҲјПҖМ„вҲ’i QПҖМ„ s, ai , aвҲ’i

                      i   i

                    ПҖМ„ a |s := P                   вҲ’1 E вҲ’i                i   вҲ’i
                                                                                   .
                                     bi вҲҲAi exp (Оұ     a вҲјПҖМ„ вҲ’i [QПҖМ„ (s, b , a )])
Thus, ПҖМ„ is a quantal response equilibrium, which finishes the proof.


                                                             26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F    P SEUDOCODE OF HASAC

Algorithm 2: Heterogeneous-Agent Soft Actor-Critic
Input: temperature Оұ, Polyak coefficient П„ , batch size B, number of: agents n, episodes K,
        steps per episode T , mini-epochs e;
Initialize: the critic networks: П•1 and П•2 and policy networks: Оёi iвҲҲN , replay buffer B, Set
 target parameters equal to main parameters П•targ, 1 вҶҗ П•1 , П•targ, 2 вҶҗ П•2 ;
for k = 0, 1, . . . , K вҲ’ 1 do
    Observe state oit and select action ait вҲј ПҖОёi (В·|oit );
    Execute ait in the environment;
    Observe next state    ot+1 , reward r t ;
    Push transitions oit , ait , oit+1 , rt , вҲҖi вҲҲ N , t вҲҲ T into B;
    Sample a random minibatch of B transitions from B;
    Compute the critic targets

                                                        n
                                                                                              !
                                                        X
                                                              log ПҖОёi   ait+1 |oit+1

     yt = r+Оі      min QП•targ ,i (st+1 , at+1 ) вҲ’ Оұ                                               ,   at+1 вҲј ПҖОё (В·|st+1 ) ;
                   i=1,2
                                                        i=1

    Update Q-functions by one step of gradient descent using
                                           1 X                       2
                       П•i = arg min            (yt вҲ’ QП•i (st , at ))               for i = 1, 2;
                                    П•i     B t
    Draw a permutation of agents i1:n at random;
    for agent im = i1 , . . . , in do
        Update agent im by solving


                          1    X                            i1:mвҲ’1

                                                                             i

                                                                                                                   im+1:n

                                                                                                                                   i
          im
                                                                                          , aiОёМӮmim   oitm

         Оёnew = arg max                  min QП•i       st , a i1:mвҲ’1        ot1:mвҲ’1                              , a im+1:n       otm+1:n
                    ОёМӮ im B     t
                                     i=1,2                  Оёnew                                                   Оёold
                                                                            !

                                         вҲ’ Оұ log ПҖОёМӮim
                                                     im
                                                          aim
                                                                |o
                                                           ОёМӮ im t
                                                                  im



       where aiОё (oit ) is a sample from ПҖОёi (В·|oit ) which is differentiable wrt Оё via the
       reparametrization trick;
       with e mini-epochs of policy gradient ascent;
    end
    Update the target critic network smoothly
                              П•targ ,i вҶҗ ПҒП•targ ,i + (1 вҲ’ ПҒ)П•i               for i = 1, 2;
end
Discard П• . Deploy Оёi iвҲҲN in execution;


                                                         27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G    P ROOFS OF T HE C ORE T HEOREM OF MEHAML

First, we show that enhancing the MEHAMO (Definition 2) alone is sufficient to guarantee policy
improvement, as demonstrated by the following lemma.
Lemma G.1. Let ПҖold and ПҖnew be joint policies and let i1:n вҲҲ Sym(n) be an agent permutation.
Suppose that, for every state s вҲҲ S and every m = 1, . . . , n,
                                                                  i

                                  im
                                (ПҖnew )                         (ПҖ m )
                              M       i1:mвҲ’1       VПҖold (s) вүҘ M old i1:mвҲ’1 VПҖold (s)                    (25)
                                Dim ,ПҖnew                                   Dim ,ПҖnew


Then, ПҖnew is jointly better than ПҖold , so that for every state s,
                                                   VПҖnew (s) вүҘ VПҖold (s).

Subsequently, the monotonic improvement property of the joint return follows naturally, as
                         J (ПҖnew ) = EsвҲјd [VПҖnew (s)] вүҘ EsвҲјd [VПҖold (s)] = J (ПҖold ) .


Proof. By Inequality 25, we have
                                              i1:m
                                                       (s, ai1:mвҲ’1 , aim ) вҲ’ Оұ log ПҖnew
                                                                                      im
                                                                                           aim |s

             Eai1:mвҲ’1 вҲјПҖi1:mвҲ’1 ,aim вҲјПҖim QПҖ        old
                        new            new

                  im    im        i1:mвҲ’1
             вҲ’ DПҖold ПҖnew |s, ПҖnew
                                                                                         im
             вүҘ Eai1:mвҲ’1 вҲјПҖi1:mвҲ’1 ,aim вҲјПҖim QiПҖ1:m           (s, ai1:mвҲ’1 , aim ) вҲ’ Оұ log ПҖold  aim |s

                                                        old
                             new             old

                        im       i1:mвҲ’1
             вҲ’ DiПҖmold ПҖold |s, ПҖnew       .
                                                             h                      i
                                                               i            i1:mвҲ’1
Subtracting both sides of the inequality by Eai1:mвҲ’1 вҲјПҖi1:mвҲ’1 QПҖ1:mвҲ’1
                                                                 old  (s, a        )  gives
                                                                            new


             Eai1:mвҲ’1 вҲјПҖi1:mвҲ’1 ,aim вҲјПҖim AiПҖmold (s, ai1:mвҲ’1 , aim ) вҲ’ Оұ log ПҖnew
                                                                              im
                                                                                   aim |s

                        new            new

                  im    im        i1:mвҲ’1
             вҲ’ DПҖold ПҖnew |s, ПҖnew
                                                                                  im                     (26)
             вүҘ Eai1:mвҲ’1 вҲјПҖi1:mвҲ’1 ,aim вҲјПҖim AiПҖmold (s, ai1:mвҲ’1 , aim ) вҲ’ Оұ log ПҖold   aim |s

                             new             old

                        im       i1:mвҲ’1
             вҲ’ DiПҖmold ПҖold |s, ПҖnew       .

    e ПҖ (ПҖnew |s) вүң      Pn        im      im        i1:mвҲ’1
Let D  old                       D
                              m=1 ПҖold   ПҖ new |s, ПҖ new      . Combining this with Lemma A.1 gives
                   "                         n
                                                                       #
                                             X
                                                        i           i

         EaвҲјПҖnew AПҖold (s, a) + Оұ                  H   ПҖnew     В· |s     вҲ’D
                                                                          e ПҖ (ПҖnew |s)
                                                                             old
                                             i=1
             n h
             X
                    Eai1:mвҲ’1 вҲјПҖi1:mвҲ’1 ,aim вҲјПҖim AiПҖmold (s, ai1:mвҲ’1 , aim ) вҲ’ Оұ log ПҖnew
                                                                                     im
                                                                                         aim |s

         =
                                      new              new
             m=1
                                             i
                                  i
         вҲ’DiПҖmold ПҖnew
                   im        1:mвҲ’1
                       |s, ПҖnew
         by Inequality 20
             Xn h
                                                                                   im
                  Eai1:mвҲ’1 вҲјПҖi1:mвҲ’1 ,aim вҲјПҖim AiПҖmold (s, ai1:mвҲ’1 , aim ) вҲ’ Оұ log ПҖold aim |s

          вүҘ
                                      new              old
             m=1
                                             i
                   im             i
         вҲ’DiПҖmold ПҖold       1:mвҲ’1
                       |s, ПҖnew
                   "                             n
                                                                               #
                                                 X
                                                              i         i

         = EaвҲјПҖold AПҖold (s, a) + Оұ                    H     ПҖold       В· |s     вҲ’D
                                                                                  e ПҖ (ПҖold |s) .
                                                                                     old
                                                 i=1


                                                                28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The resulting inequality can be equivalently rewritten as
                                                n
                                                X
                                                         i
                                                             В·i |s вҲ’ D

             EaвҲјПҖnew [QПҖold (s, a)] + Оұ               H ПҖnew         e ПҖ (ПҖnew |s)
                                                                        old
                                                i=1
                                                      n
                                                                                                                (27)
                                                      X
                                                                   i     i

             вүҘ EaвҲјПҖold [QПҖold (s, a)] + Оұ                   H     ПҖold   В· |s вҲ’ D
                                                                                e ПҖ (ПҖold |s) , вҲҖs вҲҲ S.
                                                                                   old
                                                      i=1

We use it to prove the claim as follows,
                                                n
                                                X
                                                         i
                                                             В·i |s

VПҖnew (s) = EaвҲјПҖnew [QПҖnew (s, a)] + Оұ                H ПҖnew
                                                i=1
                                                n
                                                X
                                                         i
                                                             В·i |s вҲ’ D

         = EaвҲјПҖnew [QПҖold (s, a)] + Оұ                 H ПҖnew         e ПҖ (ПҖnew |s)
                                                                        old
                                                i=1

         +De ПҖ (ПҖnew |s) + EaвҲјПҖ [QПҖ (s, a) вҲ’ QПҖ (s, a)] ,
               old                 new   new            old

         by Inequality 27
                                       n
                                       X
                                             i
                                                В·i |s вҲ’ D

         вүҘ EaвҲјПҖold [QПҖold (s, a)] + Оұ    H ПҖold             e ПҖ (ПҖold |s)
                                                               old
                                                i=1

         +De ПҖ (ПҖnew |s) + EaвҲјПҖ [QПҖ (s, a) вҲ’ QПҖ (s, a)] ,
              old                new    new           old

                       e ПҖ (ПҖnew |s) + EaвҲјПҖ [QПҖ (s, a) вҲ’ QПҖ (s, a)]
         = VПҖold (s) + D  old               new   new      old

         = VПҖ (s) + DПҖ (ПҖnew |s) + EaвҲјПҖ ,s вҲјP [r(s, a) + ОіVПҖ (sвҖІ ) вҲ’ r(s, a) вҲ’ ОіVПҖ
               old
                       e
                               old
                                                вҖІ
                                                            new                        new                old
                                                                                                                (sвҖІ )]
                       e ПҖ (ПҖnew |s) + ОіEaвҲјПҖ ,sвҖІ вҲјP [VПҖ (sвҖІ ) вҲ’ VПҖ (sвҖІ )]
         = VПҖold (s) + D  old               new        new        old

         вүҘ VПҖold (s) + Оі inf
                           вҖІ
                             [VПҖnew (sвҖІ ) вҲ’ VПҖold (sвҖІ )] .
                           s
         Hence VПҖnew (s) вҲ’ VПҖold (s) вүҘ Оі inf
                                           вҖІ
                                             [VПҖnew (sвҖІ ) вҲ’ VПҖold (sвҖІ )] .
                                                       s
         Taking infimum over s and simplifying
         (1 вҲ’ Оі) inf [VПҖnew (s) вҲ’ VПҖold (s)] вүҘ 0
                     s

Therefore, inf s [VПҖnew (s) вҲ’ VПҖold (s)] вүҘ 0, which proves the lemma.

Then, any algorithm derived from Algorithm 1 ensures that the resulting policies satisfy Condition
25, as demonstrated by the following lemma.
Lemma G.2. Suppose an agent im maximizes the expected MEHAMO

               im                                 (ПҖ im )
              ПҖnew =      arg max EsвҲјОІПҖold M i                  V
                                                          i1:mвҲ’1 ПҖold  (s) .                                    (28)
                             im                   D m ,ПҖnew
                      ПҖ im вҲҲUПҖ      ПҖ im
                               old ( old )


Then, for every state s вҲҲ S
                                                          im

                            im
                          (ПҖnew )                       (ПҖold )
                        M i       i1:mвҲ’1 VПҖold   (s) вүҘ M i      i1:mвҲ’1 VПҖold   (s).                             (29)
                           D m ,ПҖnew                                     D m ,ПҖnew

Hence, ПҖnew attains the properties provided by Lemma G.1.

Proof. We will prove this statement by contradiction. Suppose that there exists s0 вҲҲ S such that

                        (ПҖ im )                        (ПҖ im )
                    M inew i1:mвҲ’1 VПҖold (s0 ) < M iold i1:mвҲ’1 VПҖold (s0 ).
                          D m ,ПҖnew                                      D m ,ПҖnew

Let us define the following policy ПҖМӮ im .
                                                             im

                                      im   im
                                                            ПҖold В·im |s  , at s = s0
                                 ПҖМӮ        В· |s =            im
                                                            ПҖnew  В·im |s , at s Мё= s0

                                                                29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                            im
Note that ПҖМӮ im is (weakly) closer to ПҖold     than ПҖnewim
                                                              at s0 , and at the  same distance at other states.
                                  im                                              im
Together with ПҖnew вҲҲ UПҖold ПҖold , this implies that ПҖМӮ im вҲҲ UПҖim
                 im      im
                                                                          old
                                                                                ПҖold   . Further,

                                                                                  im
                         (ПҖМӮ im )                                              (ПҖnew )
         EsвҲјОІПҖold M i                     V
                                  i1:mвҲ’1 ПҖold    (s)   вҲ’  E  sвҲјОІПҖold       M                  V
                                                                                       i1:mвҲ’1 ПҖold    (s)
                         D m ,ПҖnew                                             Dim ,ПҖnew

                                (ПҖМӮim )                                   im
                                                                       (ПҖnew  )
          = ОІПҖold (s0 ) M i                    V
                                        i1:mвҲ’1 ПҖold    (s 0 ) вҲ’   M      i
                                                                                        V
                                                                                i1:mвҲ’1 ПҖold    (s 0 )  > 0.
                                D m ,ПҖnew                          D m ,ПҖnew

                          im
The above contradicts ПҖnew    as being the argmax of Equality 28, as ПҖМӮ im is strictly better. The
contradiction finishes the proof.

Next, we prove the most fundamental theorem of MEHAML.
Theorem 3 (The Core Theorem of MEHAML). Let ПҖ0 вҲҲ О , and the sequence of joint policies
     вҲһ
(ПҖk )k=0 be obtained by a MEHAML algorithm 1 induced by Di , U i , вҲҖi вҲҲ N , and ОІПҖ . Then, the
joint policies induced by the algorithm enjoy the following list of properties (1) Attain the monotonic
improvement property J (ПҖk+1 ) вүҘ J (ПҖk ), (2) Their value functions converge to a quantal response
value function limkвҶ’вҲһ VПҖk = V QRE , (3) Their expected returns converge to a quantal response
return limkвҶ’вҲһ J (ПҖk ) = J QRE , (4) Their Пү-limit set consists of quantal response equilibria.

Proof. Proof of Property 1.
It follows from combining Lemma G.1 & G.2.
Proof of Properties 2, 3 & 4.
Step 1: convergence of the value function. By Lemma G.1, we have that VПҖk (s) вүӨ VПҖk+1 (s), вҲҖs вҲҲ
S, and that the value function is upper-bounded by Vmax . Hence, the sequence of value functions
(VПҖk )kвҲҲN converges. We denote its limit by V .
Step 2: characterisation of limit points. As the joint policy space О  is bounded, by Bolzano-
Weierstrass theorem, we know that the sequence (ПҖk )kвҲҲN has a convergent subsequence. Therefore,it
has at least one limit point policy. Let ПҖМ„ be such a limit point. We introduce an auxiliary notation: for
a joint policy ПҖ and a permutation i1:n , let HU (ПҖ, i1:n ) be a joint policy obtained by a MEHAML
update from ПҖ along the permutation i1:n .
Claim: For any permutation z1:n вҲҲ Sym(n),
                                             ПҖМ„ = HU (ПҖМ„, z1:n )

Proof of Claim. Let ПҖМӮ = HU (ПҖМ„, z1:n ) Мё= ПҖМ„ and (ПҖkr )rвҲҲN be a subsequence converging to ПҖМ„. Let
us recall that the limit value function is unique and denoted as V . Writing Ei0:вҲһ
                                                                               1:n
                                                                                   [В·] for the expectation

operator under the stochastic process ik1:n kвҲҲN of update orders, for a state s вҲҲ S, we have

                      0 = lim Ei0:вҲһ 1:n
                                         VПҖkr +1 (s) вҲ’ VПҖkr (s)
                           rвҶ’вҲһ
                      as every choice of permutation improves the value function

                       вүҘ lim P ik1:n

                                     r
                                       = z1:n VHU(ПҖkr ,z1:n ) (s) вҲ’ VПҖkr (s)
                          rвҶ’вҲһ

                       = p (z1:n ) lim VHU(ПҖkr ,z1:n ) (s) вҲ’ VПҖkr (s) .
                                   rвҶ’вҲһ

By the continuity of the expected MEHAMO (following from the continuity of the state-action
value function (Lemma A.2), the entropy term, HADFs, neighbourhood operators, and the sampling
distribution) we obtain that the first component of HU (ПҖkr , z1:n ), which is ПҖkz1r +1 , is continuous in
ПҖkr by BergeвҖҷs Maximum Theorem (1). Applying this argument recursively for z2 , . . . , zn , we have
that HU (ПҖkr , z1:n ) is continuous in ПҖkr .Hence, as ПҖkr converges to ПҖМ„, its HU converges to the HU
of ПҖМ„, which is ПҖМӮ. Hence, we continue writing the above derivation as
                            = p (z1:n ) [VПҖМӮ (s) вҲ’ VПҖМ„ (s)] вүҘ 0, by Lemma G.1.
As s was arbitrary, the state-value function of ПҖМӮ is the same as that of ПҖ : VПҖМӮ = VПҖМ„ , by the Bellman
equation 5: Q(s, a) = r(s, a) + ОіE [V (sвҖІ )], this also implies that their state-action value functions


                                                      30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


are the same: QПҖМӮ = QПҖМ„ . Let m be the smallest integer such that ПҖМӮ zm Мё= ПҖМ„ zm . This means that ПҖМӮ zm
achieves a greater expected MEHAMO than ПҖМ„ zm . Hence,
                           (ПҖМӮ zm )                             (ПҖМ„ zm )
                     hh                  i i              hh                        i i
              EsвҲјОІПҖМ„ MDzm ,ПҖМ„z1:mвҲ’1 VПҖМ„ (s) > EsвҲјОІПҖМ„ MDzm ,ПҖМ„z1:mвҲ’1 VПҖМ„ (s)

then for some state s,
                                    (ПҖМӮ zm )                 (ПҖМ„ zm )
                               h                     i     h                  i
                                   MDzm ,ПҖМ„z1:mвҲ’1 VПҖМ„ (s) > MDzm ,ПҖМ„z1:mвҲ’1 VПҖМ„ (s)

which can be written as
                             h                                                  i
Eaz1:mвҲ’1 вҲјПҖМ„z1:mвҲ’1 ,azm вҲјПҖМӮzm QzПҖМ„1:m (s, az1:mвҲ’1 , azm ) вҲ’ Оұ log ПҖМӮ zm (azm |s) вҲ’ DzПҖМ„m (ПҖМӮ zm |s, ПҖМ„ z1:mвҲ’1 )
                                h                                                 i
= Eaz1:mвҲ’1 вҲјПҖМ„z1:mвҲ’1 ,azm вҲјПҖМӮzm QzПҖМӮ1:m (s, az1:mвҲ’1 , azm ) вҲ’ Оұ log ПҖМӮ zm (azm |s) вҲ’ DzПҖМ„m (ПҖМӮ zm |s, ПҖМ„ z1:mвҲ’1 )
                                h                                                 i
> Eaz1:mвҲ’1 вҲјПҖМ„z1:mвҲ’1 ,azm вҲјПҖМ„zm QzПҖМ„1:m (s, az1:mвҲ’1 , azm ) вҲ’ Оұ log ПҖМ„ zm (azm |s) вҲ’ DzПҖМ„m (ПҖМ„ zm |s, ПҖМ„ z1:mвҲ’1 )
                                h                                                 i
= Eaz1:mвҲ’1 вҲјПҖМ„z1:mвҲ’1 ,azm вҲјПҖМ„zm QzПҖМ„1:m (s, az1:mвҲ’1 , azm ) вҲ’ Оұ log ПҖМ„ zm (azm |s) .
                                          PmвҲ’1
Adding
       both sides ofPthe  inequality by  Оұ i=1 H (ПҖМ„ zi (В·|s)) and using the equation VПҖ (s) =
                       n
EaвҲјПҖ QПҖ (s, a) + Оұ i=1 H ПҖ i (В·|s) gives
                              "              n
                                                              #
                                             X
                                                    i

              VПҖМӮ (s) = EaвҲјПҖМӮ QПҖМӮ (s, a) + Оұ   H ПҖМӮ (В·|s)
                                                               i=1
                                   "                   n
                                                                         #
                                                       X
                                                             H ПҖМӮ (В·|s) вҲ’ DzПҖМ„m (ПҖМӮ zm |s, ПҖМ„ z1:mвҲ’1 )
                                                                  i

                    вүҘ EaвҲјПҖМӮ QПҖМӮ (s, a) + Оұ
                                                       i=1
                                   "                   n
                                                                           #
                                                       X
                                                                  i

                    > EaвҲјПҖМ„ QПҖМ„ (s, a) + Оұ                   H ПҖМ„ (В·|s)
                                                       i=1
                    = VПҖМ„ (s).

However, we have VПҖМӮ = VПҖ which yields a contradiction, proving the claim.
Step 3: dropping the HADF. Consider an arbitrary limit point joint policy ПҖМ„. By Step 2, for any
permutation i1:n , considering the first component of the HU,

                                         (ПҖi1 )
      ПҖМ„ i1 = arg max EsвҲјОІПҖМ„ MDi1 VПҖМ„ (s)
                         i
                ПҖ i1 вҲҲUПҖМ„1 (ПҖМ„ i1 )
                             h         h                                 i               i
             = arg max EsвҲјОІПҖМ„ Eai1 вҲјПҖi1 QiПҖМ„1 s, ai1 вҲ’ Оұ log ПҖ i1 ai1 |s вҲ’ DiПҖМ„1 ПҖ i1 |s

                         i
                ПҖ i1 вҲҲUПҖМ„1 (ПҖМ„ i1 )
                             h         h                                 i               i
             = arg max EsвҲјОІПҖМ„ Eai1 вҲјПҖi1 AiПҖМ„1 s, ai1 вҲ’ Оұ log ПҖ i1 ai1 |s вҲ’ DiПҖМ„1 ПҖ i1 |s .

                         i
                ПҖ i1 вҲҲUПҖМ„1 (ПҖМ„ i1 )


Suppose that there exists a policy ПҖ вҖІ Мё= ПҖМ„ i1 , and a state s, such that

                   ПҖ вҖІ = arg max Eai1 вҲјПҖi1 AiПҖМ„1 s, ai1 вҲ’ Оұ log ПҖ i1 ai1 |s ,

                                                                                                         (30)
                                          i
                                 ПҖ i1 вҲҲUПҖМ„1 (ПҖМ„ i1 )

implies

          Eai1 вҲјПҖвҖІ AiПҖМ„1 (s, ai1 ) вҲ’ Оұ log ПҖ вҖІ ai1 |s > Eai1 вҲјПҖМ„i1 AiПҖМ„1 (s, a) вҲ’ Оұ log ПҖМ„ i1 ai1 |s


which can be written as

                        Eai1 вҲјПҖвҖІ AiПҖМ„1 (s, ai1 ) + ОұH ПҖ вҖІ В·i1 |s > ОұH ПҖМ„ i1 В·i1 |s .



                                                                31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For any policy ПҖ i1 , consider the canonical parameterisation ПҖ i1 (В·i1 |s) = x1 , . . . , xmвҲ’1 ,
    PmвҲ’1
1 вҲ’ i=1 xi , where m is the size of the action space. We have that
                                                        m
                                                       X
                            Eai1 вҲјПҖi1 AiПҖМ„1 (s, ai1 ) =   ПҖ i1 aii1 |s AiПҖМ„1 s, aii1

                                                                  i=1
                                                                 пЈ«         пЈ¶
                                mвҲ’1
                                X                                   mвҲ’1
                                                                    X
                                          xi AiПҖМ„1   s, aii1 + пЈӯ1 вҲ’     xj пЈё AiПҖМ„1 s, aim1

                            =
                                    i=1                                 j=1
                                mвҲ’1
                                X
                                                                              i1
                                          xi AiПҖМ„1 s, aii1 вҲ’ AiПҖМ„1 s, aim1 + AПҖМ„ s, aim1 .

                            =
                                    i=1

This means that Eai1 вҲјПҖi1 AiПҖМ„1 (s, ai1 ) is an affine function of ПҖ i1 (В·i1 |s), and thus, its GГўteaux deriva-


                   in P(A) for fixed directions. Hence, we can obtain that Eai1 вҲјПҖi1 AiПҖМ„1 (s, ai1 ) +

tives are constant

ОұH ПҖ i1 В·i1 |s     is a strict concave function of ПҖ i1 (В·i1 |s) (following from the affinity of
            i1
Eai1 вҲјПҖi1 AПҖМ„ (s, ai1 ) and the strict concavity of H ПҖ i1 В·i1 |s ). Therefore, by combining the
                                                        i1
Equation 30 and the strict concavity of Eai1 вҲјПҖi1 AПҖМ„ (s, ai1 ) + ОұH ПҖ i1 В·i1 |s , GГўteaux deriva-
                    i1
tive of Eai1 вҲјПҖi1 AПҖМ„ (s, ai1 ) + ОұH ПҖ i1 В·i1 |s , in the direction from ПҖМ„ to ПҖ вҖІ , is strictly positive.


Furthermore, the GГўteaux derivatives of DiПҖМ„1 (ПҖ i1 |s) are zero at ПҖ i 1 (В·i1 |s) = ПҖМ„ i1 (В·i1 |s) by its defini-
tion (zero gradient). Hence, the GГўteaux derivative of Eai1 вҲјПҖi1 AiПҖМ„1 (s, a) + ОұH ПҖ i1 В·i1 |s вҲ’


DiПҖМ„1 ПҖ i1 |s is strictly positive. Therefore, for conditional policies ПҖМӮ i1 (В·i1 |s) sufficiently close to


ПҖМ„ i1 (В·i1 |s) in the direction towards ПҖ вҖІ (В·i1 |s), we have
                                   h               i
                         Eai1 вҲјПҖМӮi1 AiПҖМ„1 (s, ai1 ) + ОұH ПҖМӮ i1 В·i1 |s вҲ’ DiПҖМ„1 (ПҖМӮ i1 |s)

                                      h               i                                                      (31)
                          > Eai1 вҲјПҖМ„i1 AiПҖМ„1 (s, ai1 ) + ОұH ПҖМ„ i1 В·i1 |s вҲ’ DiПҖМ„1 (ПҖМ„ i1 |s).


Let us construct a policy ПҖМғ i1 as follows. For all states y Мё= s, we set ПҖМғ i1 (В·i1 |y) = ПҖМ„ i1 (В·i1 |y).
Moreover, for ПҖМғ i1 (В·i1 |s) we choose ПҖМӮ i1 (В·i1 |s) as in Inequality 31, sufficiently close to ПҖМ„ i1 (В·i1 |s), so
that ПҖМғ i1 вҲҲ UПҖМ„i1i1 ПҖМ„ i1 . Then, we have
                                h               i         h                                   i
              EsвҲјОІПҖМ„ ,ai1 вҲјПҖМғi1 AiПҖМ„1 (s, ai1 ) + EsвҲјОІПҖМ„ ОұH ПҖМғ i1 В·i1 |s вҲ’ DiПҖМ„1 (ПҖМғ i1 |s)

                                    h               i         h                                    i
                 > EsвҲјОІПҖМ„ ,ai1 вҲјПҖМ„i1 AiПҖМ„1 (s, ai1 ) + EsвҲјОІПҖМ„ ОұH ПҖМ„ i1 В·i1 |s вҲ’ DПҖМ„   i1
                                                                                         (ПҖМ„ i1 |s) ,


which yields a contradiction. Hence, the assumption was false. Thus, we have proved that, for every
state s,
               ПҖМ„ i1 В·i1 |s = arg max Eai1 вҲјПҖi1 AiПҖМ„1 s, ai1 вҲ’ Оұ log ПҖ i1 ai1 |s

                                               i
                                      ПҖ i1 вҲҲUПҖМ„1 (ПҖМ„ i1 )

                                    = arg max Eai1 вҲјПҖi1 QiПҖМ„1 s, ai1 вҲ’ Оұ log ПҖ i1 ai1 |s .

                                               i
                                      ПҖ i1 вҲҲUПҖМ„1 (ПҖМ„ i1 )

Step 4: Quantal response equilibrium. We have proved that ПҖМ„ satisfies
                ПҖМ„ i В·i |s = arg max Eai вҲјПҖi QiПҖМ„ s, ai вҲ’ Оұ log ПҖ i ai |s

                                          ПҖ i (В·i |s)вҲҲP(Ai )

                                     =       arg max Eai вҲјПҖi ,aвҲ’i вҲјПҖМ„вҲ’i [QПҖМ„ (s, a)]
                                          ПҖ i (В·i |s)вҲҲP(Ai )
                                            n
                                            X X
                                                            ПҖ j aj |s log ПҖ j aj |s , вҲҖi вҲҲ N , s вҲҲ S.

                                     вҲ’Оұ
                                            j=1 aj вҲҲAj

Then following the proof of Theorem 1, we have
                                   exp ОұвҲ’1 EaвҲ’i вҲјПҖМ„вҲ’i QПҖМ„ s, ai , aвҲ’i

                        i       i

                      ПҖМ„ a |s := P              вҲ’1 E вҲ’i                i   вҲ’i
                                                                                .
                                  bi вҲҲAi exp (Оұ     a вҲјПҖМ„ вҲ’i [QПҖМ„ (s, b , a )])


                                                                  32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Thus, ПҖМ„ is a quantal response equilibrium. Lastly, this implies that the value function corresponds to
a quantal response value function V QRE , the return corresponds to a quantal response return J QRE .


                                                  33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H     E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

H.1     AUTOMATICALLY A DJUSTING T EMPERATURE

We implement an automated temperature tuning method for HASAC which draws on the auto-tuned
temperature extension of SAC (9). Thus, we adjust Оұ with the following objective:
                            J(Оұ) = Est вҲјD,at вҲјПҖ [вҲ’Оұ log ПҖ(at |st ) вҲ’ ОұHМ„],
where HМ„ is the target entropy.

H.2     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP AND A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

H.2.1    B I -D EX H ANDS
Bi-DexHands (2) offers numerous bimanual manipulation tasks that are designed to match various
human skill levels. Building on the Isaac Gym simulator, Bi-DexHands supports running thousands
of environments simultaneously. This increases the number of samples generated in the same time
interval, thus significantly alleviating the sample efficiency problem of on-policy algorithms.
We evaluate HASAC on nine tasks simulating human behaviors across different ages and compare it
with on-policy algorithms HAPPO, MAPPO, PPO, and off-policy algorithms HATD3 and SAC, as
shown in Figure 7. Despite leveraging GPU parallelization, we observe that the sample efficiency
of on-policy algorithms remains significantly lower than that of off-policy algorithms. In the most
challenging Catch Abreast, Two Catch Underarm, and Lift Underarm tasks, on-policy algorithms
fail to learn useful policies within 10m steps. While the off-policy algorithm HATD3 demonstrates
higher sample efficiency compared to on-policy algorithms, it exhibits substantial variance during
training due to the deterministic policies it learned, eventually converging to local optima. In contrast,
our algorithm HASAC outperforms the other five methods by a large margin, showcasing faster
convergence speed and lower variance.

H.2.2    M ULTI -AGENT M U J O C O
MuJoCo tasks challenge a robot to learn an optimal way of motion; Multi-Agent MuJoCo (MAMu-
JoCo) models each part of a robot as an independent agent, for example, a leg for a spider or an
arm for a swimmer. With the increasing variety of body parts, improving each agentвҖҷs exploration
becomes necessary. Although the easier tasks with fewer agents can be solved by a wide range
of different algorithms, the more complex benchmarks, such as the HumanoidStandup 17x1 and
ManyAgentSwimmer 10x2, are difficult to solve with current MARL algorithms.
We compare our method to several algorithms that show the current state-of-the-art performance in
10 tasks of 5 scenarios in MAMuJoCo, including HAPPO, a sequential-update on-policy algorithm;
MAPPO, a simultaneous-update on-policy algorithm; and HATD3 (45), an off-policy algorithm that
outperforms HADDPG and MADDPG. Figure 8 demonstrates that, in all scenarios, HASAC enjoys
superior performance over the three rivals both in terms of reward values and learning speed.

H.2.3    S TAR C RAFT M ULTI -AGENT C HALLENGE
StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge (SMAC) (25) contains a set of StarCraft maps in which a team of
ally units aims to defeat the opponent team. Notably, MAPPO (42), HAPPO, and HATRPO have
demonstrated remarkable performance on this benchmark through the utilization of five influential
factors that significantly impact algorithm performance.
We evaluate our method on four hard maps and four super-hard. Our experimental results, illustrated
in Figure 9, reveal that HASAC achieves over 90% win rates in 7 out of 8 maps and significantly
outperforms other strong baselines in most maps. Notably, in particularly challenging tasks such as
5m_vs_6m, 3s5z_vs_3s5z, and 6h_vs_8z, we observe that HAPPO and HATRPO would converge
towards suboptimal NE. In addition, FOP is unable to learn meaningful joint policy in super-hard
tasks due to its reliance on the IGO assumption. By contrast, HASAC consistently achieves superior
performance and shows the ability to identify higher reward equilibria due to its extensive exploration.
We also observe that HASAC has better stability and higher learning speed across most maps.


                                                   34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                     ShadowHandCatchAbreast                                                    ShadowHandTwoCatchUnderarm                                               ShadowHandLiftUnderarm
                     50                                                                                                                                                400
                                                                                           20.0                                                                                    PPO
                                                                                                                                                                                   SAC
                     40                                                                    17.5                                                                                    MAPPO
                                                                                                                                                                       300         HAPPO
                                                                                           15.0                                                                                    HATD3
                     30
    Episode Return


                                                                          Episode Return


                                                                                                                                                      Episode Return
                                                                                           12.5                                                                                    HASAC
                                                                                                                                                                       200
                     20                                                                    10.0
                                                                                             7.5                                                                       100
                     10                                                                      5.0
                                                                                             2.5                                                                         0
                      0
                                                                                             0.0
                          0.0      0.2     0.4          0.6   0.8   1.0                                0.0      0.2    0.4          0.6   0.8   1.0                          0.0     0.2      0.4          0.6   0.8   1.0
                                                 Step               1e7                                                      Step               1e7                                                 Step               1e7

                                  (a) Catch Abreast                                                    (b) Two Catch Underarm                                                       (c) Lift Underarm
                                         ShadowHandOver                                                       ShadowHandCatchOver2Underarm                                                   ShadowHandPen
                                                                                                  30
                     30                                                                                                                                                            PPO
                                                                                                                                                                       175         SAC
                                                                                                  25                                                                               MAPPO
                     25                                                                                                                                                150
                                                                                                                                                                                   HAPPO
                                                                                                  20                                                                   125         HATD3
    Episode Return


                                                                                 Episode Return


                                                                                                                                                      Episode Return
                     20                                                                                                                                                            HASAC
                                                                                                  15                                                                   100
                     15
                                                                                                                                                                        75
                     10                                                                           10
                                                                                                                                                                        50
                      5                                                                            5                                                                    25
                      0                                                                            0                                                                     0
                          0.0      0.2     0.4          0.6   0.8   1.0                                0.0      0.2    0.4          0.6   0.8   1.0                          0.0      0.2     0.4          0.6   0.8   1.0
                                                 Step               1e7                                                      Step               1e7                                                 Step               1e7

                                    (d) Hand Over                                                      (e) Catch Over2Underarm                                                             (f) Hand Pen
                                   ShadowHandDoorCloseInward                                                    ShadowHandDoorOpenInward                                             ShadowHandDoorOpenOutward
                                                                                             500                                                                                   PPO
                                                                                                                                                                       500         SAC
                 400                                                                                                                                                               MAPPO
                                                                                             400                                                                       400         HAPPO
                                                                                                                                                                                   HATD3
                 300
Episode Return


                                                                            Episode Return


                                                                                                                                                      Episode Return
                                                                                             300                                                                       300         HASAC

                                                                                             200                                                                       200
                 200
                                                                                             100                                                                       100
                 100
                                                                                                   0                                                                     0

                          0.0      0.2     0.4          0.6   0.8   1.0                                0.0     0.2     0.4          0.6   0.8   1.0                          0.0     0.2      0.4          0.6   0.8   1.0
                                                 Step               1e7                                                      Step               1e7                                                 Step               1e7

                                (g) Door Close Inward                                                        (h) Door Open Inward                                              (i) Door Open Outward

                                                 Figure 7: Comparisons of average episode return on nine Bi-DexHands tasks.
H.2.4                              G OOGLE R ESEARCH F OOTBALL

Google Research Football Environment (GRF) contains a set of cooperative multi-agent challenges
in which a team of agents plays a team of bots in various football scenarios. Recent works (42; 45)
have conducted experiments on academic scenarios and achieved nearly 100% winning rate on each
scenario except two very challenging tasks: run pass and shoot with keeper (RPS) and corner. We
apply HASAC to these two academy tasks of GRF, with QMIX and several SOTA methods, including
HAPPO and MAPPO as baselines. Since GRF lacks a global state interface, we propose a solution
to address this limitation by implementing a global state based on agentsвҖҷ observations following
the Simple115StateWrapper of GRF. Concretely, the global state consists of common components
in agentsвҖҷ observations and the concatenation of agent-specific parts and is taken as input by the
centralized critic for value prediction. Additionally, we employ the dense-reward setting. All methods
are trained for 20 million environment steps in the RPS task and for 25 million environment steps in
the corner task.
As shown in Figure 10a and 10b, we generally observe that both MAPPO and HAPPO tend to
converge to a non-optimal NE on the two challenging tasks with a winning rate of approximately
80%. This suboptimal convergence can be attributed to the insufficient level of exploration of these
algorithms. In contrast, HASAC exhibits the ability to attain a higher reward equilibrium by learning
stochastic policies, which effectively enhance exploration and robustness. This finding highlights
the crucial role of stochastic policies in improving exploration, thereby enabling agents to converge
toward a higher reward equilibrium.

H.2.5                              M ULTI -AGENT PARTICLE E NVIRONMENT

We evaluate HASAC on the Spread, Reference, and Speaker_Listener tasks of the Multi-Agent Particle
Environment (MPE) (19), which were implemented in PettingZoo (31). PettingZoo incorporates


                                                                                                                             35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        (a) 2x4-Agent Ant                 (b) 4x2-Agent Ant                   (c) 8x1-Agent Ant


   (d) 2x3-Agent HalfCheetah          (e) 3x2-Agent HalfCheetah           (f) 6x1-Agent HalfCheetah


      (g) 2x3-Agent Walker               (h) 6x1-Agent Walker              (i) 10x2-Agent Swimmer


(j) 17x1-Agent HumanoidStandup

         Figure 8: Comparisons of average episode return on multiple Multi-Agent MuJoCo tasks.
MPE with some minor adjustments and allows for customizing the number of agents and landmarks,
as well as the global and local rewards. To adapt these tasks to fully cooperative MARL settings,
we sum up the individual rewards of agents to form a joint reward. The results presented in Figure
11 shows that HASAC consistently outperforms the baselines in terms of both average return and
sample efficiency.

H.2.6    L IGHT A IRCRAFT G AME

In addition to the previous three well-established benchmarks, we extend our experiments to include a
novel environment called Light Aircraft Game (LAG) (23). LAG is a recently developed cooperative-
competitive environment for red and blue aircraft games, offering various settings such as single
control, 1v1, and 2v2 scenarios. In the context of multi-agent scenarios, LAG currently supports self-
play only for 2v2 settings. To address this limitation, we introduce a novel cooperative non-weapon
task where two agents collaborate to combat two opponents controlled by the built-in AI. Specifically,
the agents are trained to fly towards the tail of their opponents and maintain a suitable distance.


                                                  36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                               8m vs 9m                                                                                 5m vs 6m                                                                                  3s5z
                        1.0                                                                          1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.0

                        0.8                                                                          0.8                                                                                              0.8


                                                                                                                                                                              Evaluate Winning Rate
Evaluate winning rate


                                                                             Evaluate winning rate
                        0.6                                                                          0.6                                                                                              0.6

                        0.4                                                                          0.4                                                                                              0.4                                            FOP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     QMIX
                        0.2                                                                          0.2                                                                                                                                             MAPPO
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.2                                            HAPPO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     HATRPO
                        0.0                                                                          0.0                                                                                              0.0                                            HASAC
                              0.0     0.2     0.4          0.6   0.8   1.0                                       0.0       0.2         0.4           0.6    0.8         1.0                                 0.0      0.2    0.4          0.6   0.8       1.0
                                                    Step               1e7                                                                    Step                      1e7                                                       Step                   1e7

                                    (a) 8m-vs-9m (hard)                                                                 (b) 5m-vs-6m (hard)                                                                          (c) 3s5z (hard)
                                              10m vs 11m                                                                                     MMM2                                                                           3s5z vs 3s6z
                        1.0                                                                          1.0                                                                                              1.0         FOP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  QMIX
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.8         MAPPO
                        0.8                                                                          0.8                                                                                                          HAPPO



                                                                             Evaluate Winning Rate
Evaluate winning rate


                                                                                                                                                                              Evaluate winning rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  HATRPO
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.6         HASAC
                        0.6                                                                          0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.4
                        0.4                                                                          0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.2
                        0.2                                                                          0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.0
                        0.0                                                                          0.0
                              0.0     0.2     0.4          0.6   0.8   1.0                                       0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75 2.00                                               0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75 2.00
                                                    Step               1e7                                                           Step                 1e7                                                                   Step                 1e7

                                (d) 10m-vs-11m (hard)                                                             (e) MMM2 (super hard)                                                                (f) 3s5z-vs-3s6z (super hard)
                                                corridor                                                                                     6h vs 8z
                                                                                                           1.0
                        1.0

                        0.8                                                                                0.8
Evaluate Winning Rate


                                                                                   Evaluate winning rate


                        0.6                                                                                0.6

                        0.4                                                                                0.4                                                     FOP
                        0.2                                                                                                                                        QMIX
                                                                                                           0.2                                                     MAPPO
                                                                                                                                                                   HAPPO
                        0.0                                                                                                                                        HATRPO
                                                                                                           0.0                                                     HASAC
                              0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75 2.00                                        0.0    0.5     1.0   1.5      2.0 2.5    3.0    3.5   4.0
                                                  Step                 1e7                                                                     Step                     1e7

                               (g) corridor (super hard)                                                          (h) 6h-vs-8z (super hard)

Figure 9: Performance comparison on eight SMAC tasks. We generally observe that HASAC consistently
outperforms other baselines in most tasks, exhibiting higher convergence speed and better stability.


                                    (a) RPS (2 agents)                                                                 (b) Corner (11 agents)                                                               (c) Non-weapon (2 agents)
Figure 10: Performance comparison on two GRF tasks and one LAG task. HASAC achieves superior performance
to the other methods.
We compare our method to MAPPO and HAPPO on the cooperative non-weapon task involving
2 agents. Figure 10c demonstrates that HASAC outperforms both MAPPO and HAPPO in terms
of learning speed and stability. Specifically, HASAC exhibits faster convergence and achieves a
higher level of stability throughout the learning process. In contrast, MAPPO and HAPPO exhibit
considerable variability in their performance and display slower learning speeds.

H.3                                 H YPER - PARAMETER S ETTINGS FOR E XPERIMENTS

Before presenting the hyperparameters employed in our experiments, we would like to clarify the
reporting conventions we adhere to. First, we introduce a boolean variable auto_alpha to indicate
whether the temperature is auto-tuned or not. Also, the hyperparameters will only take effect when


                                                                                                                                         37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                  Reference (continuous)                                            Speaker Listener (continuous)                                                Spread (continuous)
                                                                                            5
                 10                                                                                                                                             60
                                                                                           10
                 20                                                                        15                                                                   70
                                                                                           20
Episode Return


                                                                          Episode Return


                                                                                                                                              Episode Return
                                                                                                                                                                80
                 30                                                                        25
                                                                                           30                                                                   90
                 40                                                                                                                                                                                        HATRPO
                                                                                           35                                                                                                              MAPPO
                                                                                                                                                               100                                         HAPPO
                 50                                                                        40                                                                                                              HATD3
                                                                                                                                                               110                                         HASAC
                                                                                           45
                      0       1         2             3       4   5                             0    1           2             3    4   5                            0       1       2             3   4       5
                                            Episode               1e6                                                Episode            1e6                                              Episode               1e6

                      (a) Reference (continuous)                                (b) Speaker Listener (continuous)                                                        (c) Spread (continuous)
                                   Reference (discrete)                                                  Speaker Listener (discrete)                            60
                                                                                                                                                                                  Spread (discrete)
                 15                                                                        10
                                                                                                                                                                70
                 20
                                                                                           15
                 25                                                                                                                                             80
Episode Return


                                                                          Episode Return


                                                                                                                                              Episode Return
                 30                                                                        20                                                                   90
                 35
                                                                                           25                                                                  100
                 40
                 45                                                                                                                                            110                                         HATRPO
                                                                                           30                                                                                                              MAPPO
                 50                                                                                                                                                                                        HAPPO
                                                                                                                                                               120                                         HASAC
                 55
                      0       1        2              3       4   5                             0    1          2              3    4   5                            0       1       2             3   4       5
                                            Episode               1e6                                                Episode            1e6                                              Episode               1e6

                          (d) Reference (discrete)                                         (e) Speaker Listener (discrete)                                                (f) Spread (discrete)

                                                          Figure 11: Comparisons of average episode return on six MPE tasks.
they are used. For instance, the temperature parameter Оұ can be assigned any numerical value, but it
is taken into consideration only when the boolean value auto_alpha is set to False. Similarly, the
target_entropy and alpha_lr are applicable when auto_alpha is set to True.

H.3.1                         C OMMON H YPER - PARAMETERS ACROSS A LL E NVIRONMENTS
We implement the HASAC based on the HARL framework (45) and employ the existing implemen-
tations of other algorithms, including HATD3, HAPPO, HATRPO, and MAPPO, as described in
the HARL literature. In Google Research Football, we use the results of QMIX in Yu et al. (42).
In StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge, we use the results of FOP in Zhang et al. (44). To ensure
comprehensive evaluation, we conduct training using a minimum of four different random seeds
for each algorithm. Next, we offer the hyperparameters used for HASAC in Table 4 across all
environments, which are kept comparable with the HATD3 for fairness purposes.
Table 4: Common hyperparameters used for off-policy algorithms HASAC and HATD3 across all environments.

                                                hyperparameters                                       value                        hyperparamerters                           value
                                               proper time limits                                      True                          warmup steps                              1e4
                                                    activation                                        ReLU                          final activation                          Tanh
                                                    buffer size                                        1e6                               polyak                               0.005
                                                  hidden sizes                                      [256, 256]                      update per train                            1
                                                  train interval                                        50                           target entropy                         -dim(Ai )
                                                  policy noise                                          0.2                             noise clip                             0.5
                                            policy update frequency                                      2                           linear lr decay                          False

H.3.2                         B I -D EX H ANDS
In the Bi-DexHands domain, for SAC, PPO, MAPPO baselines we adopt the implementation and
tuned hyperparameters reported in the paper (43). And for HAPPO we adopt the implementation and
tuned hyperparameters reported in the HARL paper (45). Here we report the hyperparameters for
HASAC and HATD3 in Table 5 and 6.

H.3.3                         M ULTI -AGENT M U J O C O (MAM U J O C O )
In this part, we report the hyperparameters used in MAMuJoCo tasks for HASAC and HATD3
in Table 7, 8, 9, and 10. For the other three baselines, we utilize the implementation and tuned
hyperparameters reported in the HARL paper (45).


                                                                                                                     38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Table 5: Common hyperparameters used for HASAC and HATD3 in the Bi-DexHands domain.

       hyperparameters    value    hyperparameters          value      hyperparameters        value
        rollout threads    20          gamma                 0.95         batch size          1000
            actor lr      5e - 4        critic lr           5e - 4          n step             20
        use huber loss    False     use valuenorm           False      exploration noise       0.1

           Table 6: Different hyperparameters used for HASAC in the Bi-DexHands domain.

                          scenarios                       auto alpha     alpha    alpha lr
                  ShadowHandCatchAbreast                     True          /       3e - 4
               ShadowHandTwoCatchUnderarm                   False        5e - 5      /
                  ShadowHandLiftUnderarm                     True          /       3e - 4
                      ShadowHandOver                         True          /       3e - 4
              ShadowHandCatchOver2Underarm                   True          /       3e - 4
                      ShadowHandPen                          True          /       3e - 4
                ShadowHandDoorCloseInward                    True          /       3e - 4
                ShadowHandDoorOpenInward                     True          /       3e - 4
               ShadowHandDoorOpenOutward                     True          /       3e - 4

      Table 7: Common hyperparameters used for HASAC and HATD3 in the MAMuJoCo domain.

                     hyperparameters     value         hyperparameters      value
                      rollout threads     10             train interval      50
                          critic lr      1e - 3             gamma           0.99
                      use huber loss     False          use valuenorm       False

            Table 8: Common hyperparameters used for HATD3 in the MAMuJoCo domain.

                     hyperparameters     value         hyperparameters      value
                         actor lr        5e - 4        exploration noise     0.1

          Table 9: Parameter n_step used for HASAC and HATD3 in the MAMuJoCo domain.

                    scenarios              value             scenarios                value
                     Ant 2x4                 5            HalfCheetah 2x3              10
                     Ant 4x2                 5            HalfCheetah 3x2              10
                     Ant 8x1                 5            HalfCheetah 6x1              10
                   Walker 2x3               20              Walker 6x1                 20
             manyagent_swimmer 10x2         10          HumanoidStandup 17x1           10

           Table 10: Different hyperparameters used for HASAC in the MAMuJoCo domain.

               scenarios        actor lr auto alpha alpha                  alpha lr   batch size
                Ant 2x4          3e - 4    False     0.2                      /         2200
                Ant 4x2          3e - 4    False     0.2                      /         1000
                Ant 8x1          3e - 4    False     0.2                      /         2200
          HalfCheetah 2x3        1e - 3     True      /                     3e - 4      1000
          HalfCheetah 3x2        1e - 3     True      /                     3e - 4      1000
          HalfCheetah 6x1        1e - 3     True      /                     3e - 4      1000
             Walker 2x3          5e - 4    False     0.2                      /         1000
             Walker 6x1          5e - 4    False     0.2                      /         1000
      manyagent_swimmer 10x2     1e - 3     True      /                     3e - 4      1000
       HumanoidStandup 17x1      1e - 3     True      /                     3e - 4      1000
H.3.4 S TAR C RAFT M ULTI -AGENT C HALLENGE (SMAC)

In the SMAC domain, for MAPPO we adopt the implementation and tuned hyperparameters reported
in the MAPPO paper (42). And for HAPPO and HATRPO we adopt the implementation and tuned


                                                  39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        Table 11: Common hyperparameters used for HAPPO and MAPPO in the MAMuJoCo domain.

                       hyperparameters         value    hyperparameters           value
                          batch size           4000         network               MLP
                           gamma               0.99       hidden sizes          [256, 256]

        Table 12: Different hyperparameters used for HAPPO and MAPPO in the MAMuJoCo domain.

                                 linear actor/critic ppo/critic     clip   actor/critic entropy
           scenarios
                               lr decay      lr        epoch      param mini batch        coef
             Ant                 False     5e - 4         5         0.1         1           0
         HalfCheetah             False     5e - 4        15        0.05         1         0.01
         Walker 2x3               True    1e - 3          5        0.05         2          0
         Walker 6x1              False     5e - 4         5         0.1         1         0.01
  manyagent_swimmer 10x2         False     5e - 4         5         0.2         1         0.01
   HumanoidStandup 17x1           True    5e - 4          5         0.1         1          0
hyperparameters reported in the HARL paper (45). Here we report the hyperparameters for HASAC
in Table 13 and 14.
                Table 13: Common hyperparameters used for HASAC in the SMAC domain.

     hyperparameters       value         hyperparameters       value       hyperparameters          value
      rollout threads       20              state type          FP             batch size           1000
      use huber loss       False          use valuenorm        False    use policy active masks      true

                Table 14: Different hyperparameters used for HASAC in the SMAC domain.

                                                                  auto
              Map            critic lr     actor lr    gamma                 alpha    alpha lr   n step
                                                                  alpha
           8m_vs_9m          5e - 4        3e - 4       0.95      True         /      3e - 4       5
           5m_vs_6m          5e - 4        3e - 4       0.95      True         /      3e - 4      20
              3s5z           5e - 4        3e - 4       0.99      True         /      3e - 4      20
          10m_vs_11m         5e - 4        3e - 4       0.95      True         /      3e - 4      20
             MMM2            5e - 4        3e - 4       0.95      True         /      3e - 4      20
          3s5z_vs_3s6z       5e - 4        3e - 4       0.99      True         /      3e - 4      10
             corridor        5e - 4        5e - 4       0.99      False      2e - 3     /          5
            6h_vs_8z         5e - 4        3e - 4       0.99      True         /      3e - 4       5


H.3.5     G OOGLE R ESEARCH F OOTBALL (GRF)
In the GRF domain, for MAPPO and QMIX baselines we adopt the implementation and tuned
hyperparameters reported in the MAPPO paper (42). And for HAPPO we adopt the implementation
and tuned hyperparameters reported in the HARL paper (45). Here we report the hyperparameters for
HASAC in Table 15 and 16.
                 Table 15: Common hyperparameters used for HASAC in the GRF domain.

          hyperparameters      value        hyperparameters       value      hyperparameters     value
           rollout threads      20              gamma              0.99         batch size       1000
               actor lr        5e - 4            critic lr        5e - 4          n step          10
           use huber loss      False         use valuenorm        False

                 Table 16: Different hyperparameters used for HASAC in the GRF domain.

                                scenarios       auto alpha     alpha       alpha lr
                                  RPS             False        1e - 4         /
                                 Corner           False        1e - 3         /


                                                        40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H.3.6     M ULTI -AGENT PARTICLE E NVIRONMENT (MPE)
In this part, we report the hyperparameters for HASAC in Table 17.

                     Table 17: Hyperparameters used for HASAC in the MPE domain.

          hyperparameters      value    hyperparameters    value      hyperparameters     value
           rollout threads      20         batch_size      1000           critic lr       5e - 4
               gamma           0.99          actor lr      5e - 4         n_step           20
             auto alpha        True         alpha lr       3e - 4
           use huber loss      False     use valuenorm     False


H.3.7     L IGHT A IRCRAFT G AME (LAG)
In this part, we report the hyperparameters for HASAC in Table 18 and the hyperparameters for
MAPPO and HAPPO in Table 19.
                     Table 18: Hyperparameters used for HASAC in the LAG domain.

          hyperparameters      value    hyperparameters    value      hyperparameters     value
           rollout threads      20        batch_size       1000           critic lr       5e - 4
               gamma           0.99         actor lr       5e - 4         n_step           10
             auto alpha        True         alpha lr       3e - 4

               Table 19: Hyperparameters used for MAPPO and HAPPO in the LAG domain.

        hyperparameters      value     hyperparameters    value     hyperparameters       value
           batch size        4000       linear lr decay   False       hidden sizes      [256, 256]
         actor/critic lr     5e - 4         gamma         0.99           network          MLP
           ppo epoch           5         entropy coef       0          clip param          0.05
          critic epoch         5       actor mini batch     2       critic mini batch       2


                                                    41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I   A BLATION S TUDY ON S EQUENTIAL U PDATES
In this section, we conduct an ablation study to investigate the effect of sequential updates. We
compare the performance of the original HASAC with sequential update scheme, and HASAC
without sequential updates (or MASAC), which updates each policy according to the following
objective:
                                             h
               i                                      i    i
                                                                     i          i   вҲ’i
                                                                                        i
         JПҖi (П• ) = Est вҲјD Eai вҲјПҖi ,aвҲ’i вҲјПҖвҲ’i Оұ log ПҖП•i at |st вҲ’ QПҖold ;Оё st , at , at      .
                              t   П•i   t       вҲ’i
                                           П•
                                               old

We run the experiments on nine Bi-DexHands tasks. For a fair comparison, we set the hyperparameters
of MASAC to be the same as those of HASAC. Experiments results show that HASAC with sequential
updates consistently achieves better performance.

                              Tasks                        HASAC         MASAC
                     ShadowHandCatchAbreast                45.9(4.3)     36.4(5.2)
                  ShadowHandTwoCatchUnderarm               20.6(1.9)     17.2(1.1)
                     ShadowHandLiftUnderarm               361.0(23.2)   345.0(9.7)
                         ShadowHandOver                    31.1(0.7)     30.5(1.1)
                 ShadowHandCatchOver2Underarm              28.7(0.4)     27.0(0.9)
                         ShadowHandPen                    181.5(10.4)   163.8(18.6)
                   ShadowHandDoorCloseInward              429.8(16.7)   425.9(7.1)
                   ShadowHandDoorOpenInward               475.6(23.8)   428.8(14.1)
                  ShadowHandDoorOpenOutward               542.1(13.1)   528.1(20.4)

                   Table 20: Averaged final performance on nine Bi-DexHands tasks.


                                                     42
