Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


W HAT M AKES I MAGE N ET L OOK U NLIKE LAION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                               A BSTRACT

             ImageNet was famously created from Flickr image search results. What if we
             recreated ImageNet instead by searching the massive LAION dataset based on
             image captions alone? In this work, we carry out this counterfactual investigation.
             We find that the resulting ImageNet recreation, which we call LAIONet, looks
             distinctly unlike the original. Specifically, the intra-class similarity of images
             in the original ImageNet is dramatically higher than it is for LAIONet. Conse-
             quently, models trained on ImageNet perform significantly worse on LAIONet.
             We propose a rigorous explanation for the discrepancy in terms of a subtle, yet
             important, difference in two plausible causal data-generating processes for the re-
             spective datasets, that we support with systematic experimentation. In a nutshell,
             searching based on an image caption alone creates an information bottleneck that
             mitigates the selection bias otherwise present in image-based filtering. Our expla-
             nation formalizes a long-held intuition in the community that ImageNet images
             are stereotypical, unnatural, and overly simple representations of the class cate-
             gory. At the same time, it provides a simple and actionable takeaway for future
             dataset creation efforts.


1       I NTRODUCTION

For nearly a decade, ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009) was the focal benchmark for much of computer
vision and deep learning. Created from image web search results and human filtering, ImageNet
contributed curated images suitable for supervised learning at the time. In recent years, however, the
community has seen a new generation of models trained on massive amounts of noisy image-text
data gathered from the web with minimal curation. Available to the academic public is the massive
scale LAION dataset, in two versions, featuring 400 million (Schuhmann et al., 2021) and 5 bil-
lion (Schuhmann et al., 2022) crawled image-text pairs, filtered by the OpenAI CLIP model (Rad-
ford et al., 2021) for sufficient image-text relevance rather than human annotators.
At the outset, LAION works much like text-based web image search. We can specify a query and
retrieve images with high similarity between the query and the text surrounding the image on the
website that it was crawled from. We can therefore search LAION for each of the 1000 categories
in the ImageNet ILSVRC-2012 dataset1 and retrieve images corresponding to each of the classes.
This process is much like the first step of creating ImageNet from Flickr search results, except
that LAION replaces Flickr, but either way, both are based on web crawls. Where the creators of
ImageNet hired human annotators to filter images, we analyze image captions to ensure that the
resulting images have high fidelity to the class category.
We might expect that for a suitably chosen textual similarity threshold, the resulting dataset would
bear resemblance to the original ImageNet. However, we demonstrate that this is anything but the
case. The dataset, so created from LAION, very much looks unlike ImageNet. And we explain
why, supported by independent evidence from other well-curated datasets. This explanation, al-
though subtle, reveals a fundamental fact about the difference between ImageNet and LAION that
has consequences for understanding dataset creation at large.


    1
        Unless otherwise stated, by ImageNet we mean the ImageNet ILSVRC-2012 dataset.


                                                     1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


1.1   O UR CONTRIBUTIONS

We introduce a new research artifact, called LAIONet, that aims at a recreation of ImageNet on the
basis of LAION. We start from LAION-400M, a collection of 400M image-text pairs extracted from
web pages in Common Crawl (commoncrawl.org) between 2014 and 2021. The relevance of
images and their corresponding texts was quality-controlled with OpenAI CLIP model, excluding
instances with a cosine similarity of image and text embeddings less than 0.3.

Creation of LAIONet. We create LAIONet solely on the basis of text-based selection. We re-
quire the exact “lemmas” (terms) in a so-called “synset” of an ImageNet category to appear in the
text corresponding to an image. Moreover, we require a high similarity between the text and the
synset name and definition. We use the cosine similarity of CLIP text embeddings to calculate this
similarity, however, we make consistent observations using MPNet (Song et al., 2020) as the text
encoder. LAIONet selection criteria are conservative in that they tend toward images that are easy to
classify; at least from the CLIP point of view, there is no evidence that LAIONet images are harder
to classify than ImageNet.

Contrasting LAIONet and ImageNet. To begin to understand the differences between LAIONet
and ImageNet, we evaluate a slew of Imagenet models on LAIONet. As we show, the accuracy
of models trained on ImageNet drops by 5 to 12 percentage points when evaluated on LAIONet
(Figure 1). In calculating accuracy, we weight classes uniformly as is done in ImageNet. When
classes are weighted based on the frequency of each class in LAIONet, accuracy drops by another 5
to 10 percentage points.

                                         Top 1 accuracy                                                  Top 5 accuracy
                                0.85                                                        0.95
                                0.80
             (validation set)


                                                                         (validation set)


                                                                                            0.90
               ImageNet


                                                                           ImageNet


                                0.75                                                        0.85
                                0.70                                                        0.80
                                                 1k models                                                     1k models
                                0.65             pt22k-ft1k models                                             pt22k-ft1k models
                                                 pt22k models                               0.75               pt22k models
                                0.60             y=x                                                           y=x
                                                                                            0.70
                                         0.6      0.7      0.8                                     0.7      0.8       0.9
                                              LAIONet                                                     LAIONet
                                       (equi-weighted classes)                                     (equi-weighted classes)

Figure 1: Accuracy of ImageNet-trained models when evaluated on ImageNet validation set ver-
sus LAIONet. Three types of models are distinguished based on whether they are pre-trained on
ImageNet-22k and whether they are fine-tuned on ImageNet-1k. Accuracy is defined as the average
of the recalls calculated for each class that is present in LAIONet.

Drops in accuracy, such as these, are a well-documented phenomenon in machine learning at this
point. In this work, we go a step further by providing a substantive explanation for the difference
between LAIONet and ImageNet.

Diagnosing the difference. In a first step, we observe that the intra-class similarity, measured as
the pairwise similarity of the images within a class, is lower for LAIONet than for ImageNet. In
other words, LAIONet images are more diverse in each class. The recall of the models is also lower
in the classes with lower intra-class similarity. Hence, lower intra-class similarity gives a concrete
reason for why the accuracy of ImageNet models drops on LAIONet. But why does LAIONet have
lower intra-class similarity in the first place?
We answer this question in terms of two plausible causal graphs for the respective data-generating
processes (Figure 2). Both graphs are based on the standard anti-causal representation of classi-
fication problems (Schölkopf et al., 2012), whereby for each category Y there is a mechanism to
generate data (here, image X and text T ) given Y . But, the graphs differ in one important aspect.
In the case of LAIONet (Figure 2a), selection is based on text alone. The causal graph has the
important property that the distribution of the image is independent of the selection decision condi-
tional on the text. In other words the text serves as an information bottleneck between the selection


                                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                !                                      !

                        #               "                      #               "
                                                                ?       ?

                        $                                      $′

                   (a) LAIONet data collection            (b) ImageNet data collection

Figure 2: The suggested underlying mechanism of data generation and selection in LAIONet and
ImageNet. Class Y , text description T , image X, selection S or S ′ .


mechanism and the image. Choosing an image reveals nothing more about the image than what can
be learned from its textual representation. This powerful conditional independence property limits
how much selection can bias the distribution of the image. In contrast, in the case of ImageNet
(Figure 2b), there is a link from the image to the selection decision. For example, this link exists
when human annotators see the full image and decide to select or discard an image. The existence
of this link is what can strongly bias the distribution of the image conditional on selection. It is this
selection bias that is visible in the higher intra-class similarity.
Our case hinges on the existence and strength of the image-to-selection link in the causal graph for
ImageNet. We then go beyond LAIONet and provide three complementary arguments as evidence:
• We can weaken the image-to-selection link by considering ImageNet instances of different selec-
  tion frequencies. The selection frequency describes the rate at which Amazon MTurk workers
  selected a candidate image into the dataset within a target class. This allows us to modulate the
  strength of the image-to-selection link. Looking at three versions of ImageNetV2 (Recht et al.,
  2019), we find that for a lower selection frequency, the resulting images come closer to LAIONet.
• We show that text alone cannot explain why an image was selected into ImageNet. The ImageNet-
  Captions dataset (Fang et al., 2022) has restored the captions for one-third of the original Ima-
  geNet images. If the text was the only factor in determining the relevance to a synset, it should
  explain why the images in ImageNet-Captions are selected. Looking at the similarity between
  texts and their synsets, a majority of text-synset pairs exhibit high similarity, but the distribution
  has a heavy tail and there are instances with low similarity. For pairs with low similarity, there
  are often many other synsets more similar to the text. This makes these instances unlikely to have
  been selected solely based on their text.
• We search LAION for the texts most similar to the texts from the ImageNet-Captions dataset. The
  resulting images show significantly higher variability (in other words, lower intra-class similarity)
  than ImageNet. This suggests that another mechanism must have been at play.
In conclusion, we argue that the image-to-selection mechanism was significantly at play in the cre-
ation of ImageNet. It is this mechanism that makes ImageNet look unlike LAION. This insight has
direct prescriptive value for dataset creation efforts in general. When creating a dataset and diversity
is desired, we should select candidates on the basis of an information bottleneck. A succinct text
caption, for example, generally carries much less information than the entire image. Selecting on
the basis of the text caption, therefore, retains much of the entropy present in the image distribution.

1.2   R ELATED WORK

Recreating an ImageNet test set, called ImageNetV2, although with a different motivation, was the
subject of the seminal paper by Recht, Roelofs, Schmidt, and Shankar (2019). Engstrom et al. (2020)
argue that there is a subtlety in thresholding empirical estimates of the true underlying selection fre-
quency of an image in ImageNetV2. Our argument, however, does not rely on any specific threshold
of the selection frequency. We only need to observe what happens as we vary it from small to large.
In contrast to ImageNetV2, our goal is not to recreate ImageNet as closely as possible. Rather it is
the differences between ImageNet and LAION that are the focus of our investigation.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Many other works have modified ImageNet for a variety of reasons. Geirhos et al. (2019) created
a stylized version of ImageNet to reduce the reliance of the trained model on texture. Xiao et al.
(2021) disentangled the foreground and background of ImageNet images to show the tendency of
the models to rely on the background. Li et al. (2023b) proposed ImageNet-W test set by inserting
a transparent watermark into the images of ImageNet validation set, revealing the reliance of the
models on watermarks. ImageNet undergoes ongoing augmentation over time. For example, the
ImageNet-Captions (Fang et al., 2022) project has restored the captions of about one-third of original
ImageNet images from Flickr. ImageNet-X (Idrissi et al., 2023) provides a set of human annotations
pinpointing 16 failure types for ImageNet such as pose, background, or lighting. The peculiarities
of ImageNet have been the subject of multiple studies. For example, Huh et al. (2016) found the
large size and many classes, including very similar classes, do not affect the successful transfer
performance of ImageNet-trained features.
On the side of LAION, researchers are keenly interested in understanding the strong zero-shot ac-
curacy of contrastive language image models using LAION (Vogel et al., 2022). Fang et al. (2022)
found none of the large training set size, language supervision, and contrastive loss function de-
termines this robustness and a more diverse training distribution should be the main cause. Our
work demystifies this distributional advantage by contrasting ImageNet and LAION. Nguyen et al.
(2022) compared various large image-text datasets differing in the creation process and found the
robustness induced by each varies widely in different aspects, suggesting further studies of the role
of dataset design. Our work highlights an important mechanism at play in dataset design that can
move the dataset further away from a natural distribution.


2   LAION ET: A N I MAGE N ET OUT OF LAION

Our starting point is to create an ImageNet-like dataset from LAION. This dataset is a research arti-
fact intended to highlight the differences between LAION and ImageNet. Our goal is not to provide
a new benchmark or a new training set. However, LAIONet might be of interest to obtain diverse
samples, or variants of LAIONet may be created to improve our understanding of benchmarks.
To start, recall that every ImageNet class corresponds to a WordNet (Miller, 1998) synset which
consists of so-called lemmas. Synsets also come with a short definition known as gloss. We label a
LAION instance with a WordNet synset if 1) at least one lemma from the synset exists in the text of
the instance, and 2) this text is sufficiently similar to the name and definition of the synset. Out of
LAION 400M samples, 21M of them passed the first condition. The second condition ensures the
lemma as found in the LAION sample has the intended meaning. To quantify the similarity of the
LAION text and a synset, we first create a textual representation for the synset by concatenating its
name and definition (to be called the synset text). We then calculate the embedding vectors for both
the synset text and LAION text using CLIP and compute their cosine similarity. Alternatively, one
may use any sufficiently powerful text encoder for this purpose. For instance, we repeat this process
using MPNet (Song et al., 2020) in Appendix A.
Figure 3a illustrates the distribution of LAION text to synset text similarities. In general, a high
value for textual similarity ensures the LAION text is describing the same object as the synset.
But as Figure 3b shows, we cannot set a very high similarity threshold since the extracted dataset
will lose its coverage over the ImageNet’s 1k classes. We found the threshold of 0.82 the highest
reasonable choice as it allows for covering most classes while going beyond it sharply reduces the
number of covered classes (Figure 3b) with no significant reduction in the dataset size (Figure 3c).
To further support this choice, in Section 4 (Figure 8b), we demonstrate that using the restored
captions of ImageNet, a textual similarity of above 0.7 is sufficient to ensure that a sample belongs
uniquely to the synset. Refer to Appendix C for an example of when the second step of filtering is
necessary and why the chosen threshold is conservative.
We take a few additional measures to guarantee the safety and quality of the chosen instances.
First, we drop samples with more than one label to simplify evaluation on the dataset. Second,
we drop images tagged as not-safe-for-work in LAION. Finally, we exclude images that contain text
matching the name of their synset. This will ensure the captions are describing an object in the image
and not just reflecting on another text. To achieve this, we employ EAST for text detection (Zhou
et al., 2017) and TrOCR for text recognition (Li et al., 2023a). This step eliminates 1.1% of the
samples. The final dataset, which we call LAIONet, consists of 822k samples from 915 ImageNet


                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            2.5                                                                                                                        1e7
                                                                                                                                 1.25


                                                  num. of classes included
            2.0                                                              900                                                 1.00


                                                                                                                  dataset size
            1.5                                                                                                                  0.75
      pdf   1.0
                                                                             800
                                                                                                                                 0.50
            0.5                                                                                                                  0.25
                                                                             700
            0.0                                                                                                                  0.00
               0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9                                             0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9                                   0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
                 text-to-[name: def] similarity                                  text-to-[name: def] similarity                     text-to-[name: def] CLIP similarity

                          (a)                                                            (b)                                                    (c)

Figure 3: Filtering LAION samples based on their textual similarity to the candidate synsets. The
dashed line shows the chosen threshold. (a) The overall distribution of the similarities prior to the
second step of filtering. (b and c) The number of ImageNet classes covered by the dataset and the
size of the dataset for different levels of similarity threshold.


classes, sufficiently large for fine-grained evaluation purposes at statistical significance. Unlike
ImageNet which provides about the same number of images per class, the large variation in the
relative frequency of the classes in LAIONet reflects the natural distribution of each class (Figure 4).
We will use these frequencies to compare the performance of models in frequent and infrequent
classes. We can create a more conservative version of LAIONet mimicking ImageNet validation by
retaining only the top 50 most similar instances for each class. This version of LAIONet exhibits
the same properties (Appendix B). Find sample images of LAIONet in Appendix G.
                        frequency
                          relative


                                     10 2
                                     10 3
                                            we
                                            bas site
                                            law etbal
                                            bro ow
                                            for n_be r
                                            pro t
                                            sw ctor
                                            bar
                                            lion ell
                                            tre sh
                                            gol rog
                                            hay ish
                                            alt
                                            kim
                                            bin no
                                            gia
                                            dig _pan
                                            bas al_wa
                                            litt inet h
                                            her blue
                                                ar
                                                ing


                                                le_
                                                klif ar


                                                e_f
                                                b_


                                                 df


                                                 nt
                                                 der

                                                 it da
                                                 w e

                                                 je


                                                 mit _he
                                                 b
                                                  n_m l
                                                  k


                                                  s tc
                                                  fi


                                                  o


                                                     _cr ron
                                                        ab
Figure 4: Relative frequencies of different classes in LAIONet sorted in descending order for the 500
most frequent classes. Some class names are shown. The red line shows uniform weight.

Are LAIONet images harder to classify? To find out, we compare CLIP zero-shot accuracy on
LAIONet and ImageNet. For every image, we predict the label of the image based on what synset
has the highest cosine similarity between the image embedding and the synset text embedding. To
make accuracy estimates on LAIONet comparable with ImageNet, we calculate accuracy as the
average recall across the classes present in LAIONet. This uniform weighting is consistent with the
setup of ImageNet validation with 50 images per class. We found CLIP zero-shot top 1 accuracy
to only differ by 2% across datasets. Hence, at least from the CLIP view, LAIONet images are not
harder to classify. We note the limitation that CLIP text embeddings are jointly trained with image
embeddings, possibly giving CLIP an advantage on LAIONet. Appendix D offers a more direct
assessment of the level of difficulty involved in identifying the intended object in LAIONet. This is
achieved by directly computing the cross-modality similarity between an image and its associated
synset. Overall, LAIONet images do not exhibit significant difficulty compared to ImageNet.

3      LAION ET VERSUS I MAGE N ET

We begin to understand the differences between the two datasets by looking at the accuracy of
various ImageNet classifiers on LAIONet. After observing a significant accuracy drop, we consider
the disparity in intra-class similarity as a possible explanation.

3.1     C OMPARING ACCURACY

We consider four model families: ResNet (He et al., 2016), Vision Transformers (ViT) (Dosovitskiy
et al., 2021), modernized ConvNet (ConvNeXt) (Liu et al., 2022), and Bidirectional Encoder repre-


                                                                                          5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


sentation from Image Transformers (BEiT) (Bao et al., 2022). All models are trained on ImageNet
without extra training data. We use various versions of each model in terms of the size (small, base,
large, etc.), image resolution (224x224 or 384x384), patch resolution (16x16 or 32x32), and whether
models are pre-trained on the complete ImageNet with 22k classes or not. All models come from
HuggingFace (huggingface.co) checkpoints.
We first compare the (equally weighted) accuracy defined by the average of recalls across the classes
covered by LAIONet. Figure 1 compares the top 1 and top 5 accuracy on ImageNet and LAIONet. In
most of the highly accurate models, accuracy drops by at least 10 percentage points when estimated
on LAIONet with models pre-trained on ImageNet-22k showing slightly more robustness.
Next, we use the relative frequency of each class in LAIONet to weight its recall and obtain a
LAION-weighted accuracy. Figure 5 compares LAION-weighted and equally-weighted accuracy
on LAIONet. The LAION-weighted accuracy is consistently lower by 5 to 10 percentage points
(similar observations made in Appendix H when evaluated on ImageNet). This can partially be
explained by the observation that ImageNet-trained models are performing worse when the class is
describing a more common object (Appendix F.1).

                                                      Top 1 accuracy                                                 Top 5 accuracy
                                                      1k models                                              0.9     1k models
             (LAION-weighted classes)


                                                                                  (LAION-weighted classes)
                                                      pt22k-ft1k models                                              pt22k-ft1k models
                                        0.7           pt22k models                                                   pt22k models
                                                      y=x                                                    0.8     y=x
                    LAIONet


                                                                                         LAIONet
                                        0.6
                                                                                                             0.7
                                        0.5
                                                                                                             0.6
                                              0.5      0.6 0.7 0.8                                                  0.7     0.8     0.9
                                                           LAIONet                                                        LAIONet
                                                    (equi-weighted classes)                                        (equi-weighted classes)

Figure 5: A LAION-weighted accuracy is calculated according to the relative frequency of the
classes in LAIONet and compared to the accuracy with equally weighted classes.


3.2   C OMPARING INTRA - CLASS SIMILARITY

While LAIONet images are in a precise sense not more difficult than ImageNet, there is another
factor that can explain the accuracy drop: the intra-class similarity of images. We define this simi-
larity as the pairwise similarity of the images from the same class, measured by the cosine similarity
of their CLIP image embeddings. The lower these similarity values, the more diverse the images
from that class. Figure 6a shows the distribution of intra-class similarities aggregated over all the
classes. To make the distributions comparable, we sampled (with replacement) the similarities from
LAIONet to match ImageNet. The left tail of the LAIONet intra-class similarity distribution makes
it clear that LAIONet overall provides a more diverse set of images. To observe the effect in greater
detail, for each class, Figure 6b shows the average intra-class similarity of LAIONet images sub-
tracted by the average intra-class similarity of ImageNet images from the same class. In almost
two-thirds of the classes, LAIONet has significantly lower intra-class similarity. This provides fur-
ther evidence that LAIONet images exhibit greater variability within each class.
In Appendix F.2, we show that models struggle more with classes where LAIONet and ImageNet
have significantly different intra-class similarity. This, combined with our observation of LAIONet
having lower intra-class similarity, supports our argument that intra-class similarity plays a crucial
role in reducing accuracy.

4     D IAGNOSING I MAGE N ET
As is standard modeling practice, we think of a data-generating process that for a given class Y
generates a pair of image X and text T . Ideally, when we search for images of a particular class y,
we would like to draw samples from distribution p(X|Y = y). Unless we have access to the


                                                                              6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                    intra-class image-image
                               LAIONet                                                        0.2
                     3         ImageNet


                                                                        CLIP similarity
                     2                                                                        0.0


               pdf
                                                                                                          LAIONet - ImageNet
                     1                                                                        0.2         UCB
                                                                                                          LCB
                     0
                       0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0                                                      0   200 400 600 800
                      intra-class image-image CLIP similarity

              (a) Dist. of aggregated similarities                            (b) Comparison across classes

Figure 6: Comparing the intra-class similarity of LAIONet and ImageNet. (a) In each class, pair-
wise similarities of LAIONet images are sampled to match ImageNet in number. All the classes
combined, the distribution of intra-class similarity is depicted. (b) For each class, the average intra-
class similarity of ImageNet images is subtracted from the same value in LAIONet. The blue and
red curves show upper and lower 95% confidence intervals. All values are sorted ascendingly.


generative process or we have a completely random set of images all correctly labeled, drawing
samples directly from p(X|Y = y) will not be possible. In particular, none of these options are
available when researchers collect a new dataset. Instead, researchers have to define a selection
mechanism S for choosing images. What we observe is the conditional distribution of X given S.
In creating LAIONet, we relied on texts to select the samples (Figure 2a). LAIONet images fol-
low p(X|S = 1), where S = 1 if T is sufficiently similar to Y . With our conservative selection cri-
teria, we can assume every T passed our similarity threshold is generated from the intended Y = y.
Therefore, p(X|S = 1) = p(X|S = 1, Y = y). Generally, an image carries much more information
than the text. So, for the images of a certain class, conditioning on the text alone should not alter the
distribution significantly. Intuitively speaking, p(X|Y = y, T = t) ≈ p(X|Y = y). In our setting,
a weaker independence is sufficient to show LAIONet images follow the desired distribution. Even
if information from X beyond Y is present in T , since we deliberately refrained from searching for
visual descriptions in the text, we expect S to be independent from X for a given Y = y. Therefore,
we have reason to hope p(X|S = 1) ≈ p(X|S = 1, Y = y) ≈ p(X|Y = y).
In general, a selection S ′ can rely on both text and image directly (Figure 2b). In this case, the dis-
tribution of observed images p(X|S ′ = 1) can be far from the desired distribution p(X|Y = y). We
believe this has happened in the collection of ImageNet, primarily through human annotators exam-
ining and acting on images. Incorporation of visual features at the side of the search engine provider
is another plausible mechanism. While we may not be able to pinpoint the exact mechanism at play,
we will now move beyond LAIONet and demonstrate, through three independent experiments, a
strong link between the image X and the selection criterion S ′ in the creation of ImageNet.

4.1   A WEAKER IMAGE - TO - SELECTION LINK MAKES I MAGE N ET MORE LIKE LAION ET

Image annotation is one clear mechanism by which the image X influences selection S ′ . Changing
the strictness of annotation allows us to modulate the strength of this mechanism and measure its
effect. This experiment is possible due to the availability of ImageNetV2 (Recht et al., 2019) that
comes with three different versions. The three versions of ImageNetV2, called a, b, and c, differ in
the level of agreement among annotators. More precisely, each image comes with a MTurk selection
frequency which is what fraction of MTurk workers selected the image to be from the target class.
ImageNetV2 versions a, b, and c have an average MTurk selection frequency of 0.85, 0.73, and 0.93,
respectively. Note that version b has the lowest and version c has the highest selection frequency.
We first observe that allowing for more disagreement among annotators results in the inclusion of
more diverse images. Figure 7a shows the distribution of intra-class similarity for ImageNetV2
versions b and c. One can see that in version b with the lowest average MTurk selection frequency,
the intra-class similarity is shifted toward lower values. We further show as the average MTurk
selection frequency increases, ImageNetV2 becomes more similar to ImageNet and less similar to
LAIONet. In this regard, to compare two datasets, we count the number of classes in which the
first dataset has significantly lower intra-class similarity than the second dataset, and vice versa.
Figure 7b compares LAIONet and three versions of ImageNetV2. As the figure suggests, LAIONet


                                                                7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and ImageNetV2 are quite similar when the average MTurk selection frequency is low (ImageNetV2
version b) but as the MTurk selection frequency increases, ImageNetV2 shows higher intra-class
similarity than LAIONet. At the same time, Figure 7c shows ImageNetV2 becomes more similar to
ImageNet as we increase the MTurk selection frequency. These observations show the impact the
image has on the selection, particularly during annotation, is significant and can partially explain
the divergence between LAIONet and ImageNet. Further, the extra intra-class diversity of LAIONet
is achievable from less stringent human annotation and can explain the consistent accuracy drop on
LAIONet and ImageNetV2.

                                                                               1.0                                                         1.0
            3         ImageNetV2-b                                                         LAIONet < ImageNetV2                                       ImageNet < ImageNetV2


                                                       proportion of classes


                                                                                                                   proportion of classes
                      ImageNetV2-c                                             0.8         LAIONet > ImageNetV2                            0.8        ImageNet > ImageNetV2
            2                                                                  0.6                                                         0.6
      pdf


                                                                               0.4                                                         0.4
            1
                                                                               0.2                                                         0.2
            0                                                                  0.0                                                         0.0
              0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0                                                0.75 0.80 0.85 0.90                                         0.75 0.80 0.85 0.90
             intra-class image-image CLIP similarity                                   MTurk selection frequency                                   MTurk selection frequency

   (a) Dist. of aggregated similarities                   (b) LAIONet vs. ImageNetV2                                 (c) ImageNet vs. ImageNetV2

Figure 7: The effect of MTurk selection frequency on intra-class similarity. (a) The distribution of
intra-class similarity aggregated over all classes for ImageNetV2 versions b and c. (b) LAIONet ver-
sus three versions of ImageNetV2. Vertical axis shows the proportion of classes in which one dataset
exhibits significantly lower intra-class similarity than the other dataset (significance determined us-
ing 95% confidence intervals). Blue curve: LAIONet has lower intra-class similarity. Green curve:
ImageNetV2 has lower intra-class similarity. (c) ImageNet versus ImageNetV2. Red curve: Ima-
geNet has lower intra-class similarity. Green curve: ImageNetV2 has lower intra-class similarity.


4.2     T EXT ALONE CANNOT EXPLAIN WHY AN IMAGE IS SELECTED INTO I MAGE N ET

ImageNet-Captions (Fang et al., 2022) is a subset of ImageNet-1k training data with restored title,
description, and tags from Flickr. We assume the samples in ImageNet-Captions are a random subset
of the original ImageNet and the captions are accurately restored. If there was no link X → S ′ , the
accompanying caption of an image in ImageNet-Captions should be able to explain why this image
is selected. We follow Fang et al. (2022) and define the text as the title, description, and tags
concatenated. Figure 8a illustrates the similarity between the texts and their respective synsets using
CLIP text embeddings. Although most of the texts have a high similarity of 0.6 or above to their
synsets, the distribution has a heavy left tail. The fact that a text has low similarity to the intended
synset does not necessarily mean it could not be chosen by the search engine. However, we show
many of the texts that have low similarity to the intended synsets actually have high similarity to
numerous other synsets, making them less likely to have appeared for the intended meaning. For
every text, we find the similarity to all synsets, i.e. the similarity to their names and definitions, and
count the proportion of unintended synsets (false classes) that are more similar to the text than the
intended synset. A low value for this proportion shows the text well represents its intended synset
whereas a significant non-zero value indicates that there are considerable other synsets that are more
strongly present in the text. As Figure 8b demonstrates, for a text with low similarity to its synset
there are on average 5% (equivalently, 200) or more other synsets more similar to the text. These
observations show that at least based on the restored texts in ImageNet-Captions, the text alone
cannot fully explain why an image is selected and another mechanism should have been at play.

4.3     I MAGE N ET, HAD IT BEEN CREATED SOLELY SEARCHING TEXTS , DOES NOT RESEMBLE
        CURRENT I MAGE N ET

If the link from X to S ′ did not exist, regardless of how the selection algorithms works, p(X|T = t)
would look similar in both graphs of Figure 2. To test this hypothesis, we extract a new dataset from
LAION. For every image in ImageNet with corresponding text T = t in ImageNet-Captions, we find
the LAION sample with the most similar text to t. We only keep a LAION sample if the similarity is
above 0.7. This choice ensures the two texts are sufficiently similar as we can consider them roughly
the same while the dataset covers more than 95% of the ImageNet classes (Appendix E).


                                                                                             8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                   0.25


                                                                     proportion of false classes
                                       LAIONet


                                                                      more similar to the text
                      60000            ImageNet-Captions                                           0.20
                      40000                                                                        0.15


              count
                                                                                                   0.10
                      20000
                                                                                                   0.05
                          0                                                                        0.00
                           0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0                                                     0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
                              text-[name: def] similarity                                                 text-[name: def] similarity

                                      (a)                                                                      (b)

Figure 8: (a) The distribution of the text-to-synset similarity. (b) For every bin of text-to-synset
similarity, the average proportion of unintended classes which are more similar to the text than the
intended class is depicted in black.


As Figure 9a suggests, images in the new dataset have a significantly lower intra-class similarity.
Looking at each class separately, Figure 9b shows in almost 70% of the classes, the images from the
new dataset are significantly more diverse (have lower intra-class similarity). These observations
reject the hypothesis that the graphs of Figure 2 have the same structure and show a potential leak
from the image to the selection. We note the limitation that texts in the ImageNet-Captions dataset
may not completely include the text available at the time of ImageNet creation. Second, for many
cases, we were unable to find great matches for the ImageNet texts in LAION-400M and scaling our
analysis to LAION-5B might help here.                                intra-class image-image



                      3           LAION | ImageNet texts                                            0.2
                                  ImageNet
                                                                         CLIP similarity


                                                                                                    0.0
                      2
               pdf


                                                                                                    0.2
                                                                                                                  LAIONet - ImageNet
                      1                                                                                           UCB
                                                                                                    0.4
                                                                                                                  LCB
                      0
                        0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0                                                           0    250     500    750
                       intra-class image-image CLIP similarity

             (a) Dist. of aggregated similarities                                (b) Comparison across classes

Figure 9: Comparing the intra-class similarity of the new dataset and ImageNet. The new dataset
is obtained by selecting LAION examples with the most similar texts to the texts in ImageNet-
Captions. (a) Distribution of intra-class similarity aggregated across all classes. In each class,
pairwise similarities of the images in the new dataset are sampled to match ImageNet in number to
make the distributions comparable. (b) For each class, the average of the intra-class similarity of the
images in the new dataset minus the corresponding value in ImageNet is plotted in black. The upper
and lower 95% confidence bounds are depicted in blue and red. All values are sorted ascendingly.



5   C ONCLUSION

In conclusion, we argue that the image-to-selection mechanism played a significant role in the cre-
ation of ImageNet, distinguishing it from LAION. We demonstrated this through three experiments.
First, we modulated the speculated link from image to selection, showing the significant contribu-
tion this mechanism has in reducing the diversity of the selected images. The next two experiments
rejected the hypothesis that image plays no or negligible role in the selection by showing ImageNet
captions cannot solely explain the selection.
This insight carries valuable implications for dataset creation efforts in general. When developing a
new dataset and diversity is desired, we advise selecting candidate instances based on an information
bottleneck, like a succinct textual description of the instance, rather than the full instance. This
will mitigate the selection bias that may otherwise distort the distribution of data conditional on
selection.


                                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Hangbo Bao, Li Dong, Songhao Piao, and Furu Wei. BEit: BERT pre-training of image trans-
  formers. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=p-BhZSz59o4.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hi-
   erarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszko-
  reit, and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recogni-
  tion at scale. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=YicbFdNTTy.
Logan Engstrom, Andrew Ilyas, Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, Jacob Steinhardt, and Alek-
  sander Madry. Identifying statistical bias in dataset replication. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 2922–2932. PMLR, 2020.
Alex Fang, Gabriel Ilharco, Mitchell Wortsman, Yuhao Wan, Vaishaal Shankar, Achal Dave, and
  Ludwig Schmidt. Data determines distributional robustness in contrastive language image pre-
  training (clip). In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6216–6234. PMLR, 2022.
Robert Geirhos, Patricia Rubisch, Claudio Michaelis, Matthias Bethge, Felix A. Wichmann, and
  Wieland Brendel. Imagenet-trained CNNs are biased towards texture; increasing shape bias im-
  proves accuracy and robustness. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Bygh9j09KX.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.
Minyoung Huh, Pulkit Agrawal, and Alexei A Efros. What makes imagenet good for transfer learn-
 ing? arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.08614, 2016.
Badr Youbi Idrissi, Diane Bouchacourt, Randall Balestriero, Ivan Evtimov, Caner Hazirbas, Nicolas
  Ballas, Pascal Vincent, Michal Drozdzal, David Lopez-Paz, and Mark Ibrahim. Imagenet-x:
  Understanding model mistakes with factor of variation annotations. In The Eleventh International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=HXz7Vcm3VgM.
Minghao Li, Tengchao Lv, Jingye Chen, Lei Cui, Yijuan Lu, Dinei Florencio, Cha Zhang, Zhou-
 jun Li, and Furu Wei. Trocr: Transformer-based optical character recognition with pre-trained
 models. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 37, pp. 13094–
 13102, 2023a.
Zhiheng Li, Ivan Evtimov, Albert Gordo, Caner Hazirbas, Tal Hassner, Cristian Canton Ferrer,
  Chenliang Xu, and Mark Ibrahim. A whac-a-mole dilemma: Shortcuts come in multiples where
  mitigating one amplifies others. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, pp. 20071–20082, 2023b.
Zhuang Liu, Hanzi Mao, Chao-Yuan Wu, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Trevor Darrell, and Saining Xie.
  A convnet for the 2020s. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 11976–11986, 2022.
George A Miller. WordNet: An electronic lexical database. MIT press, 1998.
Thao Nguyen, Gabriel Ilharco, Mitchell Wortsman, Sewoong Oh, and Ludwig Schmidt. Qual-
  ity not quantity: On the interaction between dataset design and robustness of CLIP. In Al-
  ice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  LTCBavFWp5C.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Benjamin Recht, Rebecca Roelofs, Ludwig Schmidt, and Vaishaal Shankar. Do imagenet classifiers
  generalize to imagenet? In International conference on machine learning, pp. 5389–5400. PMLR,
  2019.
Bernhard Schölkopf, Dominik Janzing, Jonas Peters, Eleni Sgouritsa, Kun Zhang, and Joris Mooij.
  On causal and anticausal learning. In International Coference on International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 459–466, 2012.
Christoph Schuhmann, Richard Vencu, Romain Beaumont, Robert Kaczmarczyk, Clayton Mullis,
  Aarush Katta, Theo Coombes, Jenia Jitsev, and Aran Komatsuzaki. Laion-400m: Open dataset of
  clip-filtered 400 million image-text pairs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.02114, 2021.
Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade W Gordon, Ross Wightman,
  Mehdi Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, Patrick
  Schramowski, Srivatsa R Kundurthy, Katherine Crowson, Ludwig Schmidt, Robert Kaczmarczyk,
  and Jenia Jitsev. LAION-5b: An open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text
  models. In Thirty-sixth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and
  Benchmarks Track, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=M3Y74vmsMcY.
Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Tao Qin, Jianfeng Lu, and Tie-Yan Liu. Mpnet: Masked and permuted pre-
  training for language understanding. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
  16857–16867, 2020.
Felix Vogel, Nina Shvetsova, Leonid Karlinsky, and Hilde Kuehne. Vl-taboo: An analysis of
  attribute-based zero-shot capabilities of vision-language models. CoRR, abs/2209.06103, 2022.
  URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2209.06103.
Kai Yuanqing Xiao, Logan Engstrom, Andrew Ilyas, and Aleksander Madry. Noise or signal: The
  role of image backgrounds in object recognition. In International Conference on Learning Rep-
  resentations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=gl3D-xY7wLq.
Xinyu Zhou, Cong Yao, He Wen, Yuzhi Wang, Shuchang Zhou, Weiran He, and Jiajun Liang. East:
  an efficient and accurate scene text detector. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 5551–5560, 2017.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A       A N MPN ET- FILTERED LAION ET

The creation of LAIONet relies on textual similarity of the LAION text and synset text. In Section 2
we used the cosine similarity of CLIP text embeddings to calculate this similarity, however, any
sufficiently strong text encoder can be used for this purpose. In particular, we use MPNet (Song
et al., 2020) fine-tuned on 1B sentence pairs with a contrastive objective by HuggingFace.2 We
follow a similar procedure to Section 2 and choose the maximum similarity threshold so that the
resulting dataset does not lose its coverage over classes. We select the similarity threshold of 0.58.
As Figure 10 suggests, a threshold larger than 0.58 may exclude many classes without reducing the
size of the resulting dataset. Refer to Appendix C for additional evidence that this threshold works.

                                                                                                                                                                        1e7
          2.5                                                                                                                                                     1.5


                                                                   num. of classes included
          2.0                                                                                 900


                                                                                                                                                   dataset size
          1.5                                                                                                                                                     1.0
    pdf


                                                                                              800
          1.0                                                                                                                                                     0.5
          0.5                                                                                 700
          0.0                                                                                                                                                     0.0
                  0.2       0.4        0.6                                                             0.2      0.4        0.6                                             0.2      0.4        0.6
                text-to-[name: def] similarity                                                      text-to-[name: def] similarity                                      text-to-[name: def] similarity

                               (a)                                                                          (b)                                                                   (c)

Figure 10: Filtering LAION samples based on their MPNet textual similarity to the candidate
synsets. The dashed line shows the chosen threshold. (a) The overall distribution of the similar-
ities prior to the second step of filtering. (b and c) The number of ImageNet classes covered by the
dataset and the size of the dataset for different levels of similarity threshold.

Proceeding with the similarity threshold of 0.58, and after dropping samples labeled as not-safe-
for-work, samples with multiple labels, and images containing text of their associated synsets, this
version of LAIONet will have 831k samples covering 938 classes. As Figure 11 shows, consistent
with our observation from CLIP-filtered LAIONet, models trained on ImageNet experience 10 to 15
percentage points of accuracy drop on MPNet-filtered LAIONet.

                                                     Top 1 accuracy                                                                                    Top 5 accuracy
                                                                                                                                          0.95
                                       0.8
                    (validation set)


                                                                                                                       (validation set)


                                                                                                                                          0.90
                      ImageNet


                                                                                                                         ImageNet


                                       0.7                                                                                                0.85
                                                             1k models                                                                    0.80                          1k models
                                                             pt22k-ft1k models                                                                                          pt22k-ft1k models
                                       0.6                   pt22k models                                                                 0.75                          pt22k models
                                                             y=x                                                                                                        y=x
                                                                                                                                          0.70
                                             0.5       0.6     0.7      0.8                                                                      0.7      0.8       0.9
                                                          LAIONet                                                                                       LAIONet
                                                   (equi-weighted classes)                                                                       (equi-weighted classes)

Figure 11: Accuracy of ImageNet-trained models when evaluated on ImageNet validation set versus
MPNet-filtered LAIONet. Three types of models are distinguished based on whether they are pre-
trained on ImageNet-22k and whether they are fine-tuned on ImageNet-1k. Accuracy is defined as
the average of the recalls calculated for each class that is present in LAIONet.

Last but not least, Figure 12 suggests that MPNet-filtered LAIONet also exhibits lower intra-class
similarity compared to ImageNet. In particular, in more than 70% of the classes, LAIONet has
significantly lower intra-class similarity than ImageNet.

    2
        https://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers/all-mpnet-base-v2


                                                                                                            12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                           0.2


                                                                                intra-class image-image
                                          LAIONet
                                3         ImageNet                                                         0.1


                                                                                    CLIP similarity
                                2                                                                          0.0


                  pdf
                                                                                                           0.1               LAIONet - ImageNet
                                1                                                                          0.2               UCB
                                                                                                                             LCB
                                0                                                                          0.3
                                  0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0                                                         0       250    500      750
                                 intra-class image-image CLIP similarity

             (a) Dist. of aggregated similarities                                         (b) Comparison across classes

Figure 12: Comparing the intra-class similarity of LAIONet and ImageNet. (a) In each class, pair-
wise similarities of LAIONet images are sampled to match ImageNet in number. All the classes
combined, the distribution of intra-class similarity is depicted. (b) For each class, the average intra-
class similarity of ImageNet images is subtracted from the same value in LAIONet. The blue and
red curves show upper and lower 95% confidence intervals. All values are sorted ascendingly.



B    A LAION ET FROM MOST SIMILARS

We created LAIONet by ensuring the presence of at least one lemma from the associated synset in
the LAION text and by ensuring sufficient similarity between the synset text and LAION text. The
frequency of each class in LAIONet reflects the natural distribution of that class on the web and
likely worldwide. However, we can create a more conservative version of LAIONet by retaining
only the top 50 most similar instances for each class. This will make LAIONet more similar to the
ImageNet validation set. Such a version of LAIONet will have 39k samples covering 915 classes
if initially filtered by CLIP similarity threshold of 0.82, and 41k samples covering 938 classes if
initially filtered by MPNet similarity of 0.58.


                                               Top 1 accuracy                                                            Top 5 accuracy
                                0.85                                                                      0.95
             (validation set)


                                                                                (validation set)


                                0.80                                                                      0.90
               ImageNet


                                                                                  ImageNet


                                0.75                                                                      0.85
                                0.70                  1k models                                           0.80                   1k models
                                                      pt22k-ft1k models                                                          pt22k-ft1k models
                                0.65                  pt22k models
                                                                                                          0.75
                                                                                                                                 pt22k models
                                                      y=x                                                                        y=x
                                        0.6       0.7       0.8                                                  0.7          0.8       0.9
                                                 LAIONet                                                                      LAIONet
                                          (equi-weighted classes)                                                      (equi-weighted classes)

                                (a) CLIP-filtered top 50                                                  (b) CLIP-filtered top 50
                                               Top 1 accuracy                                                            Top 5 accuracy
                                0.85                                                                      0.95
             (validation set)


                                                                                (validation set)


                                0.80                                                                      0.90
               ImageNet


                                                                                  ImageNet


                                0.75                                                                      0.85
                                0.70                  1k models                                                                  1k models
                                                      pt22k-ft1k models
                                                                                                          0.80                   pt22k-ft1k models
                                0.65                  pt22k models                                                               pt22k models
                                                      y=x                                                 0.75                   y=x
                                0.60
                                         0.6       0.7       0.8                                                 0.7          0.8       0.9
                                                 LAIONet                                                                      LAIONet
                                          (equi-weighted classes)                                                      (equi-weighted classes)

                            (c) MPNet-filtered top 50                                                (d) MPNet-filtered top 50

Figure 13: Accuracy of ImageNet-trained models when evaluated on ImageNet validation set versus
LAIONet created by retaining top 50 most similar instances for each class.


                                                                           13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 13 illustrates that models performing well on ImageNet consistently experience a 7 to 10
reduction in accuracy on this version of LAIONet. Hence, the reduction in accuracy is consistent
across all versions of LAIONets, including the most conservatively created ones. Figure 14 also con-
firms that this version of LAIONet still exhibits a longer tail of small intra-class similarity compared
to ImageNet, potentially explaining the accuracy drop.

                               LAIONet                                               LAIONet
                     3         ImageNet                                    3         ImageNet
                     2                                                     2
               pdf


                                                                     pdf
                     1                                                     1

                     0                                                     0
                       0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0                               0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
                      intra-class image-image CLIP similarity               intra-class image-image CLIP similarity

                     (a) CLIP-filtered top 50                          (b) MPNet-filtered top 50

Figure 14: Comparing the intra-class similarity of LAIONet and ImageNet. In each class, pairwise
similarities of LAIONet images are sampled to match ImageNet in number. All the classes com-
bined, the distribution of intra-class similarity is depicted. LAIONet is created by retaining top 50
most similar instances to the synset text in each class after a textual similarity filtering with CLIP or
MPNet.


C    O N THE CHOICE OF LAION TEXT TO SYNSET TEXT SIMILARITY
     THRESHOLD

In Section 2, we described how LAIONet is generated through substring matching LAION texts
with ImageNet synset lemmas, followed by filtering out the cases where the LAION text is not
sufficiently similar to the synset name and definition. A critical choice in the second filtering step
is the choice of the minimum required textual similarity. We conservatively chose this threshold to
be the largest value such that the remaining examples cover a large number of ImageNet’s classes.
To show this filtering is necessary and our threshold of 0.82 for CLIP-based filtering and threshold
of 0.58 for MPNet-based filtering is conservative, we have provided an example in Figure 15. Here
the synset “cougar” has lemma “puma”. From WordNet definition, “cougar” is a “large American
feline resembling lion”. But the common usage of “puma” on the web is about a brand. As Figure 15
shows for small similarity to the synset, data most likely will represent the brand instead of the
animal. As we increase the similarity threshold, the examples become more and more likely to
be from the intended meaning. Our manual inspections show similar to this example, the chosen
thresholds most likely result in high-quality matching to the intended meaning of the synset even if
the web is dominated by other meanings.

D    O N THE ( NON ) DIFFICULTY OF LAION ET IMAGE CLASSIFICATION
To obtain a better idea of how hard is it to recognize an object in LAIONet, we calculate the cross-
modal similarity of the images to the texts of their associated synsets using CLIP embeddings. A
high value of image-to-synset similarity indicates CLIP is able to identify an object from the synset
in the image. On the other hand, a low value could indicate that the intended object is either absent
from the image or difficult to recognize. We compare the image-to-synset similarities obtained from
the ImageNet validation set and LAIONet.
Figure 16a illustrates the distribution of image-to-synset similarity for LAIONet and ImageNet.
To ensure these distributions are comparable, we sampled LAIONet with replacement to match
the number of images per class in the ImageNet validation set. As the figure suggests, the two
datasets are not significantly different. In a more fine-grained test, we compared the image-to-synset
similarity of the LAIONet and ImageNet for each class. Figure 16b shows the average similarity in
each class for LAIONet subtracted by the average similarity in the same class for ImageNet along
95% upper and lower confidence bounds. Overall, there is no strong signal that LAIONet images
are harder in particular.


                                                                14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                 puma             5.0                                                                                    puma
       2


 pdf


                                                                                            pdf
                                                                                                  2.5
       0                                                                                          0.0
       0.50    0.55   0.60      0.65       0.70         0.75       0.80   0.85      0.90             0.1                          0.2        0.3            0.4              0.5   0.6          0.7
                             text-to-[name: def] CLIP similarity                                                                             text-to-[name: def] CLIP similarity


                  (a) CLIP-based textual similarity                                                                        (b) MPNet-based textual similarity

              Figure 15: Sample images from five intervals of LAION text to synset text similarity.



                                                     LAIONet                                                                      0.10          LAIONet - ImageNet
                                                                                                           image-to-[name: def]

                             12.5
                                                     ImageNet                                                                                   UCB
                                                                                                                                  0.05
                                                                                                             CLIP similarity


                             10.0                                                                                                               LCB
                              7.5
                       pdf


                                                                                                                                  0.00
                              5.0
                              2.5                                                                                                 0.05
                              0.0
                                 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0                                                                                 0    200 400 600 800
                                image-to-[name: def] CLIP similarity

                      (a) Dist. of aggregated similarities                                                         (b) Comparison across classes

Figure 16: Comparing image-to-synset similarities of LAIONet and ImageNet. (a) For each class,
LAIONet is sampled with replacement to have the same number of images as ImageNet, and all
samples are aggregated to obtain the distribution. (b) For every class, the average similarity of the
images to synset text is calculated for LAIONet and ImageNet and the difference is plotted. The
upper and lower 0.95% confidence bound for this difference is plotted in red and blue. All values
are sorted ascendingly.


E          O N THE CHOICE OF TEXTUAL SIMILARITY THRESHOLD IN EXTRACTING
           MOST SIMILAR LAION INSTANCES TO I MAGE N ET-C APTIONS


In Section 4.3, we selected a similarity threshold of 0.7 as the minimum requirement for similarity
between LAION text and ImageNet text in order to include a sample from LAION. Ideally, we look
for LAION examples with identical text as the ImageNet but due to the limited number of samples
available in LAION, this is not possible. As Figure 3b shows, increasing the similarity threshold
beyond the chosen level of 0.7 significantly decreases the number of covered classes. Meanwhile,
for larger thresholds, the new dataset looks more like ImageNet but is still distinguishable. As
Figure 17b shows, the proportion of classes with significantly lower intra-class similarity in Ima-
geNet increases as the threshold increases, while the proportion of classes with significantly lower
intra-class similarity in the new dataset decreases. The gap still persists but can potentially become
smaller in the region our data cannot cover. In sum, the new dataset extracted based on ImageNet
looks unlike ImageNet but to the extent it is possible to find similar texts in LAION.


                                                                                           15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         1000


              num. of classes included
                                                                                                        1.00


                                                                                proportion of classes
                                         950                                                            0.75
                                                                                                                    LAION < ImageNet
                                                                                                        0.50        LAION > ImageNet
                                         900
                                                                                                        0.25
                                         850                                                            0.00
                                            0.5       0.6         0.7                                       0.5        0.6          0.7
                                             LAION text to ImageNet text                                      LAION text to ImageNet text
                                                   CLIP similarity                                                  CLIP similarity
                                                    (a)                                                              (b)

Figure 17: The effect of similarity threshold on the dataset extracted from LAION samples with
most similar texts to the ImageNet texts. (a) Number of the classes covered in the new dataset versus
the similarity threshold. (b) Proportion of classes with significantly lower intra-class similarity in
the new dataset (blue) and proportion of classes with significantly lower intra-class similarity in
ImageNet (red) versus the similarity threshold.


F     T HE RELATION OF RECALL , RELATIVE FREQUENCY, AND INTRA - CLASS
      SIMILARITY

F.1   R ECALL VERSUS RELATIVE FREQUENCY

In Section 3.1 we observed accuracy drops when we weight different classes according to their fre-
quency in LAIONet. This can be partially explained as models perform worse in more frequent
classes. To directly observe this, Figure 18 shows the recall in each class versus the relative fre-
quency of the class in LAIONet. Regardless of whether LAIONet is created by filtering based
on CLIP textual similarity or MPNet similarity, there exists a weak but consistent trend that more
frequent classes are more likely to be misclassified.

F.2   R ECALL VERSUS INTRA - CLASS SIMILARITY

Section 3.2 introduced the hypothesis that higher intra-class similarity may account for the lower-
than-expected performance of ImageNet models on LAIONet. To observe that intra-class similarity
can be responsible for accuracy drop, Figure 19 demonstrates that models struggle on classes where
LAIONet is more diverse than ImageNet, as shown by the recall rates plotted against the difference
in average intra-class similarity. This is true regardless of what notion of accuracy and what version
of LAIONet, CLIP-filtered or MPNet-filtered, is used.


                                                                           16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     1.0                                   1.0                                        1.0                                         1.0
          recall@1


                                                recall@1


                                                                                           recall@1


                                                                                                                                       recall@1
                     0.5                                   0.5                                        0.5                                         0.5
                                    resnet-50                         convnext-base-224                          convnext-base-224-22k-1k                    vit-base-patch16-224
                     0.0                                   0.0                                        0.0                                         0.0
                                  10 3                                  10 3                                       10 3                                        10 3
                           relative frequency                    relative frequency                         relative frequency                          relative frequency

                                                  (a) Recall@1 (CLIP-filtered LAIONet)
                     1.0                                   1.0                                        1.0                                         1.0
          recall@1


                                                recall@1


                                                                                           recall@1


                                                                                                                                       recall@1
                     0.5                                   0.5                                        0.5                                         0.5
                                    resnet-50                         convnext-base-224                          convnext-base-224-22k-1k                    vit-base-patch16-224
                     0.0                                   0.0                                        0.0                                         0.0
                               10 4 10 2                             10 4 10 2                                  10 4 10 2                                   10 4 10 2
                           relative frequency                    relative frequency                         relative frequency                          relative frequency

                                                (b) Recall@1 (MPNet-filtered LAIONet)
                     1.0                                   1.0                                        1.0                                         1.0
          recall@5


                                                recall@5


                                                                                           recall@5


                                                                                                                                       recall@5
                     0.5                                   0.5                                        0.5                                         0.5
                                    resnet-50                         convnext-base-224                          convnext-base-224-22k-1k                    vit-base-patch16-224
                     0.0                                   0.0                                        0.0                                         0.0
                                  10 3                                  10 3                                       10 3                                        10 3
                           relative frequency                    relative frequency                         relative frequency                          relative frequency

                                                  (c) Recall@5 (CLIP-filtered LAIONet)
                     1.0                                   1.0                                        1.0                                         1.0
          recall@5


                                                recall@5


                                                                                           recall@5


                                                                                                                                       recall@5


                     0.5                                   0.5                                        0.5                                         0.5
                                    resnet-50                         convnext-base-224                          convnext-base-224-22k-1k                    vit-base-patch16-224
                     0.0                                   0.0                                        0.0                                         0.0
                               10 4 10 2                             10 4 10 2                                  10 4 10 2                                   10 4 10 2
                           relative frequency                    relative frequency                         relative frequency                          relative frequency

                                                (d) Recall@5 (MPNet-filtered LAIONet)

Figure 18: Recall per class evaluated on LAIONet versus how frequent the class is in LAIONet.
Four different models are used, where two of them are pretrained on ImageNet-21k and two of
them are not. Two versions of LAIONet, CLIP-filtered and MPNet-filtered are included. Trends are
consistent.


                                                                                      17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      1.0                                       1.0                                            1.0                                          1.0
           recall@1


                                                     recall@1


                                                                                                    recall@1


                                                                                                                                                 recall@1
                      0.5                                       0.5                                            0.5                                          0.5

                                       resnet-50                            convnext-base-224                              convnext-base-224-22k-1k                     vit-base-patch16-224
                      0.0                                       0.0                                            0.0                                          0.0
                             0.25 0.00 0.25                            0.25 0.00 0.25                                 0.25 0.00 0.25                               0.25 0.00 0.25
                            intra-class similarity                    intra-class similarity                         intra-class similarity                       intra-class similarity

                                                        (a) Recall@1 (CLIP-filtered LAIONet)
                      1.0                                       1.0                                            1.0                                          1.0
           recall@1


                                                     recall@1


                                                                                                    recall@1


                                                                                                                                                 recall@1
                      0.5                                       0.5                                            0.5                                          0.5

                                      resnet-50                            convnext-base-224                              convnext-base-224-22k-1k                     vit-base-patch16-224
                      0.0                                       0.0                                            0.0                                          0.0
                             0.25 0.00                                 0.25 0.00                                      0.25 0.00                                    0.25 0.00
                            intra-class similarity                    intra-class similarity                         intra-class similarity                       intra-class similarity

                                                     (b) Recall@1 (MPNet-filtered LAIONet)
                      1.0                                       1.0                                            1.0                                          1.0
           recall@5


                                                     recall@5


                                                                                                    recall@5


                      0.5                                       0.5                                            0.5                               recall@5   0.5

                                       resnet-50                            convnext-base-224                              convnext-base-224-22k-1k                     vit-base-patch16-224
                      0.0                                       0.0                                            0.0                                          0.0
                             0.25 0.00 0.25                            0.25 0.00 0.25                                 0.25 0.00 0.25                               0.25 0.00 0.25
                            intra-class similarity                    intra-class similarity                         intra-class similarity                       intra-class similarity

                                                        (c) Recall@5 (CLIP-filtered LAIONet)
                      1.0                                       1.0                                            1.0                                          1.0
           recall@5


                                                     recall@5


                                                                                                    recall@5


                                                                                                                                                 recall@5


                      0.5                                       0.5                                            0.5                                          0.5

                                      resnet-50                            convnext-base-224                              convnext-base-224-22k-1k                     vit-base-patch16-224
                      0.0                                       0.0                                            0.0                                          0.0
                             0.25 0.00                                 0.25 0.00                                      0.25 0.00                                    0.25 0.00
                            intra-class similarity                    intra-class similarity                         intra-class similarity                       intra-class similarity

                                                     (d) Recall@5 (MPNet-filtered LAIONet)

Figure 19: Recall on LAIONet for each class versus the disparity in intra-class similarity between
LAIONet and ImageNet. This disparity (horizontal axis) is measured by subtracting the class-
average intra-class similarity in ImageNet from that in LAIONet. Four exemplary models are shown,
where two of them are pretrained on ImageNet-21k (yellow) and two of them are not (red). Two
versions of LAIONet are considered. Trends are consistent.


                                                                                               18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G    S AMPLE IMAGES FROM LAION ET
We provide randomly picked images from both CLIP-filtered and MPNet-filtered LAIONet (Ap-
pendix B) in this section. These images have been chosen based on various levels of difficulty.
Figure 20 illustrates the distribution of the recall@5 difference for each common class between
LAIONet and ImageNet. We choose recall@5 as a more reliable metric where the multiplicity of la-
bels is less of a concern. One can see that there exist classes for which the recall on LAIONet is less
than ImageNet for 0.5 or more. These are typically the classes for which LAIONet may have used
a broader meaning for the synset or the images have appeared in a different context than ImageNet.
It is worth noting that these classes make up a very small portion of all classes and have minimal
impact on evaluations, whether or not including such images is desired.
For the classes labeled on the graphs of Figure 20, we have provided 10 random images from all
datasets in the following. Each figure comes with a potential explanation for the failure of ImageNet
models in the caption.


                  200                                                                           200
                                      pillow thimble


                                                                                                                             torch egyptian cat
                  150                                                                           150
          count


                                                                                        count
                  100
                               egyptian cat


                                                                                                100


                                                                                                              grille brass
                               bolete hen


                                                                                                                                                  thimble
                  50                                                                            50


                                                                                                                                                  bolete
                                                                                                                             pillow
                               brass

                               torch
                               grille


                                                                                                                                                  hen
                   0                                                                             0
                                    0.5         0.0                                                     1.0        0.5        0.0
                          recall@5 (LAIONet - ImageNet)                                                 recall@5 (LAIONet - ImageNet)

                          (a) MPNet-filtered                                                             (b) CLIP-filtered

Figure 20: Distribution of recall@5 on LAIONet subtracted by recall@5 on ImageNet. Only com-
mon classes are considered. The texts show the chosen classes for which example images are pro-
vided. The position of each text on the horizontal axis is the difference in recalls for that class.

                    letter_opener.n.01             saltshaker.n.01                          vase.n.01                               plate_rack.n.01 comic_book.n.01


                                                                     (a) MPNet-filtered
                        milk_can.n.01                                         table_lamp.n.01 pedestal.n.03       saltshaker.n.01


                                                                     (b) CLIP-filtered


                                                              (c) ImageNet validation

Figure 21: Egyption cat. ImageNet models primarily struggle with Egyptian cat statues or painted
graphics, which are not well-represented or are rare in the ImageNet dataset.


                                                                            19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                        quilt.n.01                      rubber_eraser.n.01                              cradle.n.01       studio_couch.n.01


                                                       (a) MPNet-filtered
                        studio_couch.n.01               knee_pad.n.01                    velvet.n.01       studio_couch.n.01velvet.n.01
                                        hook.n.04                        studio_couch.n.01


                                                        (b) CLIP-filtered


                                                     (c) ImageNet validation

Figure 22: Pillow. ImageNet models struggle to identify pillows when they deviate from the pre-
dominantly rectangular shape that is common in ImageNet.



                                                       nematode.n.01                      frying_pan.n.01 croquet_ball.n.01


                                                       (a) MPNet-filtered
                                                                          croquet_ball.n.01


                                                        (b) CLIP-filtered


                                                     (c) ImageNet validation

Figure 23: Bolete. ImageNet models are challenged when a bolete appears in contexts outside of
nature, such as being picked by a girl or found in a pan.



                       carpenter's_kit.n.01            letter_opener.n.01carpenter's_kit.n.01                                               rule.n.12


                                                       (a) MPNet-filtered


                                                        (b) CLIP-filtered


                                                     (c) ImageNet validation

Figure 24: Thimble. ImageNet models are challenged when the thimble is among many other items.



                                                                     20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           plunger.n.03                                                        soap_dispenser.n.01                quill.n.01
        can_opener.n.01


                                                                             (a) MPNet-filtered
                           goblet.n.01                      ballpoint.n.01 pinwheel.n.02                                                            whistle.n.04


                                                                              (b) CLIP-filtered


                                                                     (c) ImageNet validation

Figure 25: Torch. ImageNet models have difficulty with recognizing graphical depictions of torches
and identifying variations in torch orientation.


                                                          red-breasted_merganser.n.01
        red-breasted_merganser.n.01       hamper.n.02                                                                                          drake.n.02      prairie_chicken.n.01


                                                                             (a) MPNet-filtered
                                                           candle.n.01                                          comic_book.n.01


                                                                              (b) CLIP-filtered


                                                                     (c) ImageNet validation

Figure 26: Hen. Graphical hens pose a challenge for ImageNet models. MPNet-filtered images also
include blue and green-winged teal hens, which are not present in the ImageNet dataset.


        loupe.n.01        magnetic_compass.n.01
                                        tray.n.01                                                               abacus.n.02                        fire_screen.n.01 rule.n.12
                                                           space_heater.n.01                   honeycomb.n.02


                                                                             (a) MPNet-filtered
        tray.n.01                         radiator.n.03   fire_screen.n.01                     space_heater.n.01
                                                                                                             window_screen.n.01                  can_opener.n.01 moving_van.n.01
                       modem.n.01                                            plate_rack.n.01


                                                                              (b) CLIP-filtered


                                                                     (c) ImageNet validation

Figure 27: Grille. ImageNet models only recognize grille when installed on a car. LAIONet images
also include various kinds of grille which are not meant by ImageNet class.



                                                                                          21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       hook.n.04       bolo_tie.n.01   table_lamp.n.01                    soap_dispenser.n.01
                                                                                          hook.n.04      water_tower.n.01switch.n.01    water_tower.n.01 prayer_rug.n.01


                                                                          (a) MPNet-filtered
                                       fountain.n.01     lampshade.n.01                    prayer_rug.n.01
                                                                                                         switch.n.01    hook.n.04
       lipstick.n.01                                                      hook.n.04                                                    breastplate.n.01 medicine_chest.n.01


                                                                           (b) CLIP-filtered


                                                                   (c) ImageNet validation

Figure 28: Brass. The intended concept of this class in ImageNet is a memorial made of brass.
However, LAIONet images correspond to the broader meaning and the model is not expected to
predict that.


                                                                                       22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H    LAION- WEIGHTED ACCURACY EVALUATED ON I MAGE N ET
In Section 3.1 we introduced LAION-weighted accuracy where we use the relative frequency of each
class in LAIONet to weight its recall. As we presented in Figure 5, the LAION-weighted accuracy
is consistently lower than the equally-weighted accuracy when models are evaluated on LAIONet.
This observation is not limited to evaluation on LAIONet. In fact, Figure 29 shows when we weight
the classes according to their relative frequency on LAIONet, ImageNet accuracy also decreases.
This can be attributed to the challenge of recognizing more frequent objects, given their potentially
diverse types.

                                                    Top 1 accuracy                                                     Top 5 accuracy
                                        0.9                                                                            1k models
                                                1k models


                                                                              (LAION-weighted classes)
                                                                                                                       pt22k-ft1k models
             (LAION-weighted classes)


                                                pt22k-ft1k models
                                                                                                                       pt22k models
                                        0.8     pt22k models                                             0.9           y=x
                                                y=x


                                                                                    ImageNet
                    LAIONet


                                        0.7
                                                                                                         0.8
                                        0.6
                                                                                                         0.7
                                        0.5
                                              0.6    0.7 0.8 0.9                                               0.7      0.8     0.9     1.0
                                                      LAIONet                                                              ImageNet
                                               (equi-weighted classes)                                               (equi-weighted classes)

Figure 29: On ImageNet, a LAION-weighted accuracy is calculated according to the relative fre-
quency of the classes in LAIONet and compared to the accuracy with equally weighted classes.


                                                                         23
