Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


T OWARDS ROBUST O UT- OF -D ISTRIBUTION
G ENERALIZATION B OUNDS VIA S HARPNESS
 Yingtian Zou, Kenji Kawaguchi, Yingnan Liu, Jiashuo Liu∗ , Mong-Li Lee, Wynne Hsu
 School of Computing, National University of Singapore
 Institute of Data Science, National University of Singapore
 ∗
   Department of Computer Science & Technology, Tsinghua University, China



                                            A BSTRACT
         Generalizing to out-of-distribution (OOD) data or unseen domain, termed OOD
         generalization, still lacks appropriate theoretical guarantees. Canonical OOD
         bounds focus on different distance measurements between source and target do-
         mains but fail to consider the optimization property of the learned model. As
         empirically shown in recent work, the sharpness of learned minima influences
         OOD generalization. To bridge this gap between optimization and OOD general-
         ization, we study the effect of sharpness on how a model tolerates data change in
         domain shift which is usually captured by "robustness" in generalization. In this
         paper, we give a rigorous connection between sharpness and robustness, which
         gives better OOD guarantees for robust algorithms. It also provides a theoreti-
         cal backing for "flat minima leads to better OOD generalization". Overall, we
         propose a sharpness-based OOD generalization bound by taking robustness into
         consideration, resulting in a tighter bound than non-robust guarantees. Our find-
         ings are supported by the experiments on a ridge regression model, as well as the
         experiments on deep learning classification tasks.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Machine learning systems are typically trained on a given distribution of data and achieve good
performance on new, unseen data that follows the same distribution as the training data. Out-of-
Distribution (OOD) generalization requires machine learning systems trained in the source domain to
generalize to unseen data or target domains with different distributions from the source domain. A
myriad of algorithms (Sun & Saenko, 2016; Arjovsky et al., 2019; Sagawa et al., 2019; Koyama &
Yamaguchi, 2020; Pezeshki et al., 2021; Ahuja et al., 2021) aim to learn the invariant components
along the distribution shifting. Optimization-based methods such as (El Ghaoui & Lebret, 1997;
Duchi & Namkoong, 2018; Liu et al., 2021; Rame et al., 2022) focus on maximizing robustness
by optimizing for worst-case error over an uncertainty distribution set. While these methods are
sophisticated, they do not always perform better than Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) when
evaluated across different datasets (Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz, 2021; Wiles et al., 2022). This raises
the question of how to understand the OOD generalization of algorithms and which criteria should
be used to select models that are provably better (Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz, 2021). These questions
highlight the need for more theoretical research in the field of OOD generalization (Ye et al., 2021).
To characterize the generalization gap between the source domain and the target domain, a canonical
method (Blitzer et al., 2007) from domain adaptation theory decouples this gap into an In-Distribution
(ID) generalization and a hypothesis-specific Out-of-Distribution (OOD) distance. However, this
distance is based on the notion of VC-dimension (Kifer et al., 2004), resulting in a loose bound due to
the large size of the hypothesis class in the modern overparameterized neural networks. Subsequent
works improve the bound based on Rademacher Complexity (Du et al., 2017), whereas Germain
et al. (2016) improves the bound based on PAC-Bayes. Unlike the present paper, these works did
not consider algorithmic robustness, which has natural interpretation and advantages for distribution
shifts In this work, we consider algorithmic robustness to derive the OOD generalization bound.
The key idea is to partition the input space into K non-overlapping subspaces such that the error
difference in the model’s performance between any pair of points in each subspace is bounded by
some constant ϵ. Within each subspace, any distributional shift is considered subtle for the robust


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


model thus leading to less impact on OOD generalization. Figure 1 illustrates this with the two
distributions where the target domain has a distributional shift from the source domain. Compared to
existing non-robust OOD generalization bounds Zhao et al. (2018), our new generalization error does
not depend on hypothesis size, which is more reliable in the overparameterized regime. Our goal is to
measure the generalizability of a model by considering how it is robust to this shift and achieves a
tighter bound than existing works.
Although robustness captures the tolerance to dis-
tributional shift, it is intractable to compute robust-
ness constant ϵ due to the inaccessibility of target
distribution. The robustness definition in Xu &
Mannor (2012) indicates that the loss landscape                                  Dicretize into
induced by the model’s parameters is closely tied                                  different
to its robustness. To gain a deeper understanding                                robust areas

of robustness, we further study the learned model                               S
                                                                                     T
                                                                                                               S
                                                                                                                     T
from an optimization perspective. As shown in
(Lyu et al., 2022; Petzka et al., 2021), when the
                                                                               d(S,T) > 0                      d' (S,T) = 0
loss landscape is "flat", there is a good general-
ization, which is also observed in OOD settings                 Continuous Density                Discrete Density

(Izmailov et al., 2018; Cha et al., 2021). How-
ever, the relationship between robustness and this        Figure 1: An example of a target distribution
geometric property of the loss landscape, termed          (red) directly translated from a source distribu-
Sharpness, remains an open question. In this pa-          tion (blue). The 1D density reflects the marginal
per, we establish a provable dependence between           distribution. Unlike existing works (left), we di-
robustness and sharpness for ReLU random neural           vide the distributions into disjoint partitions as a
network classes. It allows us to replace robustness       small change in distribution for a robust model
constant ϵ with the sharpness of a learned model          is negligible (right). The sharpness of the model
which is only computed from the training dataset          will decide the tolerance of change thus affecting
that addresses the problem mentioned above. Our           the partitions. If two sub-distributions S, T have
result of the interplay between robustness and            small shifts such that they fall into the same par-
sharpness can be applied to both ID and OOD               tition (red grid), their distance measure d′ (S, T )
generalization bounds. We also show an example            by considering robustness will be zero.
to generalize our result beyond our assumption
and validate it empirically.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:

       • We proposed a new framework for Out-of-distribution/ Out-of-domain generalization bounds.
         In this framework, we use robustness to capture the tolerance of distribution shift which
         leads to tighter upper bounds generally.
       • We reveal the underlying connection between the robustness and sharpness of the loss
         landscape and use this connection to enrich our robust OOD bounds under one-hidden
         layer ReLU NNs. This is the first optimization-based bound in Out-of-Distribution/Domain
         generalization.
       • We studied two cases in ridge regression and classification which support and generalize our
         main theorem well. All the experimental results corroborate our findings well.


2     P RELIMINARY

Notations We use [n] to denote the integers set {i}ni=1 . We use ∥ · ∥ to denote the ℓ2 -norm
(Euclidean norm). In vector form, wi denotes the i-th instance while the wj is the j-th element of
the vector w and we use |w| for the element-wise absolute value of vector w. We use n, d for the
training set size and input dimension. O is the Big-O notation.

2.1   P ROBLEM FORMULATION

Consider a source domain and a target domain of the OOD generalization problem where we use
DS , DT to represent the source and target distribution respectively. Let each D be the probability


                                                      2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


measure of sample z from sample space Z = X × Y with X ∈ Rd . In the source domain, we have a
training set S = {zi }ni=1 , ∀i ∈ [n], zi ∼ DS while the target is to learn a model f ∈ F with S and
parameters θ ∈ Θ where f : Θ × X 7→ R generalizes well. Given loss function ℓ : R × R → R+ ,
which is for short, the expected risk over the source distribution DS will be
                                                                              1X
        LS (fθ ) ≜ Ez∼DS [ℓθ (z)] = Ez∼DS [ℓ(f (θ, x), y)], LbS (fθ ) ≜                  [ℓθ (zi )].
                                                                             n     zi ∈S

We use ℓθ (z) as the shorthand. The OOD generalization is to measure between target domain
expected risk LT (fθ ) and the source domain empirical risk LbS (fθ ) which involves two parts: (1)
In-domain generalization error gap between empirical risk and expected risk LS (fθ ) in the source
domain. (2) Out-of-Domain distance between source and target domains. A model-agnostic example
in Zhao et al. (2018) gave the following uniform bound:
Proposition 2.1 (Zhao et al. Zhao et al. (2018) Theorem 2 & 3.2). With hypothesis class F and
pseudo dimension Pdim(F) = d′ , unlabeled empirical datasets from source and target distribution
DbS and DbT with size n each, then with probability at least 1 − δ, for all f ∈ F,
                                             1                          p
                        LT (f ) ≤ LbS (f ) + dF ∆F D  bT ; DbS + O         d′ /n
                                             2
where dF ∆F (DbT ; DbS ) := 2 supA ∈A                  P b [Af ] − PDbT [Af ] and ⊕ is the XOR
                             p f {f (x)⊕f (x):f,f ∈F } DS
                                            ′     ′

operator. Specific form of O( |F|/n) is defined in Appendix C.6.

2.2   A LGORITHMIC ROBUSTNESS

Definition 2.2 (Robustness, Xu & Mannor (2012)). A learning model fθ on training set S is (K, ϵ(·))-
                                                                                 K
robust, for K ∈ N, if Z can be partitioned into K disjoint sets, denoted by {Ci }i=1 , such that ∀s ∈ S
we have
                          s, z ∈ Ci , ∀i ∈ [K] ⇒ |ℓθ (s) − ℓθ (z)| ≤ ϵ(S).

This definition captures the robustness of the model in terms of the input. Within each partitioned set
Ci , the loss difference between any sample z belonging to Ci and training sample s ∈ Ci will be
upper bounded by the robustness constant ϵ(S). The generalization result given by Xu & Mannor
(2012) provides a framework to bound the empirical risk with algorithmic robustness which has
been stated in Appendix C. Based on this framework, we are able to reframe the existing OOD
generalization theory.

3     M AIN R ESULTS
In this section, we propose a new Out-of-Distribution (OOD) generalization bound for robust
algorithms that have not been extensively studied yet. We then compare our result to the existing
domain shift bound in Proposition 2.1 and discuss its implications for OOD and domain generalization
problems by considering algorithmic robustness. To further explain the introduced robustness, we
connect it to the sharpness of the minimum (a widely concerned geometric property in optimization)
by showing a rigorous dependence between robustness and sharpness. This interplay will give us a
better understanding of the OOD generalization problem, and meanwhile, provide more information
on the final generalization bound. Detailed assumptions are clarified in Appendix B.1.

3.1   ROBUST OOD G ENERALIZATION B OUND

The main concern in OOD generalization is to measure the domain shift of a learned model. However,
existing methods fail to consider the intrinsic property of the model, such as robustness. Definition
2.2 gives us a new robustness measurement to the model trained on dataset S where the training
set S is a collection of i.i.d. data pair (x, y) sampled from source distribution DS with size n. The
measurement provides an intuition that if a test sample from the target domain is similar to a specific
group of training samples, their losses will be similar as well. In other words, the model’s robustness
is a reflection of its ability to generalize to unseen data. Our first theorem shows that by utilizing
the "robustness" measurement, we can more effectively handle domain shifts by setting a tolerance


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


range for distribution changes. This robustness measurement, therefore, provides a useful tool for
addressing OOD generalization.
Theorem 3.1. Let D̂T be the empirical distribution of size n drawn from DT . Assume that the loss ℓ
is upper bounded by M. With probability at least 1 − δ (over the choice of the samples S), for every
fθ trained on S satisfying (K, ϵ(S))-robust, we have
                                                                   r
                                                                      2K ln 2 + 2 ln(2/δ)
           LT (fθ ) ≤ LS (fθ ) + M d(ϵ,K) (S, D̂T ) + 2ϵ(S) + 3M
                       b                                                                         (1)
                                                                                n
where the total variation distance d(ϵ,K) for discrete empirical distributions is defined by:
                                                                     K
                                                                     X ni (S)         ni (D̂T )
          ∀i ∈ [n], ni (S) := #(z ∈ S ∩ Ci ), d(ϵ,K) (S, D̂T ) :=                 −                  (2)
                                                                     i=1
                                                                             n            n

and ni (S), ni (D̂T ) are the number of samples from S and D̂T that fall into the set Ci , respectively.
Remark. The result can be decomposed into in-domain generalization and out-domain distance
|LT (fθ ) − LS (fθ )| (please refer to Lemma C.1). Both of them depend on robustness ϵ(S).
See proof in Appendix C. The last three terms on the RHS of (1) are distribution distance, robustness
constant, and error term, respectively. Unlike traditional distribution measures, we partition the
sample space and the distributional shift separately in the K sub-groups instead of measuring it
point-wisely. We argue that the d(ϵ,K) (S, D̂T ) can be zero measure if all small changes happen within
the same partition where a 2D illustrative case is shown in Figure 1. Under the circumstances, our
distribution distance term will be significantly smaller than Proposition 2.1 as the target distribution
is essentially a perturbation of the source distribution. As a robust OOD generalization measure, our
bound characterizes how robust the learned model is to negligible distributional perturbations. To
prevent a bound that expands excessively, we also propose an alternate solution tailored for non-robust
algorithms (K → ∞) as follows.
Corollary 3.2. If K → ∞, the domain shift bound |LT (fθ ) − LS (fθ )| can be replaced to the
distribution distance in Proposition 2.1 where
                                       1                   1                       p
                                                                        bT ) + O( d′ /n)
              |LT (fθ ) − LS (fθ )| ≤ dF ∆F (S; DT ) ≤ dF ∆F (S; D                                    (3)
                                       2                   2
where the pseudo dimension Pdim(F) = d′ .
The proof is in Appendix C.1. As dictated in Theorem 3.1, when K → ∞, the use infinite number of
partitions on the data distribution leads to meaningless robustness. However, Corollary C.7 suggests
that our bound can be replaced by dF ∆F (DS ; DT ) in the limit of infinite K. This avoids computing
a vacuous bound for non-robust algorithms. In summary, Theorem 3.1 presents a novel approach
for quantifying distributional shifts by incorporating the concept of robustness. Our framework is
particularly beneficial when a robust algorithm is able to adapt to local shifts in the distribution.
Additionally, our data-dependent result remains valid and useful in the overparameterized regime,
since K does not depend on the model size.

3.2   S HARPNESS AND ROBUSTNESS

Clearly, robustness is inherently tied to the optimization properties of a model, particularly the
curvature of the loss landscape. One direct approach to characterize this geometric curvature, referred
to as "sharpness," involves analyzing the Hessian matrix (Foret et al., 2020; Cohen et al., 2021).
Recent research (Petzka et al., 2021) has shown that the concept of “relative flatness", the sharpness
in this paper, has a strong correlation with model generalization. However, the impact of relative
flatness on OOD generalization remains uncertain, even within the convex setting. To address this
problem, we aim to investigate the interplay between robustness and sharpness. With the following
definition of sharpness, we endeavor to establish an OOD generalization bound rooted in optimization
principles.
Definition   3.3 (Sharpness, Petzka et al. (2021)). For a twice differentiable loss function L(w) =
                w ∈ Rm with a sample set S, the sharpness is defined by
P
   s∈S  ℓw (s),
                                κ(w, S, A) := ⟨w, w⟩ · tr (HS,A (w))                                 (4)
where HS,A is the Hessian matrix of loss L(w) w.r.t. w with hypothesis set A and input set S.


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


As per Definition 3.3, sharpness is characterized by the sum of all the eigenvalues of the Hessian
matrix, scaled by the parameter norm. Each eigenvalue of the Hessian reflects the rate of change of
the loss derivative in the corresponding eigenspace. Therefore the smaller value of κ indicates a flatter
minimum. In Cha et al. (2021), they suggest that flatter minima will improve the OOD generalization,
but fail to deliver an elaborate analysis of the Hessian matrix. In this section, we begin with the
random ReLU Neural Networks parameterized by θ = ({ai }i∈[m] , w) where w = [w1 , ..., wm ]⊤ is
the trainable parameter. Let A = [a1 , ..., am ], the whole function class is defined as
                              m                                          √
                          1 X
           f (w, A, x) ≜ √       wi σ (x, ai ) : wi ∈ R, ai ∼ Unif(Sd−1 ( d)), i ∈ [m]               (5)
                           d i=1

where σ(·) is the ReLU activation function and a are random vectors uniformly distributed on
n-dim hypersphere whose surface is a n − 1 manifold. We then define any convex loss function
ℓ(f (w, A, x), y) : R ×PR → R+ . The corresponding empirical minimizer in the source domain will
                           n
be: ŵ = arg minw n1 i=1 ℓ(f (w, A, xi ), yi ). With ŵ, we are interested in loss geometry over the
sample domain (ℓŵ,A (z) for short). Intuitively, a flatter minimum on the loss landscape is expected
to be more robust to varying input. Suppose the sample space Z can be partitioned into K disjoint
sets. For each set Ci , i ∈ [K], the loss difference is upper bounded by ϵ(S, A). Given z ∈ S, we have

                           ϵ(S, A) ≜ max sup |ℓŵ,A (z) − ℓŵ,A (z ′ )| .                            (6)
                                       i∈[K] z,z ′ ∈Ci

As an alternative form of robustness, the ϵ(S, A) in (6) captures the "maximum" loss difference
between any two samples in each partition and depends on the convexity and smoothness of the loss
function in the input domain. Given a training set S and any initialization w0 , the robustness ϵ(S, A)
of a learned model fŵ will be determined. It explicitly reflects the smoothness of the loss function
in each (pre-)partitioned set. Nevertheless, its connection to the sharpness of the loss function in
parameter space still remains unclear. In order to address this gap, we establish a connection between
sharpness and robustness in Theorem 3.4. Notably, this interplay holds implications not only for
OOD but also for in-distribution generalization.
Theorem 3.4. Assume for any A, the loss function ℓŵ,A (z) w.r.t. sample z satisfies the L-
Hessian Lipschitz continuity (refer to Definition B.2) within every set Ci , ∀i ∈ [K]. Let
zi (A) = arg maxz∈Ci ∩S ℓŵ,A (z). Define Mi to be the set of global minima in Ci , sup-
pose ∃zi∗ (A) ∈ Mi such that for some ρi (L) > 0, ∥zi (A) − zi∗ (A)∥ ≤ ρiL(L) almost
                                                        2                 ′            +
           let ρmax
surely, then        (L) = max{ρi (L), i ∈ [K]},    ∥x∥ ≡ R(d) and n ≤ n, ∈ N , w.p
                          1
                                    √         1                                √
p = min π2 arccos R(d)− 2 , 1 − √ 2d−4 e 4d−9      over {ai }m
                                                             i=1 ∼ Unif(S
                                                                         d−1
                                                                              ( d)) we have
                                          πR(d)

                                     2

                          ρmax (L)          ′            d                      4ρmax (L)
                ϵ(S, A) ≤                   n +O                  κ(ŵ, S, A) +                 .    (7)
                            2L2                          m                         3

Remark. Given the training set S, we can estimate factor n̂ that n′ ≤ n̂ by comparing the maximum
Hessian norm w.r.t. zj to the sum of all the Hessian norms over {zi }i∈[n] . Note that the smoothness
condition only applies to every partitioned set (locally) where it is much weaker than the global
requirement for the loss function to be satisfied We also discuss the difference between our results and
Petzka et al. (2021) in Appendix F. The chosen family of loss functions that applied to our theorem
can be found in Appendix B.1.
                                                                                                   √
Corollary 3.5. Let ŵmin be the minimum value of |ŵ|. Suppose ∀x ∼ Unif(Sd−1 ( d))
and |∂ 2 ℓ(f (ŵ, A, x), y)/∂f 2 | is bounded by [M̃1 , M̃2 ]. If m = Poly(d), d > 2, ρmax (L) <
   2
(ŵmin        √ m))/(2d) taking expectation over all xj ∈ S, j ∈ [n] and all ai ∈ A ∼
       M̃1 σ̃(d,
Unif(Sd−1 ( d))∀i ∈ [m], we have
                                          7ρmax (L)2   ′
                     ES,A [ϵ(S, A)] ≤ ES,A              n κ(ŵ, S, A) + M̃ 2   .             (8)
                                             6L2
                                          Pm
where σ̃(d, m) = Ea∼Unif(Sd−1 (√d)) λmin ( i=1 ai a⊤
                                                   i Gii ) > 0 is the minimum eigenvalue and Gii
is product constant of Gegenbauer polynomials (definition can be founded in Appendix B).


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


See proof in Appendix D. From Theorem 3.4 we can see, the robustness constant ϵ(S, A) is (pointwise)
upper bounded by the sharpness of the learned model, as measured by the quantity κ(ŵ, S, A), and
the parameter ρmax (L). It should be noted that the parameter ρmax (L) depends on the partition,
and as the number of partitions increases, the region ρmax (L) of the input domain becomes smaller,
thereby making sharpness the dominant term in reflecting the model’s robustness within the small
local area. In Corollary 3.5, we show a stronger connection when the partition satisfies some
conditions. Overall, this bound states that the larger the sharpness of the model κ(ŵ, S, A), the
larger the upper bound on the robustness parameter ϵ(S, A). This result aligns with the intuition that
a sharper model is more prone to overfitting the training domain and is less robust in the unseen
domain. While the dependency is not exact, it still can be regarded as an alternative approach that
avoids the explicit computation of the intractable robustness term. By substituting this upper bound
for ϵ(S, A) into Theorem 3.1, we derive a sharpness-based OOD generalization bound. This implies
that the OOD generalization error will have a high probability of being small if the learned model
is flat enough. Unlike existing works, our generalization bound provides more information about
how optimization property influences performance when generalizing to OOD data. It bridges the
gap between robustness and sharpness which can also be generalized to non-OOD learning problems.
Moreover, we provide a better theoretical grounding for an empirical observation that a flat minimum
improves domain generalization (Cha et al., 2021) by pinpointing a clear dependence on sharpness.

3.3   C ASE S TUDY

To better demonstrate the relationship between sharpness and robustness, we provide two specific
examples: (1) linear ridge regression; (2) two-layer diagonal neural networks for classification.
Example 3.6. In ridge regression models, ϵ(S, A) has a reverse relationship to the regularization
parameter β. β ↑, the more probably flatter minimum κ ↓ and less sensitivity ϵ ↓ of the learned model
could be. Following the previous notation, we have ∃c̃1 > 0 such that ϵ(S, A) ≤ c̃1 κ(θ̂, S) + õd
where õd has a smaller order than κ(θ̂, S) for large d (proof refer to Appendix E.1).

As suggested in Ali et al. (2019), let’s consider a generic response model y|θ∗ ∼ (Xθ∗ , σ 2 I) where
X ∈ Rn×d , d > n. The least-square empirical minimizer of the ridge regression problem will be:
                         1            β
         θ̂ = arg min      ∥Xθ − y∥2 + ∥θ∥2 = (X ⊤ X + nβIn )−1 X ⊤ y = M −1 X ⊤ y                 (9)
                    θ   2n            2
Let S be the training set. It’s trivial to get the sharpness of a quadratic loss function where
                         κ(θ̂, S) = ∥θ̂∥2 tr(X ⊤ X/n + βIn ) = ∥θ̂∥2 tr(M )                       (10)
It’s obvious that both of the above two equations depend on the same matrix M = X ⊤ X/n + βIn .
For fixed training samples X, we have κ(θ̂, S) = O(β −1 ) in the limit of β. Then it’s clear that
a higher penalty β leads to a flatter minimum. This intuition is rigorously proven in Appendix
E.1. According to Theorem 3.1 and Theorem 3.4, a flatter minimum probably associates with lower
robustness constant ϵ(S, A). Thus it enjoys a lower OOD generalization error gap. In ridge regression,
this phenomenon can be reflected by the regularization coefficient β. Therefore, in general, the larger
β is, the lower the sharpness κ(θ̂, S) and variance are. As a consequence, larger β learns a more
robust model resulting in a lower OOD generalization error gap. This idea is later verified in the
distributional shift experiments, shown as Figure 2.
Example 3.7. We consider a classification problem using a 2-layer diagonal linear network with
exp-loss. The robustness ϵ(S, A) has a similar relationship in Theorem 3.4. Given training set S,
after iterations t > Tϵ , ∃c̃2 > 0, ϵ(S, A) ≤ c̃2 supt≥Tϵ κ(θ(t), S).

In addition to the regression and linear models, we have obtained a similar relationship for 2-layer
diagonal linear networks, which are commonly used in the kernel and rich regimes as well as in
intermediate settings (Moroshko et al., 2020). Example 3.7 demonstrates that the relationship also
holds true when the model is well-trained, even exp-loss does not satisfy the PŁ condition. By
extending our theorems to these more complex frameworks, we go beyond our initial assumptions
and offer insights into broader applications. Later experiments on non-linear NN also support
our statements. However, we still need a unified theorem for general function classes with fewer
assumptions.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4     R ELATED W ORK
Despite various methods (Sun & Saenko, 2016; Sagawa et al., 2019; Shi et al., 2021;
Shafieezadeh Abadeh et al., 2015; Li et al., 2018; Cha et al., 2021; Du et al., 2020; Zhang et al.,
2022) that have been proposed to overcome the poor generalization brought by unknown distribution
shifts, the underlying principles and theories still remain underexplored. As pointed out in Redko
et al. (2020); Miller et al. (2021), different tasks that address distributional shifts, such as domain
adaptation, OOD, and domain generalization, are collectively referred to as "transfer transductive
learning" and share similar generalization theories. In general, the desired generalization bound
will be split into In-Distribution/Domain (ID) generalization error and Out-of-Distribution/Domain
(OOD) distance. Since Blitzer et al. (2007) establish a VC-dimension-based framework to estimate
the domain shift gap by a divergence term, many following works make the effort to improve this
term in the following decades, such as Discrepancy (Mansour et al., 2009), Wasserstein measurement
(Courty et al., 2017; Shen et al., 2018), Integral Probability Metrics (IPM) (Zhang et al., 2019b; Ye
et al., 2021) and β-divergence (Germain et al., 2016). Among them, new generalization tools like
PAC-Bayes, Rademacher Complexity, and Stability are also applied. However, few of them discuss
how the sharpness reacts to data distributional shifts.
Beyond this canonical framework, Ye et al. (2021) reformulate the OOD generalization problem
and provide a generalization bound using the concepts of "variation" and "informativeness." The
causal framework proposed in Peters et al. (2017); Rojas-Carulla et al. (2018) focuses on the impact
of interventions on robust optimization over test distributions. However, none of these frameworks
consider the optimization process of a model and how it affects OOD generalization. Inspired by
previous investigation on the effect of sharpness on ID generalization (Lyu et al., 2022; Petzka
et al., 2021), recent work in Cha et al. (2021) found that flatter minima can also improve OOD
generalization. Nevertheless, they lack a sufficient theoretical foundation for the relationship between
the "sharpness" of a model and OOD generalization, but end with a union bound of Blitzer et al.
(2007)’s result. In this paper, we aim to provide a rigorous examination of this relationship.

5     E XPERIMENTS
In light of space constraints, we present only a portion of our experimental results to support the
validity of our theorems and findings. For comprehensive results, please refer to the Appendix G

5.1   R IDGE REGRESSION IN DISTRIBUTIONAL SHIFTING

Following Duchi & Namkoong (2021), we investigated the ridge regression on distributional shift.
We randomly generate θ0∗ ∈ Rd in spherical space, and data from the following generating process:
    iid
X ∼ N (0, 1), y = Xθ0∗ . To simulate distributional shift, we randomly generate a perpendicular
unit vector θ0⊥ to θ0∗ . Let θ0⊥ , θ0∗ be the basis vectors, then shifted ground-truth will be computed
from the basis by θα∗ = θ0∗ · cos(α) + θ0⊥ · sin(α). For the source domain, we use θ0∗ as our training
distribution. We randomly sample 50 data points and train a linear classifier with a gradient descent
of 3000 iterations. By minimizing the objective function in (9), we can get the empirical optimum
θ̂. Then we gradually shift the distribution by increasing α to get different target domains. Along
distribution shifting, the test loss ℓ(θ̂, yα ) will increase. As shown in Figure 2, the test loss will
culminate in around 3 rads due to the maximum distribution shifting. Comparing different levels
of regularization, we found that the larger L2-penalty β brings lower OOD generalization error
which is shown as darker purple lines. This plot bears out our intuition in the previous section. As
stated in the aforementioned case, the sharpness of ridge regression should inversely depend on β.
Correspondingly, we compute sharpness using the definition equation (4) by averaging ten different
results. For each trial, we use the same training and test data for every β. The sharpness of each ridge
regressor is shown in the legend of Figure 2. As we can see, larger β leads to less sharpness.

5.2   S HARPER MINIMUM HURTS OOD GENERALIZATION

In our results, we proved that the upper bound of OOD generalization error involves the sharpness of
the trained model. Here we empirically verified our theoretical insight. We follow the experiment
setting in DomainBed (Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz, 2021). To easily compute the sharpness, we choose


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: OOD test losses increase along dis-            Figure 3: The relationship between out-of-
tributional shifting. The X-axis is the shifting         domain test accuracy and model sharpness on
angle α and the Y-axis is the test loss of the           RotatedMNIST dataset. Here we show 4 dif-
model which is trained on distribution α = 0.            ferent OOD environments: 15◦ , 30◦ , 45◦ , 60◦
Lines are average test losses and shadows are            rotation as the OOD test set respectively. Each
variances of 10 trials. Larger regularization β          marker denotes a minimum of an algorithm with
(darker color) causes a lower increase in test           a specific seed. The marker style means the
loss but smaller sharpness.                              models trained in the same environment.


the 4-layer MLP on RotatedMNIST dataset where RotatedMNIST is a rotation of MNIST handwritten
digit dataset (LeCun, 1998) with different angles ranging from [0◦ , 15◦ , 30◦ , 45◦ , 60◦ , 75◦ ]. In this
codebase, each environment refers to selecting a domain (a specific rotation angle) as the test
domain/OOD test dataset while training on all other domains. After getting the trained model of each
environment, we compute the sharpness using all domain training sets based on the implementation
of Petzka et al. (2021). To this end, we plot the performances of Empirical Minimization Risk (ERM),
SWAD (Cha et al., 2021), Mixup (Yan et al., 2020) and GroupDRO (Sagawa et al., 2019) with 6 seeds
of each. Then we measure the sharpness of all these minima. Figure 3 shows the relationship between
model sharpness and out-of-domain accuracy. The tendency is clear that flat minima give better OOD
performances. In general, different environments can not be plotted together due to different training
sets. However, we found the middle 4 environments are similar tasks and thus plot them together for
a clearer trend. In addition, different algorithms lead to different feature scales which may affect the
scale of the sharpness. To address this, we align their scales when putting them together. For more
individual results, please refer to Figure 8 in the appendix.

5.3   C OMPARISON OF GENERALIZATION BOUNDS

To analyze our generalization bounds, we follow the toy example experiments in Sagawa et al. (2020).
In this experiment, the distribution shift terms and generalization error terms can be explicitly com-
puted. Furthermore, their synthetic experiment considers the spurious correlation across distribution
shifts which is now a general formulation of OOD generalization (Wald et al., 2021; Aubin et al.,
2021; Yao et al., 2022). Consider data x = [xcore , xspu ] ∈ that consist of two features: core feature
and spurious feature. The features are generated from the following rule:
                                             2                             2

                      xcore | y ∼ N y1, σcore   Id xspu | a ∼ N a1, σspu      Id
where y ∈ {−1, 1} is the label, and a ∈ {−1, 1} is the spurious attribute. Data with y = a forms the
majority group of size nmaj , and data with y = −a forms minority group of size nmin . Total number
                                                                                      n
of training points n = nmaj + nmin . The spurious correlation probability, pmaj = nmaj defines the
probability of y = a in training data. In testing, we always have pmaj = 0.5. The metric, worst-group
error Sagawa et al. (2019) is defined as
                              Errwg (w) := max Ex,y|gi [ℓ0−1 (w; (x, y))]
                                             i∈[4]

where ℓ0−1 is the 0 − 1 loss in binary classification. Here we compare the robustness of our proposed
OOD generalization bound and the baseline in Proposition 2.1. We also give the comparison to other
baselines, like PAC-Bayes DA bound in the Appendix G.


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: Spurious feature synthetic experiment. Each dot represents a trained model. The dash
curves are the smoothed function fit by the test data points. The baseline is Proposition 2.1. (a),(d):
the generalization error of the logistic regression models with increasing the model size/correlation
probability. (b): concentration error term in domain shift bound. (e): comparison of distribution
distance bounds. (c),(f): comparisons of generalization bounds. Note that model size > 500 is
the overparameterized regime. The further the correlation probability is from 0.5, the greater the
distributional shift is.


Along model size We plot the generalization error of the random feature logistic regression along
the model size increases in Figure 4(a). In this experiment, we follow the hyperparameter setup of
Sagawa et al. (2020) by setting the number of points n = 500, data dimension 2d = 200 with 100
                                                             2         2
on each feature. majority fraction pmaj = 0.9 and noises σspu   = 1, σcore = 100. The worst-group
error turns out to be nearly the same as the model size increases. However, in Figure 4(b), the
error term in domain shift bound Proposition 2.1(A) will√ keep increasing when the model size is
increasing. In contrast, our domain shift bound at order K is independent of the model size which
addresses the limitation of their bound. We follow Kawaguchi et al. (2022) to compute K in an
inverse image of the ϵ-covering in a randomly projected space (see details in appendix). We set the
same value K = 1, 000 in our experiment. Different from the baseline, K is data dependent and
leads to a constant concentration error term along with model size increases. Analogously, our OOD
generalization bound will not explode as model size increases (shown in Figure 4(c)).

Along distribution shift In addition, we are interested in characterizing OOD generalization when
test distribution shifts from train distribution by varying the correlation probability pmaj during data
generation. As shown in Figure 4(d), when pmaj = 0.5, there is no distributional shift between
training and test data due to no spurious features correlated to training data. Thus, the training and test
distributions align closer and closer when pmaj < 0.5 and increase, resulting in an initial decrease in
the test error for the worst-case group. However, as pmaj > 0.5 and deviates from 0.5, introducing the
spurious features, a shift in the distribution occurs. This deviation is likely to impact the worst-case
group differently, leading to an increase in the test error. As displayed in Figure 4(e) and Figure 4(f),
our distribution distance and generalization bound can capture the distribution shifts but are tighter
than the baseline.

6    C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we provide a more interpretable and informative theory to understand Out-of-
Distribution (OOD) generalization Based on the notion of robustness, we propose a robust OOD
bound that effectively captures the algorithmic robustness in the presence of shifting data distribu-
tions. In addition, our in-depth analysis of the relationship between robustness and sharpness further
illustrates that sharpness has a negative impact on generalization. Overall, our results advance the
understanding of OOD generalization and the principles that govern it.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


7   ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research/project is supported by the National Research Foundation, Singapore under its AI
Singapore Programme (AISG Award No: AISG-GC-2019-001-2A), (AISG Award No: AISG2-TC-
2023-010-SGIL) and the Singapore Ministry of Education Academic Research Fund Tier 1 (Award
No: T1 251RES2207). We would appreciate the contributions of Fusheng Liu, Ph.D. student at NUS.

R EFERENCES
Kartik Ahuja, Ethan Caballero, Dinghuai Zhang, Jean-Christophe Gagnon-Audet, Yoshua Bengio,
  Ioannis Mitliagkas, and Irina Rish. Invariance principle meets information bottleneck for out-of-
  distribution generalization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:3438–3450,
  2021.
Alnur Ali, J Zico Kolter, and Ryan J Tibshirani. A continuous-time view of early stopping for least
  squares regression. In The 22nd international conference on artificial intelligence and statistics,
  pp. 1370–1378. PMLR, 2019.
Martin Arjovsky, Léon Bottou, Ishaan Gulrajani, and David Lopez-Paz. Invariant risk minimization.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.02893, 2019.
Benjamin Aubin, Agnieszka Słowik, Martin Arjovsky, Leon Bottou, and David Lopez-Paz. Linear
  unit-tests for invariance discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.10867, 2021.
Peter Bandi, Oscar Geessink, Quirine Manson, Marcory Van Dijk, Maschenka Balkenhol, Meyke
  Hermsen, Babak Ehteshami Bejnordi, Byungjae Lee, Kyunghyun Paeng, Aoxiao Zhong, et al.
  From detection of individual metastases to classification of lymph node status at the patient level:
  the camelyon17 challenge. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 2018.
Shai Ben-David, John Blitzer, Koby Crammer, Alex Kulesza, Fernando Pereira, and Jennifer Wortman
  Vaughan. A theory of learning from different domains. Machine learning, 79:151–175, 2010.
John Blitzer, Koby Crammer, Alex Kulesza, Fernando Pereira, and Jennifer Wortman. Learning
  bounds for domain adaptation. Advances in neural information processing systems, 20, 2007.
Jean-Christophe Bourin, Eun-Young Lee, and Minghua Lin. Positive matrices partitioned into a small
  number of hermitian blocks. Linear Algebra and its Applications, 438(5):2591–2598, 2013.
Junbum Cha, Sanghyuk Chun, Kyungjae Lee, Han-Cheol Cho, Seunghyun Park, Yunsung Lee,
  and Sungrae Park. Swad: Domain generalization by seeking flat minima. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 34:22405–22418, 2021.
Jeremy M Cohen, Simran Kaur, Yuanzhi Li, J Zico Kolter, and Ameet Talwalkar. Gradient descent on
   neural networks typically occurs at the edge of stability. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.00065, 2021.
Nicolas Courty, Rémi Flamary, Amaury Habrard, and Alain Rakotomamonjy. Joint distribution
  optimal transportation for domain adaptation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2017.
Simon S Du, Jayanth Koushik, Aarti Singh, and Barnabás Póczos. Hypothesis transfer learning via
  transformation functions. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Yingjun Du, Xiantong Zhen, Ling Shao, and Cees GM Snoek. Metanorm: Learning to normalize
  few-shot batches across domains. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
John Duchi and Hongseok Namkoong. Learning models with uniform performance via distributionally
  robust optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.08750, 2018.
John C Duchi and Hongseok Namkoong. Learning models with uniform performance via distribu-
  tionally robust optimization. The Annals of Statistics, 49(3):1378–1406, 2021.
Laurent El Ghaoui and Hervé Lebret. Robust solutions to least-squares problems with uncertain data.
  SIAM Journal on matrix analysis and applications, 1997.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Pierre Foret, Ariel Kleiner, Hossein Mobahi, and Behnam Neyshabur. Sharpness-aware minimization
  for efficiently improving generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.01412, 2020.

Pascal Germain, Amaury Habrard, François Laviolette, and Emilie Morvant. A pac-bayesian approach
  for domain adaptation with specialization to linear classifiers. In International conference on
  machine learning. PMLR, 2013.

Pascal Germain, Amaury Habrard, François Laviolette, and Emilie Morvant. A new pac-bayesian
  perspective on domain adaptation. In International conference on machine learning. PMLR, 2016.

Ishaan Gulrajani and David Lopez-Paz. In search of lost domain generalization. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.

Pavel Izmailov, Dmitrii Podoprikhin, Timur Garipov, Dmitry Vetrov, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. Av-
  eraging weights leads to wider optima and better generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.05407,
  2018.

Kenji Kawaguchi, Zhun Deng, Kyle Luh, and Jiaoyang Huang. Robustness implies generalization via
  data-dependent generalization bounds. In International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR,
  2022.

Daniel Kifer, Shai Ben-David, and Johannes Gehrke. Detecting change in data streams. In VLDB,
  volume 4, pp. 180–191. Toronto, Canada, 2004.

Pang Wei Koh, Shiori Sagawa, Henrik Marklund, Sang Michael Xie, Marvin Zhang, Akshay Bal-
  subramani, Weihua Hu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Richard Lanas Phillips, Irena Gao, et al. Wilds: A
  benchmark of in-the-wild distribution shifts. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 5637–5664. PMLR, 2021.

Masanori Koyama and Shoichiro Yamaguchi. Out-of-distribution generalization with maximal
 invariant predictor. 2020.

Yann LeCun. The mnist database of handwritten digits. http://yann. lecun. com/exdb/mnist/, 1998.

Da Li, Yongxin Yang, Yi-Zhe Song, and Timothy M Hospedales. Deeper, broader and artier domain
  generalization. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp.
  5542–5550, 2017.

Da Li, Yongxin Yang, Yi-Zhe Song, and Timothy Hospedales. Learning to generalize: Meta-learning
  for domain generalization. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, 2018.

Jiashuo Liu, Zheyuan Hu, Peng Cui, Bo Li, and Zheyan Shen. Heterogeneous risk minimization. In
   International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6804–6814. PMLR, 2021.

Kaifeng Lyu, Zhiyuan Li, and Sanjeev Arora. Understanding the generalization benefit of normal-
  ization layers: Sharpness reduction. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2022.

Yishay Mansour, Mehryar Mohri, and Afshin Rostamizadeh. Domain adaptation: Learning bounds
  and algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:0902.3430, 2009.

Song Mei and Andrea Montanari. The generalization error of random features regression: Precise
  asymptotics and the double descent curve. Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics, 75
  (4):667–766, 2022.

John P Miller, Rohan Taori, Aditi Raghunathan, Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Vaishaal Shankar,
  Percy Liang, Yair Carmon, and Ludwig Schmidt. Accuracy on the line: on the strong correlation
  between out-of-distribution and in-distribution generalization. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning. PMLR, 2021.

Mehryar Mohri, Afshin Rostamizadeh, and Ameet Talwalkar. Foundations of machine learning. MIT
 press, 2018.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Edward Moroshko, Blake E Woodworth, Suriya Gunasekar, Jason D Lee, Nati Srebro, and Daniel
  Soudry. Implicit bias in deep linear classification: Initialization scale vs training accuracy. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 33:22182–22193, 2020.
Jonas Peters, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Elements of causal inference: foundations
  and learning algorithms. The MIT Press, 2017.
Henning Petzka, Michael Kamp, Linara Adilova, Cristian Sminchisescu, and Mario Boley. Relative
  flatness and generalization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:18420–18432,
  2021.
Mohammad Pezeshki, Oumar Kaba, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron C Courville, Doina Precup, and Guil-
 laume Lajoie. Gradient starvation: A learning proclivity in neural networks. Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 34:1256–1272, 2021.
Alexandre Rame, Corentin Dancette, and Matthieu Cord. Fishr: Invariant gradient variances for out-
  of-distribution generalization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 18347–18377.
  PMLR, 2022.
Ievgen Redko, Emilie Morvant, Amaury Habrard, Marc Sebban, and Younès Bennani. A sur-
  vey on domain adaptation theory: learning bounds and theoretical guarantees. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2004.11829, 2020.
Herbert Robbins. A remark on stirling’s formula. The American mathematical monthly, 62(1):26–29,
 1955.
Mateo Rojas-Carulla, Bernhard Schölkopf, Richard Turner, and Jonas Peters. Invariant models for
 causal transfer learning. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2018.
Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Tatsunori B Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Distributionally robust
  neural networks for group shifts: On the importance of regularization for worst-case generalization.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.08731, 2019.
Shiori Sagawa, Aditi Raghunathan, Pang Wei Koh, and Percy Liang. An investigation of why
  overparameterization exacerbates spurious correlations. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning. PMLR, 2020.
Soroosh Shafieezadeh Abadeh, Peyman M Mohajerin Esfahani, and Daniel Kuhn. Distributionally
  robust logistic regression. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2015.
Jian Shen, Yanru Qu, Weinan Zhang, and Yong Yu. Wasserstein distance guided representation
   learning for domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
   2018.
Yuge Shi, Jeffrey Seely, Philip HS Torr, N Siddharth, Awni Hannun, Nicolas Usunier, and Gabriel
  Synnaeve. Gradient matching for domain generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.09937, 2021.
Baochen Sun and Kate Saenko. Deep coral: Correlation alignment for deep domain adaptation. In
  European conference on computer vision, pp. 443–450. Springer, 2016.
Yoav Wald, Amir Feder, Daniel Greenfeld, and Uri Shalit. On calibration and out-of-domain
  generalization. Advances in neural information processing systems, 2021.
Olivia Wiles, Sven Gowal, Florian Stimberg, Sylvestre-Alvise Rebuffi, Ira Ktena, Krishnamurthy Dj
  Dvijotham, and Ali Taylan Cemgil. A fine-grained analysis on distribution shift. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Huan Xu and Shie Mannor. Robustness and generalization. Machine learning, 86(3):391–423, 2012.
Shen Yan, Huan Song, Nanxiang Li, Lincan Zou, and Liu Ren. Improve unsupervised domain
  adaptation with mixup training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.00677, 2020.
Huaxiu Yao, Yu Wang, Sai Li, Linjun Zhang, Weixin Liang, James Zou, and Chelsea Finn. Improving
  out-of-distribution robustness via selective augmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.00299, 2022.


                                                   12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Haotian Ye, Chuanlong Xie, Tianle Cai, Ruichen Li, Zhenguo Li, and Liwei Wang. Towards a
  theoretical framework of out-of-distribution generalization. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2021.
Xiao Zhang, Yaodong Yu, Lingxiao Wang, and Quanquan Gu. Learning one-hidden-layer relu
  networks via gradient descent. In The 22nd international conference on artificial intelligence and
  statistics, pp. 1524–1534. PMLR, 2019a.
Xingxuan Zhang, Linjun Zhou, Renzhe Xu, Peng Cui, Zheyan Shen, and Haoxin Liu. Towards
  unsupervised domain generalization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 4910–4920, 2022.
Yuchen Zhang, Tianle Liu, Mingsheng Long, and Michael Jordan. Bridging theory and algorithm for
  domain adaptation. In International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2019b.
Han Zhao, Shanghang Zhang, Guanhang Wu, José MF Moura, Joao P Costeira, and Geoffrey J Gordon.
  Adversarial multiple source domain adaptation. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  31, 2018.
Kai Zhong, Zhao Song, Prateek Jain, Peter L Bartlett, and Inderjit S Dhillon. Recovery guarantees
  for one-hidden-layer neural networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  4140–4149. PMLR, 2017.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS

A.1   S HARPNESS V. S . OOD G ENERALIZATION ON PACS AND W ILDS -C AMELYON 17


Figure 5: The relationship between out-of-            Figure 6: The relationship between OOD test
distribution (OOD) test accuracy on the test          accuracy and model sharpness on the PACS
environment and model sharpness (of last FC           dataset. Each marker denotes a model trained
layer) on the Wilds-Camelyon17 dataset. Each          using ERM with different seeds and hyperpa-
marker denotes a model trained using ERM              rameters. The marker style shows the out-of-
with different seed and hyperparameters.              distribution test environment of the model.

To evaluate our theorem more deeply, we examine the relationship between our defined sharpness
and OOD generalization error on larger-scale real-world datasets, Wilds-Camelyon17 Bandi et al.
(2018); Koh et al. (2021) and PACS Li et al. (2017). Wilds-Camelyon17 dataset includes 455,954
tumor and normal tissue slide images from five hospitals (environments). One of the hospitals is
assigned as the test environment by the dataset publisher. Distribution shift arises from variations
in patient population, slide staining, and image acquisition. PACS dataset contains 9,991 images of
7 objects in 4 visual styles (environments): art painting, cartoon, photo, and sketch. Following the
common setup in Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz (2021), each environment is used as a test environment
in turn. We follow the practice in Petzka et al. (2021) to compute the sharpness using the Hessian
matrix from the last Fully-Connected (FC) layer of each model. For the Wilds-Camelyon17 dataset,
we test the sharpness of 18 ERM models trained with different random seeds and hyperparameters.
Figure 5 shows the result. For the PACS dataset, we run 60 ERM models with different random seeds
and hyperparameters for each test environment. To get a clearer correlation, we align the points from
4 environments by their mean performance. Figure 6 shows the result. From the two figures, we can
observe a clear correlation between sharpness and out-of-distribution (OOD) accuracy. Sharpness
tends to hurt the OOD performance of the model. The result is consistent with what we report in
Figure 3. It shows that the correlation between sharpness and OOD accuracy can also be observed on
large-scale datasets.


B     N OTATIONS AND D EFINITIONS

Notations We use [n] denote the integers set {i}ni=1 . ∥·∥ represents ℓ2 -norm ∥·∥2 for short. Without
loss of generality, we use ℓ(f (θ, x), y) for the loss function of model fθ on data pair z = (x, y),
which is denoted as ℓθ (z)) and we use n, d for training set size and input dimension. Note that we
generally follow the notations in the original papers.

       • LS , LT : expected risk of the source domain and target domain, respectively. The corre-
         sponding empirical version will be LbS , LbT
       • {Ci }K
              i=1 : K partitions on sample space and Ci denotes each partitioned set.

       • DS , DT : distributions of source and target domain. Their sampled dataset will be denoted
         as D̂S , D̂T accordingly.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       • θ: In our setting, θ = (w, {a}m i ) denotes the model parameters where w is the trainable
         parameters and {ai }m are the random features (we also use A = [a1 , ..., am ] for short
         notation in many places). ŵ is the minimizer of empirical loss.
       • M : upper bound of the loss function.
       • S = {(xi , yi )}ni /X = [x1 , ...xn ]: training data of size n.
Definition B.1 (Robustness, Xu & Mannor (2012)). A learning algorithm A on training set S is
                                                                                           K
(K, ϵ(·))-robust, for K ∈ N, if Z can be partitioned into K disjoint sets, denoted by {Ck }k=1 , such
that for all s ∈ S, z ∈ Z we have
                      ∀s, z ∈ Ci , ∀k ∈ [K], |ℓ (AS , s) − ℓ (AS , z)| ≤ ϵ(S, A).
Definition B.2 (Hessian Lipschitz continuous). For a twice differentiable function f : Rn → R, it
has L-Lipschitz continuous Hessian for domain x, y are vectors in Ci if
                                  ∇2 f (y) − ∇2 f (x) ≤ Li ∥y − x∥

where Li > 0 depends on input domain Ci and ∥ · ∥ is L2 norm. Then for all K domains ∪K
                                                                                      i=1 Ci , let
L := max{Li |i ∈ [K]} be the uniform Lipschitz constant, so we have

              ∇2 f (y) − ∇2 f (x) ≤ Li ∥y − x∥ ≤ L∥y − x∥, ∀i ∈ [K], (x, y) ∈ Ci
which is uniformly bounded with L.
Lemma B.3 (Hessian Lipschitz Lemma). If f is twice differentiable and has L-Lipschitz continuous
Hessian, then
                                                    1                                 L
        f (y) − f (x) − ⟨∇f (x), y − x⟩ −             ∇2 f (x)(y − x), (y − x)    ≤     ∥y − x∥3 .
                                                    2                                 6


Gegenbauer Polynomials
We briefly define Gegenbauer polynomials here whose details can be found in Appendix of Mei
& Montanari (2022). First, we denote Sd−1 (r) = {x ∈ Rd : ∥x∥ = r} as the uniform spherical
distribution with the radius r on d − 1 manifold. Let τd be the probability measure on Sd−1 and and
the inner product in functional space L2 ([−d, d], µd ) denoted as ⟨·, ·⟩L2 and ∥ · ∥L2 :
                                          Z
                               ⟨f, g⟩L2 ≡       √ f (x)g(x)µd ( dx).
                                               Sd−1 ( d)
                                                                               √                √
For any function σ ∈ L2 ([−d, d], τd ), where τd is the distribution of ⟨x, y⟩/ d (x, y ∼ Sd−1 ( d)),
the orthogonal basis {Qdt } forms the Gegenbauer polynomial of degree t(t ≥ 0), its spherical
harmonics coefficients λd,t (σ) can be expressed as:
                                          Z
                                                      (d)
                                                                 √
                             λd,t (σ) =      √ √ σ(x)Qt (            dx)τd (x),
                                           [− d, d]
                                                     √ √
then the Gegenbauer generating function holds in L2 [− d, d], τd sense
                                              ∞                       √
                                                                  (d)
                                              X
                                  σ(x) =            λd,t (σ)Nd,t Qt ( dx)
                                              k=0

where Nd,t is the normalized factor depending on the norm of input.

B.1   A SSUMPTIONS

We discuss and list all assumptions we used in our theorems. The purposes are to offer clarity
regarding the specific assumptions required for each theorem and ensure that the assumptions made in
our theorems are well-founded and reasonable, reinforcing the validity and reliability of our results.


                                                       15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


OOD Generalization
(Setting): Given a full sample space Z, source and target distributions are two different measures over
this whole sample domain Z. The purpose is to study the robust algorithms in the OOD generalization
setting.
(Assumptions): For any sample ∀z ∈ Z, the loss function is bounded ℓθ (z) ∈ [0, M ]. This
assumption generally follows the original paper Xu & Mannor (2012). While it is possible to relax
this assumption and derive improved bounds, our primary objective is to formulate a framework for
robust OOD generalization and establish a clear connection with the optimization properties of the
model.

Robustness and Sharpness
(Setting): In order to give a fine-grained analysis, we follow the common choice where a two-layer
ReLU Neural Network function class is widely analyzed in most literature, i.e. Neural Tangent
Kernel, non-kernel (rich) regime Moroshko et al. (2020) and random feature models. Among them,
we select the following random feature models as our function class:
                                 m                                          √
                             1 X
            f (w, A, x) ≜ √         wi σ (x, ai ) : wi ∈ R, ai ∼ Unif(Sd−1 ( d)), i ∈ [m]
                              d i=1
where m is the hidden size and A = [a1 , ..., am ] contains random vectors uniformly distributed on
n-dim hypersphere whose surface is a n − 1 manifold. σ(a⊤ x) = (a⊤ x)I{a⊤ x} denotes the ReLU
activation function and I is the indicator function. w = [w1 , ..., wm ]⊤ is the trainable parameter. We
choose the common loss functions: (1) Homogeneity in regression; (2) (Binary) Cross-Entropy Loss;
(3) Negative Log Likelihood (NLL) loss;
(Assumptions):
(i) Let Ci , i ∈ [K] be any set from whole partitions ∪K
                                                       i=1 Ci , we assume ∀z ∈ Ci , the loss function
ℓŵ,A (z) satisfies L-Hessian Lipschitz for all i ∈ [K] (See details in Definition B.2). Note that we
only require this assumption to hold within each partition, instead of holding globally. In general,
the smoothness and convexity condition is actually equivalent to locally convex which is a weak
assumption for most function classes.
(ii) Consider an optimization problem in each partition Ci , i ∈ [K]. Let one of the training points
zi (A) ∈ S ∩Ci be the initial point and zi∗ (A) ∈ Mi is the corresponding nearest local minima where
Mi is the local minima set of partition Ci . For some ρi (L) > 0, we assume ∥zi (A) − zi∗ (A)∥ ≤
ρi (L)/L holds a.s.. It ensures the hessian norm ∥H(zi (A))∥ has the lower bound. Similar conditions
and estimations can be found in Zhang et al. (2019a).
(iii) To simplify the computation of probability, we assume ξi = a⊤
                                                                  i x obeys a rotationally invariant
distribution.

                                                        √ loss function ℓ() satisfied a bounded
(iv) For Corollary 3.5, we make additional assumptions that
condition where the second derivative ∀x ∼ Unif(Sd−1 ( d)), |∂ 2 ℓ(f (ŵ, A, x), y)/∂f 2 | with re-
spect to its argument f (ŵ, A, x)√should be bounded by [M̃1 , M̃2 ]. Note, we consider the case
where
Pm the ⊤   data ∀x ∼ Unif(Sd−1 ( d)) while m = Poly(d) is to ensure the positive definiteness of
                 d×d
   i=1 i i ∈ R
       a a           almost surely.

C    P ROOF TO D OMAIN SHIFT
Lemma C.1. Let D̂T be the empirical distribution of size n drawn from DT . The loss ℓ is upper
bounded by M. With probability at least 1 − δ (over the choice of the samples), for every fθ trained
on S, we have
                                                                 r
                                                                    2K ln 2 + 2 ln(1/δ)
          LT (fθ ) ≤ LS (fθ ) + M d(ϵ,K) (S, D̂T ) + ϵ(S) + 2M                                  (11)
                                                                              n
where
                                                                    K
                                                                  X     ni (S) ni (D̂T )
         ∀i ∈ [n], ni (S) := #(z ∈ S ∩ Ci ), d(ϵ,K) (S, D̂T ) :=               −                (12)
                                                                   i=1
                                                                          n          n


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and ni (S), ni (D̂T ) are the number of samples from S and D̂T that fall into the set Ci , respectively.


Proof. In the following generalization statement, we use ℓ(fθ , z) to denote the error obtained with
input z and hypothesis function fθ for better illustration. By definition we have,

                       LT (fθ ) − LS (fθ ) := Ez′ ∼DT ℓ(fθ , z ′ ) − Ez∼DS ℓ(fθ , z).                        (13)

Then we make the K partitions for source distribution DS . Let ni be the size of collec-
tion set of points x fall into the partition Ci where ni is the i.i.d.multinomial random vari-
able with (ps (C1 ), ..., ps (CK )). We use parallel notation for target distribution DT with Si′ ∼
(pt (C1 ), ..., pt (CK )). Since
                                                  K
                                                  X
                           Ez∼DS ℓ(fθ , z) =             Ez∼DS (ℓ(fθ , z ′ )|z ∈ Ci )ps (Ci )
                                                   i=1
                                                                                                             (14)
                                                  K
                                                  X
                       Ez′ ∼DT ℓ(fθ , z ′ ) =            Ez′ ∼DT (ℓ(fθ , z ′ )|z ′ ∈ Ci )pt (Ci )
                                                   i=1

and thus we have
                                    K
                                    X
         LT (fθ ) − LS (fθ ) =            E(ℓ(fθ , z ′ )|z ′ ∈ Ci )pt (Ci ) − E(ℓ(fθ , z)|z ∈ Ci )ps (Ci )
                                    i=1
                                    ± E(ℓ(fθ , z ′ )|z ′ ∈ Ci )ps (Ci )
                                    K
                                    X
                                =         (E(ℓ(fθ , z ′ )|z ′ ∈ Ci )) (pt (Ci ) − ps (Ci ))
                                    i=1                                                                      (15)
                                        K
                                        X
                                    +         [E(ℓ(fθ , z ′ )|z ′ ∈ Ci ) − E(ℓ(fθ , z)|z ∈ Ci )] ps (Ci )
                                        i=1
                                    K
                                    X
                                ≤         (E(ℓ(fθ , z ′ )|z ′ ∈ Ci )) (pt (Ci ) − ps (Ci )) + ϵ(S, A).
                                    i=1

If we sample empirical distribution S, D̂T of size n each drawn from DS and DT , respectively.
(n1 , ..., nK ) are the i.i.d. random variables belongs to Ci . We use the parallel notation n′i for target
distribution.
                                                      K
                                                      X ni (S) ni (D̂T )
                                  d(ϵ,K) (S, D̂T ) :=           −          .                           (16)
                                                      i
                                                          n          n

Further, we have
K                                                             K
                                                                                                              !
X                                                             X                          n i (D̂T )   n i (S)
    (E(ℓ(fθ , z ′ )|z ′ ∈ Ci )) (pt (Ci ) − ps (Ci )) −      (E(ℓ(fθ , z ′ )|z ′ ∈ Ci ))            −
i=1                                                      i=1
                                                                                              n           n
    K
                                                           !    K
  X                                              ni (D̂T )     X                                            ni (S)
=      (E(ℓ(fθ , z ′ )|z ′ ∈ Ci )) pt (Ci ) −                −     (E(ℓ(fθ , z ′ )|z ′ ∈ Ci )) ps (Ci ) −
   i=1
                                                     n         i=1
                                                                                                              n
       K                                 K
       X                   ni (D̂T )    X              ni (S)
 ≤M           pt (Ci ) −             +M     ps (Ci ) −        .
        i=1
                               n        i=1
                                                         n
                                                                                                             (17)
With Breteganolle-Huber-Carol inequality we have
                        K
                                                r
                       X   ni (S)                 2K ln 2 + 2 ln(1/δ)
                                  − ps (Ci ) ≤                        .                                      (18)
                       i=1
                              n                            n


                                                             17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To integrate these two inequalities, we have
K
X
      (E(ℓ(fθ , z ′ )|z ′ ∈ Ci ))(pt (Ci ) − ps (Ci ))
i=1
                         K
                                                                              !          r
                         X
                                         ′   ′             ni (D̂T ) ni (S)                  2K ln 2 + 2 ln(1/δ)
                     ≤         (E(ℓ(fθ , z )|z ∈ Ci ))              −             + 2M
                         i=1
                                                               n       n                              n
                                                   r
                                                         2K ln 2 + 2 ln(1/δ)
                     ≤ M d(ϵ,K) (S, D̂T ) + 2M                               .
                                                                  n
                                                                                                            (19)
In summary with probability 1 − δ we have
                                                                           r
                                                                                 2K ln 2 + 2 ln(1/δ)
              LT (fθ ) ≤ LS (fθ ) + M d(ϵ,K) (S, D̂T ) + ϵ(S) + 2M                                          (20)
                                                                                          n
which completes the proof.

With the result of the domain (distribution) shift and the relationship between sharpness and robustness,
we can move forward to the final OOD generalization error bound. First, we state the context of ID
robustness bound in Xu & Mannor (2012) as follows.
Lemma C.2 (Xu et al.Xu & Mannor (2012)). Assume that for all h ∈ H and z ∈ Z, the loss is
upper bounded by M i.e., ℓ(h, z) ≤ M . If the learning algorithm A is (K, ϵ(·))-robust, then for any
                                                                              n
δ > 0, with probability at least 1 − δ over an iid draw of n samples S = (zi )i=1 , it holds that:
                                    n
                                                               r
                                 1X                              2K ln 2 + 2 ln(1/δ)
              Ez [ℓ (AS , z)] ≤        ℓ (AS , zi ) + ϵ(S) + M
                                 n i=1                                    n


As the conclusive results, we briefly prove the following result by summarizing Lemma C.2 and
Lemma C.1.
Theorem C.3 (Restatement of Theorem 3.1). Let D̂T be the empirical distribution of size n drawn
from DT . The loss ℓ is upper bounded by M. With probability at least 1 − δ (over the choice of the
samples), for every fθ trained on S, we have
                                                              r
                                                                  2K ln 2 + 2 ln(2/δ)
           LT (θ) ≤ LbS (θ) + M d(ϵ,K) (S, D̂T ) + 2ϵ(S) + 3M                          .       (21)
                                                                           n


Proof. Firstly, with Lemma C.1 and probability as least 1 − 2δ , we have
                                                           r
                                                             2K ln 2 + 2 ln(2/δ)
          LT (fθ ) ≤ LS (fθ ) + M d(ϵ,K) (D̂S , D̂T ) + 2M                       + ϵ(S)
                                                                       n
Secondly, with Lemma C.2 (Xu & Mannor (2012) Theorem 3) and probability as least 1 − 2δ , we have
                                                    r
                                                      2K ln 2 + 2 ln(2/δ)
                    LS (fθ ) − L̂S (fθ ) ≤ ϵ(S) + M
                                                               n
By taking the union bound, we conclude our final result that with probability at least 1 − δ
                                    r
                                      2K ln 2 + 2 ln(2/δ)                                                   (22)
          LT (fθ ) ≤ L̂S (fθ ) + 3M                         + 2ϵ(S) + M d(ϵ,K) (S, D̂T )
                                               n



Here ϵ(S) is the robustness constant that we can replace with any sharpness measure.


                                                          18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.1     P ROOF TO C OROLLARY 3.2

Definition C.4. dF ∆F (DT ; DS ) := 2 supA(f )∈AF ∆F | PrDS (A(f )) − PrDT (A(f ))| and F∆F is
defined as:
                                  F∆F := {f (x) ⊕ f ′ (x) : f, f ′ ∈ F}
where ⊕ is the XOR operator e.g. I(f ′ (x) ̸= f (x)).
Lemma C.5 (Lemma 2 Zhao et al. (2018)). If Pdim(F) = d′ , then VCdim(F∆F) ≤ 2d′ .
Proposition C.6 (Zhao et al. (2018)). Let F be a hypothesis class with pseudo dimension Pdim(F) =
d′ . If D
        bS is the empirical distributions generated with n i.i.d.. samples from source domain, and D
                                                                                                   bT
is the empirical distribution on the target domain generated from n samples without labels, then with
probability at least 1 − δ, for all f ∈ F, we have:
                                               r                s
                                                 2d ′ log en       log 2δ
                                                           ′
                    LT (f ) ≤ LbS (f ) + E ∗ +            d
                                                              +
                                                       n            2n
                                                                  s
                                                                        ′           4             (23)
                                         1               bS + 4 2d ln(2n) + ln δ

                                       + dF ∆F D   bT ; D
                                         2                                   n
                                         |                     {z                    }
                                                         (Empirical div Error)

where E ∗ = LbS (f ∗ ) + LbT (f ∗ ) is the total error of best hypothesis f ∗ over source and target domain.


Proof. With Lemma 4 (Zhao et al., 2018), we have
                                                       1
                                   LT (f ) ≤ LbS (f ) + dF ∆F + E ∗
                                                       2
where
                                     E ∗ = inf
                                           ′
                                               LS (f ′ ) + LT (f ′ ).
                                            f ∈F

Lemma 6 (Zhao et al., 2018), which is actually Lemma 1 in (Ben-David et al., 2010), shows the
following results
                                                  s
                                                                                2
                                           bS + 4 VCdim(F∆F) ln(2n) + ln δ .

            dF ∆F (DT ; DS ) ≤ dF ∆F DbT ; D
                                                                n
As suggested in Zhao et al. (2018), VCdim(F∆F) is at most 2d′ . Further, with Theorem 2 (Ben-
David et al., 2010), we have at probability at least 1 − 2δ
                                                       s
                                                                                 2
                             1               bS + 4 VCdim(F∆F) ln(2n) + ln δ + E ∗

        LT (f ) ≤ LS (f ) + dF ∆F D    bT ; D
                             2                                          n
                                                       s                                 (24)
                                                            ′             2
                             1                           2d   ln(2n) + ln
                 ≤ LS (f ) + dF ∆F D   bT ; DbS + 4                       δ
                                                                            + E∗
                             2                                    n
Using in-domain generalization error Lemma 11.6 (Mohri et al., 2018), with probability at least 1 − 2δ
the result is                                                    s
                                                r
                                                  2d ′ log en       log 1δ
                                                           d′
                        LS (f ) ≤ Lb S (f ) + M               +M
                                                        n             2n
Note in Zhao et al. (2018), the M = 1 for the normalized regression loss. Combine them all, we
conclude the proof.
Corollary C.7. If K → ∞, M = 1, domain shift bound |LT (fθ ) − LS (fθ )| will be reduced to
(Empirical div Error) in Proposition C.6 where
                                           1
                 |LT (fθ ) − LS (fθ )| ≤     dF ∆F (DS ; DT ) ≤ (Empirical div Error)                  (25)
                                           2


                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. According to Theorem C.3, we have
                                    K
                                    X
        LT (fθ ) − LS (fθ ) =            E(ℓ(fθ , z ′ )|z ′ ∈ Ci )pt (Ci ) − E(ℓ(fθ , z)|z ∈ Ci )ps (Ci )   (26)
                                     i
                                          S∞
If K → ∞, let’s define a domain that U := i=1 Ci . The equation (26) will be
                                 Z                               Z
          LT (fθ ) − LS (fθ ) =        ℓ(fθ , z ′ )pt (z ′ )dz −      ℓ(fθ , z)ps (z)dz
                                   ′
                                 Zz ∈U                            z∈U
                                                                   Z
                                                                                                            (27)
                              =         ℓ(fθ , z ′ )pt (z ′ )dz −        ℓ(fθ , z)ps (z)dz
                                          z ′ ∈DT                          z∈DS
                                     = Ez′ ∼DT ℓ(fθ , z ′ ) − Ez∼DS ℓ(fθ , z).
In this case, we have,
           |LT (fθ ) − LS (fθ )|
           = |Ez′ ∼DT ℓ(fθ , z ′ ) − Ez∼DS ℓ(fθ , z)|
             Z ∞
           ≤       |PrDT (ℓ(f (θ, x′ ), y ′ ) > t) dt − PrDS (ℓ(f (θ, x), y) > t) dt|
                0
               Z 1
           =         |PrDT (ℓ(f (θ, x′ ), y ′ ) > t) − PrDS (ℓ(f (θ, x), y) > t)| dt (M = 1)
                0                                                                                           (28)
                                                     ′    ′
           ≤ sup           sup     |PrDT (ℓ(f (θ, x ), y ) > t) − PrDS (ℓ(f (θ, x), y) > t)|
               t∈[0,1] f (θ,·)∈F

           ≤         sup     |PrDT (A(f )) − PrDS (A(f ))|
               A(f )∈AF ∆F
            1
           =  dF ∆F (DS ; DT ) ≤ (Empirical div error)
            2
where AF ∆F represents a learning algorithm under the hypothesis F∆F = {f (x) ⊕ f ′ (x) : f, f ′ ∈
F}, which completes the proof.

D    S HARPNESS AND ROBUSTNESS
Lemma D.1 (positive definiteness of Hessian). Let ŵmin be the minimum value of |ŵ| and  √  x∗ =
arg minx∈Unif(Sd−1 (√d)) ℓ(f (ŵ, A, x), y). For any A = (a1 , ..., am ), ai ∼ Unif(Sd−1 ( d))∀i ∈
                               Pm
[m] denote σ̃(d, m) = λmin ( i=1 ai a⊤    i Gii ) > 0 be the minimum eigenvalue, where Gij =
P∞ 2           2    (d)           √
  t=0 λd,t (σ)Nd,t Qt (⟨ai , aj ⟩/ d) is the polynomial product constant. If m = Poly(d), the
hessian H(x∗ ) can be lower bound by
                                                                  2
                                                                ŵmin σ̃(d, m)M̃1
                            Ex∗ ∼Unif(Sd−1 (√d)) H(x∗ ) ⪰                         Id .                      (29)
                                                                         d

Proof. As suggested in Lemma D.6 of (Zhong et al., 2017), we have a similar result to bound the
local positive definiteness of Hessian. By previous definition, the Hessian w.r.t. x has a following
partial order
                                                                                         
                              2    ∗ ∗          m X  m
                            D f (x   , y  )    X
                 H(x∗ ) =                               ŵi ŵj ai a⊤  ′  ⊤ ∗ ′    ⊤ ∗ 
                                                                     j σ (ai x )σ (aj x )
                                  d            i=1 j=1
                                                                                 
                                     m X   m
                            M̃1   X
                         ⪰                    ŵi ŵj ai a⊤    ′   ⊤ ∗ ′     ⊤ ∗ 
                                                           j σ (ai x )σ (aj x )                  (30)
                             d      i=1 j=1
                                                                                      
                              2              m X m
                            ŵ M̃1        X
                         ⪰ min                       ŵi ŵj ai a⊤   ′   ⊤ ∗ ′    ⊤ ∗ 
                                                                  j σ (ai x )σ (aj x )
                                d           i=1 j=1



                                                         20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For the ReLU activation function, we further have
                                             σ(a⊤ x∗ ) ≥ σ ′ (a⊤ x∗ )                                  (31)
                        √ √                                                      √
We extend the σ ∈ L2 ([− d, d], τd ) (where τd is the distribution of ⟨x1 , x2 ⟩/ d) by Gegenbauer
polynomials that
                                      ∞                      √
                                                         (d)
                                      X
                            σ(x) =       λd,t (σ)Nd,t Qt ( dx).                               (32)
                                              t=0
                             m×d
                                                                 √
Let A = (a1 , ..., am ) ∈ R     . We assume ∀x ∈ Unif(Sd−1 ( d)). Lemma C.7 in (Mei &
Montanari, 2022), suggests that
                                                √               √
         U = Ex∗ ∼Unif(Sd−1 (√d)) [σ(⟨ai , x∗ ⟩/ d)σ(⟨ai , x∗ ⟩/ d)] ∈ Rm×m      (33)
                                                                                   i,j∈[m]

which shows matrix U is a positive definite matrix. Similarly, taking the expectation over x∗ , terms
in RHS of (30) bracket can be rewritten as
                                                                       
                                    Xm X m
             E ∗         d−1
                 x ∼Unif(S
                             √   
                             ( d))          ai a⊤   ′  ⊤ ∗ ′      ⊤ ∗ 
                                                j σ (ai x )σ (aj x )
                                            i=1 j=1
                                                                                                       (34)
                                            m X
                                            X m                           √                  √
                                      ⪰               ai a⊤         ⊤ ∗
                                                          j Ex∗ [σ(ai x /     d)σ(a⊤  ∗
                                                                                   j x /         d)]
                                            i=1 j=1

Besides, we have the following property of Gegenbauer polynomials,
                          √
      1. For x, y ∈ Sd−1 ( d)
                   D
                      (d)          (d)
                                             E                               1        (d)
                     Qj (⟨x, ·⟩), Qk (⟨y, ·⟩) 2                  √        =      δjk Qk (⟨x, y⟩).
                                                        L (Sd−1 ( d),γd )   Nd,k
                          √
      2. For x, y ∈ Sd−1 ( d)
                                                              Nd,k
                                      (d)                 1 X (d)         (d)
                                 Qk (⟨x, y⟩) =                     Y (x)Yki (y).
                                                         Nd,k i=1 ki

                                (d)
where spherical harmonics {Ylj }1≤j≤Nd,l forms an orthonormal basis which gives the following
results
              √          √      ∞                                  √                 √
                                                     (d)               (d)
                                X
 Ex∗ [σ(a⊤  ∗       ⊤ ∗
         i x / d)σ(aj x / d)] =   λ2d,t (σ)Nd,t
                                            2
                                                Ex∗ Qt (⟨ai , x∗ ⟩/ d)Qt (⟨aj , x∗ ⟩/ d)
                                             t=0
                                             ∞                                  √
                                                                  (d)
                                             X
                                        =          λ2d,t (σ)Nd,t
                                                             2
                                                                 Qt (⟨ai , aj ⟩/ d) = Gij < ∞.
                                             t=0
                                                                                                       (35)
Hence, we have
        m X
        X m                           √           √       m
                                                          X
                   ai a⊤ E
                       j x ∗ [σ(a⊤ ∗
                                 i x /  d)σ(a⊤ ∗
                                             j x /  d)] =   ai a⊤
                                                                i Gii + O(1/d)Var(a)                   (36)
         i=1 j=1                                                    i=1
                                                                Pm         ⊤
                                                                                       = rank AA⊤ = d. Let

Since m = P oly(d), and {a}i∈[m] are i.i.d, then rank              i=1 ai ai Gii
                    Pm
σ̃(d, m) = Ea λmin ( i=1 ai a⊤
                             i Gii ) > 0 we have

                                                         2
                                                       ŵmin σ̃(d, m)M̃1
                                 Ex∗ H(x∗ ) ⪰                            Id                            (37)
                                                                d


                                                        21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                       SK
Lemma D.2. Let           k=1 Ck be the whole domain, the notion of (ϵ, K)-robustness is described by

                          ϵ(S, A) ≜      max                sup       |ℓŵ,A (z) − ℓŵ,A (zi′ )| .
                                         S   K
                                      Ci ⊂             ′
                                             k=1 Ck z,zi ∈Ci ,z∈S


Define Mi be the set of global minima in Ci , where
                                    Mi ≜ {z(A)|z(A) = min ℓŵ,A (z)}
                                                                    z∈Ci

suppose for some maximum training loss point

                        zi (A) ∈    max ℓŵ,A (z) − ℓŵ,A (zi∗ (A))
                                              z∈Ci ∩S

there ∃zi∗ (A) where
                                       zi∗ (A) ≜ arg min ∥z − zi (A)∥
                                                            z∈Mi
                                                                                                     √
such that ∥zi (A) − z ∗ (A)∥ ≤ ρiL(L) almost surely hold for any A ∈ Unif(Sd−1 ( d)) and for any
A, ℓŵ,A (z) is L-Hessian Lipschitz continuous. Then the ϵ(S, A) can be bounded by
                                         ρi (L)2

                                                              2                 4ρi (L)
                          ϵ(S, A) ≤ max                      ∇ ℓŵ,A (zi (A)) +
                                    i∈[K] 2L2                                     3


Proof. Let z ∈ S be a collection of (x, y) from the training set S and zi′ denote any collection from
the set Ci . We define local minima set Mi (which is the global minima set of Ci ). Assume that for
                                                                       ∗
some maximum point
                d−1
                     √ zi (A) ∈ maxz∈Ci ∩S ℓŵ,A (z), there exists a zi (A) ∈ Mi almost surely for
all A ∼ Unif(S ( d)) such that
                                                                                                     ρi (L)
         zi∗ (A) = arg min f := {z ∈ Mi : ∥zi (A) − z∥} s.t. ∥zi (A) − z∥ ≤                                   (38)
                             z∈Mi                                                                      L
By definition, ϵ(S, A) can be rewritten as

                             ϵ(S, A) = max             sup        |ℓŵ,A (z) − ℓŵ,A (zi′ )|
                                         i∈[K] z,z ′ ∈Ci ,z∈S
                                                   i

                                      = max             sup          ℓŵ,A (z) − ℓŵ,A (z ∗ )                 (39)
                                         i∈[K] z∈Ci ∩S,z ∗ ∈Mi

                                      = max ℓŵ,A (zi (A)) − ℓŵ,A (zi∗ (A)).
                                         i∈[K]

According to Lemma B.3, we have
 ϵ(S, A) = max ℓŵ,A (zi (A)) − ℓŵ,A (zi∗ (A))
               i∈[K]
         (i)
         ≤ max ⟨∇ℓŵ,A (zi∗ (A)), zi (A) − zi∗ (A)⟩
               i∈[K]
               1                                                          L
               +  ∇2 ℓŵ,A (zi∗ (A))(zi (A) − zi∗ (A)), zi (A) − zi∗ (A) + ∥zi (A) − z ∗ ∥3
               2                                                           6
                  1                                                          L
          = max      ∇ ℓŵ,A (zi (A))(zi (A) − zi (A)), zi (A) − zi (A) + ∥zi (A) − zi∗ (A)∥3
                       2         ∗                 ∗                  ∗
            i∈[K] 2                                                          6
                  1
          ≤ max      ∇2 ℓŵ,A (zi∗ (A)) ∥zi (A) − zi∗ (A)∥2
            i∈[K] 2
               L
            + ∥zi (A) − zi∗ (A)∥3 (Cauchy-Schwarz)
               6
                                                                                            (40)
where (i) support by the fact ∇ℓŵ,A (z ∗ ) = 0. With Lipschitz continuous Hessian we have
                       ∥∇2 ℓŵ,A (zi∗ (A))∥ ≤ L∥zi (A) − zi∗ (A)∥ + ∥∇2 ℓŵ,A (zi (A))∥.                      (41)


                                                             22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Overall, we have
                        1                                             L
        ϵ(S, A) ≤ max       ∇2 ℓŵ,A (zi∗ (A)) ∥zi (A) − zi∗ (A)∥2 + ∥zi (A) − zi∗ (A)∥3
                  i∈[K] 2                                             6
                        1
                            ∥∇ ℓŵ,A (zi (A))∥ + L∥zi (A) − zi (A)∥ ∥zi (A) − zi∗ (A)∥2
                                2                                ∗

                ≤ max
                  i∈[K] 2
                  L
                + ∥zi (A) − zi∗ (A)∥3                                                         (42)
                  6
                        1                                 ρi (L)2    ρi (L)3
                ≤ max       ∥∇2 ℓŵ,A (zi (A))∥ + ρi (L)           +
                  i∈[K] 2                                    L2       6L2
                               2                               3
                        ρi (L)                         2ρi (L)
                = max        2
                                 ∥∇2 ℓŵ,A (zi (A))∥ +
                  i∈[K] 2L                               3L2
which completes the proof.
Lemma D.3 (Lemma 2.1 Bourin et al. (2013)). For every matrix in M+
                                                                 n+m partitioned into blocks,
we have a decomposition

                        A X             A 0       ∗        0 0
                                =  U            U   + V            V∗
                        X∗ B            0 0                0 B
for some unitaries U, V ∈ Mn+m .
Lemma D.4. Then, given an arbitrary partitioned positive semi-definite matrix,

                                 A X
                                               ≤ ∥A∥s + ∥B∥s
                                 X∗ B        s
for all symmetric norms.

Proof. In lemma D.3 we have

                        A X        A 0    ∗     0                   0
                              =U         U +V                               V∗
                       X∗ B        0 0          0                   B
for some unitaries U, V ∈ Mn+m . The result then follows from the simple fact that symmetric norms
are non-decreasing functions of the singular values where f = ∥ · ∥s : M 7→ R, we have

                      A X                     A 0       ∗              0 0
               f                  ≤f U                U    +f V                 V∗
                      X∗ B                    0 0                      0 B

                              √                                               p
Lemma D.5. For a ∼ Unif(Sd−1 ( d)) and x are some vector ∈ Rd with norm ∥x∥ ≡ R(d) ≥ d,
we have
                                                                               
                              
                               2 arccos   √ 1           √                      
                                                                                
               2     2
                                            R(d)          2d − 4         1     
       P(⟨x, a⟩ ≥ ∥a∥ ) ≥ min                       , 1− p        exp              (43)
                              
                                        π                 πR(d)        4d − 9 
                                                                               


Proof. We can replace the unit vector of a with e by
                              P(⟨x, a⟩2 ≥ ∥a∥2 ) = P(⟨x, e⟩2 ≥ 1)                             (44)
Similarly, we can replace x by unit vector s such that

                                                              1
                             P(⟨x, e⟩2 ≥ 1) = P ⟨s, e⟩2 ≥                                     (45)
                                                             R(d)
                   1
Solving ⟨s, e⟩2 = R(d) , we get
                                             1                    1
                       ⟨s, e⟩2 = cos2 ϕ =        ⇒ ϕ = arccos ± p                             (46)
                                            R(d)                  R(d)

                                               23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In this case, the probability will converge to 1 as R(d) increases. As is known to us, surface area of
Sd−1 equals
                                                      2π d/2
                                          Ad = rd−1                                               (47)
                                                      Γ d2


An area Cd of the spherical cap equals
                          Z ϕ
                                                    2π (d−1)/2 d−1 ϕ d−2
                                                                  Z
               Acap
                 d  (r) =      A d−1 (r sin θ)rdθ =           r      sin θdθ.                      (48)
                                                     Γ d−1

                            0                             2        0

                      (2(n−1))! √
where Γ n − 12 = 22(n−1)

                           (n−1)!
                                   π.
1) When d = 1, almost surely we have
                                        P((x · e)2 ≥ e2 ) = P(x2 ≥ 1) = 1.                         (49)
                                        2             2
2) When d = 2, we have a ∼ S where S is a circle r = 1 and the probability is the angle between
s, e how much the vectors span within the circle where
                                                       Rϕ
                                     2      1        2 0 rdθ   2ϕ
                            P ⟨s, e⟩ ≥            =          =    .                         (50)
                                          R(d)          π      π

3) When d ≥ 3, the probability equals
                                                              !
                                                     1                 Acap
                                                                        d (r)      Ãcap (r)
                           P |⟨s, e⟩| ≥ p                         =     1     = 1 − d1             (51)
                                                     R(d)               2 Ad         2 Ad

where Ãcap
        d (r) is the remaining area of cutting the hyperspherical caps in half of the sphere,
                                                    Z π2
                              cap       2π (d−1)/2
                            Ãd (r) =                    sind−2 θdθ
                                         Γ d−1

                                              2      ϕ
                                                    Z π2
                                        2π (d−1)/2
                                     ≤                   sin θdθ
                                         Γ d−1

                                              2      ϕ
                                                                                                   (52)
                                                   2π (d−1)/2       π
                                                 ≤      d−1
                                                              (− cos + cos ϕ)
                                                    Γ 2             2
                                                     2π (d−1)/2
                                                 =             cos ϕ.
                                                      Γ d−12
                            d           d

3-a) If d is even then Γ    2       =   2 − 1 !, so
                              d−1
                                                        √      √
                            Γ   2               (d − 2)! π      π  d−2
                                             = d−2 d        = d−2   d−2   .                        (53)
                             Γ d2

                                              2      2 −1 !
                                                            2 2      2

Robbins’ bounds (Robbins, 1955) imply that for any positive integer d
                  4d                                     4d

                                 1            2d                        1
                 √ exp −               <            < √ exp −                  .                   (54)
                   πd         8d − 1          d           πd          8d + 1
So we have                                                                            −1
                       2Acap                             d

                                                                 2d−1

                         d (r)
                                  2Γ                     2                    d−2
                               ≤√                        d−1
                                                               =               d−2         cos ϕ
                         Ad       πΓ                       2
                                                                  π             2
                                                     p
                                              2d−1      π(d − 2)/2
                                            <                          cos ϕ
                                                                                                   (55)

                                               π 2d−2 exp − 1
                                                                4d−9
                                                  √
                                                    2d − 4
                                            <√                  cos ϕ.
                                                          1
                                                π exp − 4d−9


                                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


So the probability will be
                                                           √
                                        1                       2d − 4         1
                   P ⟨s, e⟩2 ≥                    >1−           √      exp            cos ϕ.           (56)
                                       R(d)                       π          4d − 9
Suppose R(d) = kd, k > 1, we have
                                                   √                      r
                                              2d − 4                           2
                                   lim √                 =                       .                     (57)
                                  d→∞                1
                                         πkd exp − 4d−9                       kπ


3-b) Similarly, if d is odd, then Γ d−1    = d−3

                                       2           2   !, so
                          d−1
                                     d−2 d−3 2
                                                                           −1
                                                             2d−2

                       Γ 2          2       2    !                   d−3
                                  =           √      =           √    d−3     .                        (58)
                         Γ d2

                                     (d − 2)! π          (d − 2) π     2

If d = 3 then                                            √
                                         1              2 π              1
                     P ⟨s, e⟩2 ≥                   ≥ 1 − √ cos ϕ = 1 − p     .                         (59)
                                        R(d)            2 π             R(d)
If d > 3 then Robbins’ bounds imply that
             √                             −1
               πΓ d−1
                                                p
                            2d−4

                     2               d−3          π(d − 3)/2          1
                       =              d−3     >              exp             .                         (60)
               2Γ d2        d−2        2           d−2             4d − 11
Thus, the probability will be at least

                                   1           d−2               1
                P ⟨s, e⟩2 ≥              >1− p          exp −           cos ϕ.                         (61)
                                R(d)           π(d − 3)       4d − 11
To simplify the result, we compare the minimum probability that for ∀d ≥ 3

                         2     1               d−2                 1
               P ⟨s, e⟩ ≥            >1− p             exp −              cos ϕ
                              R(d)            π(d − 3)         4d − 11

                                               d−2               1
                                     =1− p             exp              cos ϕ
                                              π(d − 3)       4d − 11
                                                                                                       (62)
                                                 d−2                  1
                                     =1− p                  exp              cos ϕ
                                              π(d − 3)R(d)         4d − 11
                                            √
                                              2d − 4         1
                                     >1−    p        exp
                                              πR(d)        4d − 9
Overall, we have ∀d ∈ N+ ,
                                                                                                
                                       
                                        2 arccos  √1                      √                     
                                                                                                 
                     1                                    R(d)              2d − 4         1    
      P ⟨s, e⟩2 ≥              > min                                  , 1− p        exp            .   (63)
                    R(d)               
                                                      π                     πR(d)        4d − 9 
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                


D.1    P ROOF TO T HEOREM 3.4
                          i.i.d.        √
Proof. Let Ad = (ai )i∈[d] ∼ Unif(Sd−1 ( d)). We consider the random ReLU NN function class
to be                      (                                                )
                                             m
                     d                   1 X          ⊤

            Frelu (A ) = f (w, A, x) = √        wi σ x ai : wi ∈ R, i ∈ [m]
                                          d i=1
where A = [a1 , ..., am ] ∈ Rd×m . The empirical minimizer of the source domain is
                               1 X                              1 X
                     ŵ = min           ℓ(f (w, A, xi ), yi ) =      ℓŵ,A (zi ).                      (64)
                          w∈Rd n                                n
                                   xi ,yi ∈S                                  zi ∈S


                                                           25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Then with the chain rule, the first derivative of any input x at ŵ will be
                                           ∂ℓ (f (ŵ, A, x), y) ∂ℓf (ŵ, A, x) ∂σ(Ax)
                 ∇x ℓ (f (ŵ, A, x), y) =
                                              ∂f (ŵ, A, x)        σ(Ax)         ∂x
                                                       m
                                           Df1 (x, y) X             ⊤
                                         =    √           ŵi ai I ai x ≥ 0                           (65)
                                                d     i=1
                                              Df1 (x, y) ⊤ ′
                                         =       √      ŵ σ (Ax)
                                                   d
where a short notation Df1 (x, y) denotes the first order directional derivative of f (ŵ, A, x) σ ′ (Ax) ∈
Rm×d is the Jacobian matrix w.r.t. input x. Apparently, the second order derivative is represented as
Df2 (x, y), thus the Hessian will be
                                                  m X m
                                      Df2 (x, y) X
                                                         ŵi ŵj ai a⊤
                                                                          ⊤          ⊤
           ∇2x ℓ(f (ŵ, A, x), y) =                                  j I ai x ≥ 0 , aj x ≥ 0
                                           d     i=1 j=1                                              (66)
                                   Df2 (x, y) ′
                                 =           σ (Ax)⊤ ŵŵ⊤ σ ′ (Ax)
                                        d
Similarly, we have
                                                                            ∗
                      ∇2y ℓ(f (ŵ, A, x), y) = Dy2 (x, y) · (sgn(y))2 ≤ Df2 (x, y)                    (67)

where sgn(y) is the sign function. ∗ holds under our choice of the family of loss functions.

      1. Homogeneity in regression, i.e. L1, MSE, MAE, Huber Loss, we have |Dy2 (x, y)| =
         |Df2 (x, y)|;
      2. (Binary) Cross-Entropy Loss:
                                                                  C
                                                                                !
                                                    X             X
                           Dy2 (x, y) = ∂ 2     y       exp(x)/         exp(xc ) /∂y 2 = 0;
                                                    i             c=1


      3. Negative Log Likelihood (NLL) loss: Dy2 (x, y) = 0.

Besides, as a convex loss function, Dy2 (x, y) ≥ 0. Hence, the range of Dy2 (x, y) will be [0, Df2 (x, y)].
To combine with robustness, we denote z = (x; y), ∈ Rd+1 . Therefore, the Hessian of z will be
                                                            ∂ 2 ℓ(f (ŵ,A,x),y))
                                                                                  
                                ∇2x ℓ(f (ŵ, A, x), y)               ∂y∂x
                H(z|S, A) :=    ∂ 2 ℓ(f (ŵ,A,x),y)  ⊤                            .        (68)
                                                          2
                                         ∂y∂x           ∇ y (ℓ(f   ( ŵ, A, x), y))

With Lemma D.4, the spectral norm of Hessian z will be bounded by
                     ∥H(z)∥ ≤ ∇2x ℓ(f (ŵ, A, x), y) + ∇2y ℓ(f (ŵ, A, x), y) .                       (69)
The first term in (69) can be further bounded by

            Df2 (x, y)σ ′ (Ax)⊤ ŵŵ⊤ σ ′ (Ax) ≤ |Df2 (x, y)| ŵŵ⊤             σ ′ (Ax)σ ′ (Ax)⊤
                                                                                                      (70)
                                                    = Df2 (x, y)∥ŵ∥2 σ ′ (Ax)σ ′ (Ax)⊤

where the convexity of loss functions ∀x, y, Df2 (x, y) ≥ 0 supports the last equation. The right term
has the facts that
                ∥σ ′ (Ax)σ ′ (Ax)⊤ ∥ ≤ ∥σ ′ (Ax)σ ′ (Ax)⊤ ∥F = tr σ ′ (Ax)σ ′ (Ax)⊤ .

                                                                                                   (71)


                                                        26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In summary, we have the following inequality:

                              2          1     2   ′        ′     ⊤
                ∥H(z)∥ ≤ Df (x, y)         ∥ŵ∥ σ (Ax)σ (Ax) + 1
                                         d

                              2          1     2      ′       ′     ⊤

                          ≤ Df (x, y)      ∥ŵ∥ tr σ (Ax)σ (Ax) + 1
                                         d                                                       (72)
                                                                           
                                                  m
                                         1       X        2
                          = Df2 (x, y)  ∥ŵ∥2       ∥aj ∥ I a⊤

                                                                j x≥0 +1
                                                                            
                                         d       j=1

In Lemma D.2, it depends on some zi = (xi , yi ) ∈ S ∩ Ci that
                  ρi (L)2

                                                4ρi (L)
  ϵ(S, A) ≤ max             ∥H(z i (A))∥    +
            i∈[K] 2L2                              3
                                                                                           
                                                      m
                  ρi (L)2  2               ∥  ŵ∥2 X
                                                              2    ⊤                 4ρ i (L)
          ≤ max             Df (xi , yi )               ∥aj ∥ I aj xt ≥ 0 + 1 +             
            i∈[K] 2L2                           d j=1                                   3       (73)
                                                                                           
                                                 m
            ρmax (L)2  Df2 (xk , yk )          X         2                4ρmax (L)
          ≤       2
                                        ∥ ŵ∥ 2
                                                     ∥aj ∥ I a⊤ j xk ≥ 0 +           + õκ 
               2L             d                 j=1
                                                                              3

                                                  ′′
                                                                      Pm        2   ⊤
where ρmax (L) = max{ρi (L)}K  i=0 , the õκ = O(ℓ (f, xk , yk )∥ŵ∥
                                                                    2
                                                                       j=1 ∥aj ∥ I aj xk ≥ 0 d/m)
is a smaller order term compared to first term, since m ≫ d. Last equality, the maximum can be
taken as we find maximum (xk , yk ) ∈ Ĉ ∈ {Ci }i∈[K] . Because xk , yk ∈ S is one of the training
sample k ∈ [n], there must exist n′ ∈ [0, n] that
                                  m
                                  X          2
            Df2 (xk , yk )∥ŵ∥2         ∥aj ∥ I a⊤
                                                 j xk ≥ 0
                                  j=1
                                                     n                m
                                                                                                 (74)
                                                 2n
                                                   ′ X Df2 (xk , yk ) X
                                        = ∥ŵ∥                            ∥aj ∥ I{a⊤
                                                                              2
                                                                                   j xk ≥ 0}.
                                                  n          d     j=1
                                                      k=1


Recall that the sharpness of parameter ŵ is defined by

                κ(ŵ, S, A) := ∥ŵ∥2 tr[HS,A (ŵ)]
                                        n
                                    1X 2
                            = ∥ŵ∥2       Df (xj , yj ) · tr σ(Axj )σ(Axj )⊤

                                    n j=1                                                        (75)
                                       n                  m
                                   21
                                      X   Df2 (xj , yj ) X
                                                             (a⊤     2
                                                                         ⊤
                             = ∥ŵ∥                            i xj ) I ai xj ≥ 0 .
                                    n j=1      d         i=1

Let the ξi = a⊤ i x ∼ D(ξ) and the expectation of E(ξi > 0) = qi where D(ξ) is some rotationally
invariant distribution, i.e. uniform or normal distribution. Under this circumstance, the sample mean
of ξi still obeys the same family distribution as D(tξ). Thus, we have
                                                                                    
               Xm                   Xm                            Xqi       Xqi
           P      ξi I {ξi ≥ 0} ≥      ∥aj ∥2 I {ξi ≥ 0} = P       ξi ≥      ∥aj ∥2 
               j=1                  j=1                           j=1       j=1
                                                                                                  (76)

                                                              = P((a⊤ x)2 ≥ ∥a∥2 ) = Ex p(x)
With Lemma D.5, we have at least a probability at
                                      (                          √             )
              ⊤   2        2            2
                                                     − 12
                                                                   2d − 4 4d−9
                                                                            1
         P((a x) ≥ ∥a∥ ) = min            arccos R(d)       , 1− p       e                       (77)
                                        π                          πR(d)

                                                        27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the following inequality holds,
                          ρmax (L)2

                                       ′             4ρmax (L)
                ϵ(S, A) ≤            n κ(ŵ, S, A) +            + õκ
                            2L2                          3
                                                                                                (78)
                          ρmax (L)2

                                         ′       d                  4
                        =             n +O            κ(ŵ, S, A) + ρmax (L)
                            2L2                 m                   3



D.2   P ROOF TO C OROLLARY 3.5

Corollary D.6 (Restatement√    of Corollary 3.5). Let ŵmin be the minimum value of |ŵ|. Sup-
pose ∀x ∼ Unif(Sd−1 ( d)) and |∂ 2 ℓ(f (ŵ, A, x), y)/∂f 2 | is bounded by [M̃1 , M̃√2 ]. If m > d,
                2
ρmax (L) < (ŵmin  M̃1 σ̃(d, m))/(2d) for any√A = (a1 , ..., am ), ai ∼ Unif(Sd−1 ( d))∀i ∈ [m],
taking expectation over all xj ∈ Unif(Sd−1 ( d)) in S, we have
                                           7ρmax (L)2   ′
                    ES,A [ϵ(S, A)] ≤ ES,A                n κ( ŵ, S, A) + M̃ 2   .             (79)
                                               6L2
                             Pm
where σ̃(d, m) = Ea λmin ( i=1 ai a⊤   i Gii ) > 0 is the minimum eigenvalue and Gii is product
constant of Gegenbauer polynomials
                                    ∞                                  √
                                                         (d)
                                    X
                            Gij =         λ2d,t (σ)Nd,t
                                                    2
                                                        Qt (⟨ai , aj ⟩/ d).
                                    t=0


Proof. In our main theorem, with some probability, we have the following relation
                              ρmax (L)2

                                           ′              4ρmax (L)
                    ϵ(S, A) ≤             n κ(ŵ, S, A) +            + dκ .
                                 2L2                           3
So, we are concerned about the relation between the κ(ŵ, S, A) second term. If ρi (L) < κ(ŵ, S, A),
we may say the RHS is dominated by sharpness term κ(ŵ, S, A) as well as the main effect is taken
by the sharpness. As suggested in Lemma D.1, we have
                                                         2
                                                       ŵmin M̃1 σ̃A (m, d)
                        Ex∗ ∼Unif(Sd−1 (√d)) H(x∗ ) ⪰                       Id                  (80)
                                                                 d
where x∗ is the global minimum over the whole set. As defined in (38), the following condition holds
true
                                                                   ρi (L)
                           ∃zi∗ (A) ∈ Mi , ∥zi (A) − zi∗ (A)∥ ≤           ,                     (81)
                                                                      L
and with Hessian Lipschitz, the relation is almost surely for arbitrary x that
                 Ezi∗ (A) ∥H(zi (A)) − H(zi∗ (A))∥ ≤ L∥zi (A) − zi∗ (A)∥ ≤ ρi (L)
                                                              2
                                                            ŵmin M̃1 σ̃(d, m)
                                                        ≤                      Id
                                                                    2d
                                                                                                (82)
                                                                 1
                                                        ≤ EA,x∗ ∥H(x∗ )∥
                                                                 2
                                                                  1
                                                        ≤ Ezi∗ (A) ∥H(zi∗ (A))∥.
                                                                  2
Obviously, ∥H(zi∗ (A))∥ > 2ρi (L). Following Lemma A.2 of Zhang et al. (2019a), for
zi∗ (A), ∀z(A) ∈ Ci , we have a similar result that
            σ̃min (H(z(A))) ≥ σ̃min (H(zi∗ (A)) − ∥H(z(A)) − H(zi∗ (A))∥ ≥ ρi (L)               (83)
where σ̃min denotes the minimum singular value. With Lemma D.2, we know that
                                           ρi (L)2

                                                                   4ρi (L)
                 ES,A ϵ(S, A) ≤ ES,A max             ∥H(zi (A))∥ +           .                  (84)
                                     i∈[K] 2L2                       3

                                                   28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We also have another condition that
                                       ∂ 2 ℓ(f (ŵ, A, x), y)
                      |Df2 (x, y)| :=                          ∈ [M̃1 , M̃2 ], ∀x, y.              (85)
                                                 ∂f 2
Combine all these results, we finally have
                                        ρi (L)2

                                                         4
         ES,A ϵ(S, A) ≤ ES,A max                    1+       ∥H(zi (A))∥
                                 i∈[K] 2L2               3
                                                                                                   (86)
                                                                                       
                              2      2                    m
                                   D
                   7ρmax (L)  f k k   (x   , y  )       X        2
                                                   ∥ŵ∥2     ∥aj ∥ I a⊤

          ≤ ES,A                                                         j xk ≥ 0 + M̃2
                                                                                        .
                       6L2                d              j=1

Recall the definition of κ(ŵ, S, A) in the main theorem that
                                               n                 m
                                             1 X Df2 (xj , yj ) X ⊤
           ES,A κ(ŵ, S, A) ≤ E{x}n ∥ŵ∥2                           (ai xj )2 I a⊤

                                                                                 i xj ≥ 0          (87)
                                            n j=1      d        i=1
Look at the second sum, we have
                 m
                 X                        m
                                          X
                   (a⊤
                               ⊤
                           2
                                            Exj Eai ∥ai ∥2 ∥xj ∥2 cos2 (β)I a⊤

 E{xj }n ,{ai }m     i xj ) I ai xj ≥ 0 =                                    i xj ≥ 0
                i=1                              i=1
                                                 m
                                                                                                   (88)
                                                 X
                                                       Exj Eai ∥ai ∥ ∥I a⊤
                                                                  2                    2

                                             =                           i xj ≥ 0 d cos (β).
                                                 i=1
Suppose x and a are i.i.d. from Unif(Sd−1 (1)), let u = ⟨x, a⟩, we have a well-known result that
                              Eu [u2 ] = E[⟨x, a⟩2 ]
                                        = E[∥x∥2 ∥a∥2 cos2 (β)]                                    (89)
                                                       1
                                        = E[cos2 (β)] = , x, a ∈ Rd
                                                       d
Therefore, in (88),
        Xm                                          m
                                                    X
                               ⊤
                          2                  2
                                                      Exj Eai ∥ai ∥2 ∥I a⊤

             Exj Eai ∥ai ∥ ∥I ai xj ≥ 0 d cos (β) =                      i xj ≥ 0                  (90)
         i=1                                                i=1
and we have (based on proof of main theorem),
     ES,A ϵ(S, A)
                                                                                       
                                n
                              ′ X    2             m
        7ρmax (L)2         n      D f (xj , yj ) X
     ≤                ∥ŵ∥2                           Exj Eai ∥ai ∥2 I{a⊤
                                                                        i xj ≥ 0} + M̃2
                                                                                        
            6L2             n j=1       d                                                          (91)
                                                  i=1

               7ρmax (L)2   ′
      ≤ ES,A               n  κ( ŵ, S, A) + M̃ 2
                  6L2


E    C ASE S TUDY
To better illustrate our theorems, we here give two different cases for clearly picturing intuition. The
first case is the very basic model, ridge regression. As is known to us, ridge regression provides
a straightforward way (by punishing the ℓ2 norm of the weights) to reduce the "variance" of the
model in order to avoid overfitting. In this case, this mechanism is equivalent to reducing the model’s
sharpness.
Example E.1. In ridge regression models, the robustness constant ϵ has a reverse relationship to
regularization parameter β where β ↑, the more probably flatter minimum κ ↓ and less sensitivity ϵ ↓
of the learned model could be. Follow the previous notation that ϵ(S, A) denotes the robustness and
κ(θ̂, S) is the sharpness on training set S, then we have
                            τ > 0, c ∈ (0, n], ϵ(S, A) ≤ cκ(θ̂, S) + õd
where õd is a much smaller order than κ(θ̂, S).


                                                   29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.1   R IDGE REGRESSION

We consider a generic response model as stated in Ali et al. (2019).
                                            y|θ∗ ∼ (Xθ∗ , σ 2 I)
ridge regression minimization problem is defined by
                                  1            β
                         min        ∥Xθ − y∥2 + ∥θ∥2 , X ∈ Rn×d , n < d.                         (92)
                             θ   2n            2

The least-square solution of ridge regression is
                                                               −1
                                     θ̂ = X ⊤ X + nβI               X ⊤ y.                       (93)

With minimizer θ̂, we now focus on its geometry w.r.t. x. Let S = {z}ni = (X, y) be the training
set, (Z, Σ, ρ) be a measure space. Consider the bounded sample set Z such that
                                         ∃M > 0, ρ(Z) < +∞.                                      (94)
The Z can be partitioned into K disjoint sets {Ci }i∈[K] . By definition, we have robustness defined
by each partition Ci ,
                           ∀z, z ′ ∈ Ci , ℓ(θ̂, z) − ℓ(θ̂, z ′ ) ≤ ϵ(S, A).                     (95)

For this convex function ℓ(θ̂, z), we have the following upper bound in the whole sample domain

                                 ϵ(S) = max sup           ℓ(θ̂, z) − ℓ(θ̂, z ′ )
                                        i∈[K] z,z ′ ∈Ci

                                    = max sup ℓ(θ̂, z) − ℓ(θ̂, zi∗ ∈ Ci )                        (96)
                                        i∈[K] z∈Ci

                                    ≤     sup ℓ(θ̂, zj ) − ℓ(θ̂, z ∗ )
                                        zj ∈Z∩S
                                                                                SK
where the zi∗ , z ∗ are the global minimum point in Ci and whole domain Z = i Ci , respectively.
zj is a training data point that has the maximum loss difference from the optimum. Specifically, it as
well as the augmented form of θ̂ can be expressed as
                      z = [x1 , ..., xd , y]⊤ , θ̂+ = [θ̂1 , ..., θ̂d , −1]⊤ , ∈ Rd+1 .
Then the loss difference can be rewritten as
                               ⊤ 2
                 ℓθ̂+ (z) = (θ̂+ z) = (θ̂ ⊤ x − y)2 ⇒ H(ℓθ̂+ (z))is P.S.D matrix.
It is a convex function with regards to z such that
             ϵ(S) ≤ sup ℓθ̂+ (zj ) − ℓθ̂+ (z ∗ )
                     zj ∈S
                                                    1
                   = sup ∇ℓθ̂+ (z ∗ )⊤ (zj − z ∗ ) + (zj − z ∗ )⊤ H(ℓθ̂ (z ∗ ))(zj − z ∗ )
                     zj ∈S                          2
                           1                                                                     (97)
                   = sup (zj − z ∗ )⊤ H(ℓθ̂+ (z ∗ ))(zj − z ∗ )
                     zj ∈S 2
                           1
                   ≤ sup ∥H(ℓθ̂+ (z ∗ ))∥∥zj − z ∗ ∥2
                     zj ∈S 2

where the second equality is supported by convexity and the third equality is due to ℓθ̂+ (zj ) = 0.
Further, with Lemma D.4, we have
                                                     ∂ 2 ℓθ̂ (zj ))
                                                                   
                                           θ̂ θ̂ ⊤          +
                                                         ∂y∂x
               ∥H(ℓθ̂+ (z ∗ ))∥ =   ∂ 2 ℓ (zj ))  ⊤                         ⊤
                                                                     ≤ θ̂ θ̂ + 1.              (98)
                                                                   
                                          θ̂+
                                         ∂x∂y               1


                                                      30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In (97), we can also bound the norm of the input difference by
                                   ∥zj − z ∗ ∥2 ≤ ∥xj − x∗ ∥2 + (yj − y ∗ )2                                  (99)
                                           ∗ 2             2
and then for simplicity, assume ∥x ∥ ≤ ∥xj ∥ we have
                                  1
                                        θ̂ θ̂ ⊤ + 1 ∥xj − x∗ ∥2 + (yj − y ∗ )2

                   ϵ(S) ≤ sup
                            xj ∈S 2

                                  1           2
                                        θ̂ + 1 ∥xj ∥2 + ∥x∗ ∥2 + (yj − y ∗ )2

                         ≤ sup
                            xj ∈S 2
                                          2
                                                                                                             (100)
                                  1
                                               ∥xj ∥2 + ∥x∗ ∥2 + O(d)

                         ≤ sup       θ̂
                            xj ∈S 2
                                                2
                             ≤ sup θ̂               ∥xj ∥2 + O(d)
                               xj ∈S

              2
where θ̂ ∥xj ∥2 = O(d2 ) is the dominate term for large d. Now, let’s look at the relation to
sharpness. By definition,
                                                                ⊤
                                 2

                                                          2    X X
                  κ(θ̂, S) = ∥θ̂∥ tr Hθ̂ (ℓ(θ̂, S)) = ∥θ̂∥ tr      + βI .               (101)
                                                                n
Since
                                                                                             n
            X ⊤X                       X ⊤X                              XX ⊤

                                                                                           1X
   tr            + βI       = tr                    + tr (βI) = tr                  +β =       ∥xj ∥2 + β,   (102)
              n                          n                                n                n j

so we have
                                                                n
                                                           1X
                                       κ(θ̂, S) = ∥θ̂∥2        ∥xj ∥2 + β∥θ̂∥2 .                             (103)
                                                           n j
As is known to us, the "variance" of ridge estimator Ali et al. (2019) can be defined by
                                                   −1 T ⊤                           −1
        Var(θ̂) ≜ tr θ̂ θ̂ ⊤ = tr X T X + nβI         X yy X X T X + nβI                 .                   (104)

Note that θ̂ θ̂ ⊤ is a PSD with rank(θ̂ θ̂ ⊤ ) = 1, thus it has only one eigenvalue λ(θ̂ θ̂ ⊤ ) = ∥θ̂∥2 > 0.

                                Var(θ) = tr θ̂ θ̂ ⊤ = ∥θ̂∥2 = O(β −2 )                                 (105)

By definition, the covariance matrix E[yy ⊤ ] is a diagonal matrix with entries of σ 2 . Averagely, we
have                                  h               −1 ⊤                      −1 i
                  tr θ̂ θ̂ ⊤ = σ 2 tr X ⊤ X + nβI        X X X ⊤ X + nβI
                                       "                     −2 #
                                σ2       X ⊤X X ⊤X

                              =     tr                 + βI
                                n          n       n                                             (106)
                                            d
                                σ2 X          λi (X ⊤ X/n)
                                   =
                                 n i=1 (λi (X ⊤ X/n) + β)2
         ⊤
                     T           −1
where X n X and X nX + βI              are simultaneously diagonalizable and commutable. Therefore,

the greater β is, the smaller tr θ̂ θ̂ ⊤ is.

Conclusions From our above analysis, we have the following conditions.

        • Upper bound of robustness ϵ(S) ≤ supxj ∈S ∥θ̂∥2 ∥xj ∥2 + O(d).
                                                 P
        • Sharpness expression κ(θ̂, S) = ∥θ̂∥2 n1 xj ,yj ∈S ∥xj ∥2 + β .


                                                               31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        • Variance expression Var(θ) = ∥θ̂∥2 .

1) First, let’s discuss how β influences sharpness.

                   κ(θ̂, S) = ∥θ̂∥2 tr Hθ̂ (ℓ(θ̂, S))
                                                                                           
                                                     −2          1     X
                                                                                                         (107)
                          = y ⊤ X X ⊤ X + nβI             X ⊤y                  ∥xj ∥2 + β 
                                                                 n
                                                                     xj ,yj ∈S
                                  −1
                          = O(β        ).

As dictated in above equation, the κ(θ̂, S) = O(β −1 ) where sharpness holds an inverse relationship
to β.
2) Now, it’s trivial to get the relationship between robustness and sharpness by combining the first
two points. Because xj , yj ∈ S in supermum is one of the training samples there exists a constant
c < n and õd = o(d2 ) such that
                                            n
                                        c X
                             ϵ(S) ≤          ∥θ̂∥2 ∥xj ∥2 + õd
                                        n j
                                            n
                                        c X                                                              (108)
                                   ≤         ∥θ̂∥2 ∥xj ∥2 + cβ∥θ̂∥2 + õd
                                        n j

                                   = cκ(θ̂, S) + õd .
This relation is consistent with Theorem 3.4 where the robustness is upper bounded by n′ times
sharpness κ(θ̂, S). Besides, the relation is simpler here, where robustness only depends on sharpness
without other coefficients before κ(θ̂, S).
3) Finally, the relation between β and robustness will be
                 n                                   d                             Pn        2
             cX                         cσ 2 X      λi (X ⊤ X/n)                      j ∥xj ∥
                   Var(θ)∥xj ∥2 + õd =

      ϵ(S) ≤                                                                                     + õd
             n j                         n i=1 (λi (X ⊤ X/n) + β)2                      n
                 d                     Pd
             σ2 X       λi (X ⊤ X/n)
                                                 ⊤                                                       (109)
                                         j λj (X X/n)
           =                                            + õd
             n i=1 (λi (X ⊤ X/n) + β)2         n
          = O(β −2 ).
where the ϵ(S) somehow is the order of O(β −2 ) in the limit of β. It’s clear to us that the greater β is,
the less sensitive (more robust) model we can get. In practical, we show that "over-robust" may hurt
the model’s performance (we show the detail empirically in Figure 7).

E.2    2- LAYER D IAGONAL L INEAR N ETWORK C LASSIFICATION

However, our main theorem assumes the loss function satisfying Polyak-Łojasiewicz (PŁ) condition.
To extend our result to a more general case, here we study a 2-layer diagonal linear network
classification problem whose loss is exponential-based and not satisfied the PŁ condition.
Example E.2. We consider a classification problem using a 2-layer diagonal linear network with
exp-loss. The robustness ϵ(S, A) has a similar relationship in Theorem 3.4. Given training set S,
after iterations t > Tϵ , ∃C2 > 0, ϵ(S, A) ≤ C2 supt≥Tϵ κ(θ(t), S).

Given a training set S = (X, y), X = [x1 , ..., xn ], X ∈ Rd×n . A depth-2 diagonal linear networks
with parameters u = [u+ , u− ]⊤ ∈ R2d specified by:
                                      f (u, x) = ⟨u2+ − u2− , x⟩
                                                Pn
We consider exponential loss where L(t) = n1 i=1 exp(−x⊤        i θ(t)yi ) and yi ∈ {−1, 1}. It has the
same tail behavior and thus similar asymptotic properties as the logistic or cross-entropy loss. WLOG,


                                                    32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


we assume ∀i ∈ [n] : yi = 1 such that xi = yi xi . Suggest by Moroshko et al. (2020), we have
                                                       Z t
                               θ(t) = 2α2 sinh 4X          r(s)ds
                                                               0

where r(t) = n1 exp(−X ⊤ θ(t)) and ∥r(t)∥1 = L(t). Note that
                  dθ(t)   4p 2
                              θ (t) + 4α4 1 ◦ X exp −X ⊤ θ(t) = A(t)Xr(t)

                        =                                                                       (110)
                   dt     n
                     p
where A(t) = diag 4 θ 2 (t) + 4α4 1 .

Part i, sharpness. First derivative and Hessian can be obtained by
                            ∇θ L(t) = −(Xr(t))⊤
                                                        n
                                           ∂(Xr(t))⊤   X                                        (111)
                          Hθ (L(t)) = −              =     ri (t)Xi Xi⊤ .
                                             ∂θ(t)     i=1
With the definition of sharpness, we can get
                            κ(θ(t), S) = ∥θ(t)∥2 tr(Hθ [L(t)])
                                                           n
                                                                                      !
                                                           X
                                        = ∥θ(t)∥2 tr               ri (t)Xi Xi⊤
                                                           i=1
                                                            n
                                                                                      !
                                                           X                                    (112)
                                                  2
                                        = ∥θ(t)∥ tr                ri (t)Xi⊤ Xi
                                                           i=1
                                                         n
                                                                              !
                                                         X
                                        = ∥θ(t)∥2              ri (t)∥xi ∥2       .
                                                         i=1
Part ii, robustness. Now, let’s use the same discussion of the robustness constant in the previous
case. Follow the previous definition of ϵ(S, A), after some iteration number Tϵ it is defined by
                               ϵ(S, A) :=      sup       |nrj (t) − r∗ (t)|                     (113)
                                            i∈[n],t≥Tϵ

where nrj (t) is the (denormalized) point-wise loss of xj and r∗ (t) denotes the minimum loss of
point x∗ . There exists n′ < n, we have
                      ϵ(S, A) = sup n′ (∥r(t)∥1 − r∗ (t)) ≤ sup n′ ∥r(t)∥1 .                    (114)
                                 t≥Tϵ                                  t≥Tϵ

Let ∥xmin ∥ = mini∈[n] ∥xi ∥, the above equation
                                          1
                          ϵ(S, A) ≤             sup (n′ ∥r(t)∥∥xmin ∥2 )
                                       ∥xmin ∥2 t≥Tϵ
                                                          n
                                                                                      !
                                          n′              X
                                   =            sup                ri (t)∥xmin ∥2               (115)
                                       ∥xmin ∥2 t≥Tϵ      i=1
                                                           n
                                                                                  !
                                          n′              X
                                                                              2
                                   ≤            sup                ri (t)∥xi ∥        .
                                       ∥xmin ∥2 t≥Tϵ      i=1
Part iii, connection. Compare the last part of (112) and (115), we found that robustness and sharpness
depend on the same term. Further, we can say that for any step t, ∥θ(t)∥2 will have the upper bound.
From Lemma 11 of Moroshko et al. (2020), we have the following inequality,

                                                      x̄
                          ∥θ(t)∥∞ ≤ 2α2 sinh               γ̃(t)                                (116)
                                                   2γ22 α2
where L(t) = exp(−γ̃(t)). Then, we can bound the ∥θ(t)∥2 via:

                            2           2        4     2      x̄
                C1 ≤ ∥θ(t)∥ ≤ d∥θ(t)∥∞ = 4dα sinh                  γ̃(t) < ∞                    (117)
                                                           2γ22 α2

                                                  33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Note that C1 > 0 In summary, we have
                                       n′
                       ϵ(S, A) ≤              sup κ(θ(t), S) ≤ C2 sup κ(θ(t), S)                    (118)
                                   C1 ∥xmin ∥ t≥Tϵ                t≥Tϵ
                   ′
               n
where C2 = C1 ∥x min ∥
                       > 0 is a constant.
Part iv, sanity check– asymptotic. Asymptotically, as t → ∞, L(t) → 0 while ∥θ(t)∥2 will be
explode. So if sharpness κ(θ(t), X) → ∞, then it will fail to imply robustness.
                                                   n
                                                                    !
                                                  X
                           κ(θ(t), S) = ∥θ(t)∥2        ri (t)∥xi ∥2
                                                          i=1
                                                          n
                                                                                !
                                                          X
                                                   2                        2                       (119)
                                          ≤ ∥θ(t)∥              ri (t)∥xmax ∥
                                                          i=1
                                          = ∥θ(t)∥2 L(θ(t))∥xmax ∥2
                                          = κmax (θ(t), S)
Let κmax (θ(t), X) be a upper bound of κ(θ(t), X) at any time step t. The dynamics will be
dκmax (θ(t), S)
                =∇θ κmax (θ(t), S)θ̇(t)
      dt
                   =∥xmax ∥2 tr(XX ⊤ ) ∥θ(t)∥2 L̇(t) + 2L(t)θ(t)⊤ θ̇(t)
                   =∥xmax ∥2 tr(XX ⊤ ) −∥θ(t)∥2 (Xr(t))⊤ A(t)Xr(t) + 2L(t)θ(t)⊤ A(t)Xr(t)


                   =∥xmax ∥2 tr(XX ⊤ ) 2L(t)θ(t)⊤ − ∥θ(t)∥2 (Xr(t))⊤ A(t)Xr(t)

                                                                                     (120)
As t → ∞, we have L(t) → 0, thus it is easy to converge that
      dκmax (θ(t), S)
    lim                = −∥xmax ∥2 ∥θ(t)∥2 (Xr(t))⊤ A(t)Xr(t) = −∥xmax ∥2 ∥θ(t)∥2 L̇(t) = 0
 t→∞         dt
                                                                                            (121)
As we can see, the dynamics of the derivative of κmax (θ(t), X) is decreasing to 0 as t → ∞ which
means the sharpness κ(θ(t), X) will be upper bounded by a converged number κ(θ(t → ∞), X) <
C∞ < ∞. So sharpness will not explode.

F     C OMPARISON TO FEATURE ROBUSTNESS
F.1       T HEIR RESULTS

Definition F.1 (Feature robustness Petzka et al. Petzka et al. (2021)). Let ℓ : Y × Y → R+ denote
a loss function, ϵ and δ two positive (small) real numbers, S ⊆ X × Y a finite sample set, and
A ∈ Rm×m a matrix. A model f (x) = (ψ ◦ ϕ)(x) with ϕ(X ) ⊆ Rm is called ((δ, S, A), ϵ)-feature
robust, if EFϕ (f, S, αA) ≤ ϵ for all 0 ≤ α ≤ δ. More generally, for a probability distribution A on
perturbation matrices in Rm , we define
                                                    h             i
                               EFϕ (f, S, A) = EA∼A EFϕ (f, S, A) ,

and call the model ((δ, S, A), ϵ)-feature robust on average over A, if EFϕ (f, S, αA) ≤ ϵ for 0 ≤
α≤δ
Theorem F.2 (Theorem 5 Petzka et al. Petzka et al. (2021)). Consider a model f (x, w) = g(wϕ(x))
as above, a loss function ℓ and a sample set S, and let Om ⊂ Rm×m denote the set of orthogonal
matrices. Let δ be a positive (small) real number and w = ω ∈ Rd×m denote parameters at a
local minimum of the empirical risk on a sample set S. If the labels satisfy that y (ϕδA (xi )) =
y (ϕ (xi )) = yi for all (xi , yi ) ∈ S and all ∥A∥ ≤ 1, then f (x, ω) is ((δ, S, Om ) , ϵ)-feature robust
                                   δ2 ϕ

on average over Om for ϵ = 2m        κ (ω) + O δ 3 .


                                                     34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof sketch

      1. With assumption that y[ϕδA (xi )] = yi for all (xi , yi ) ∈ S and all ∥A∥ ≤ 1, feature
         perturbation around w is
                             EFϕ (f, S, αA) + Eemp (w, S) = Eemp (w + αwA, S)

      2. Since Taylor expansion for local minimum w = ω will only remains second order term,
         thus
                                                                 d
                                                           α2 X
                 Eemp (w + αwA, S) = Eemp (ω, S) +                (ωs A)Hs,t (ω, ϕ(S))(ωt A)⊤
                                                           2 s,t=1

      3. With basic algebra, one can easily get
                     h             i δ2 X d        h                    i
                       ϕ                                              T
                                              EA∼Om (ωs A) Hs,t (ωt A) + O δ 3

                EA∼Om EF (f, S, αA) ≤
                                      2 s,t=1
                                                     d
                                               δ2 X
                                                        ⟨ωs , ωt ⟩ · Tr (Hs,t ) + O δ 3

                                           =
                                               2m s,t=1
                                               δ2 ϕ
                                                  κ (ω) + O δ 3

                                           =
                                               2m

F.2   C OMPARISON TO OUR RESULTS

We first summarize the commonalities and differences between their results and ours:

       • Both of us consider the robustness of the model. But they define the feature robustness while
         we study the loss robustness Xu & Mannor (2012) which has been studied for many years.
       • They consider a non-standard generalization gap by decomposing it into representativeness
         and the expected deviation of the loss around the sample points. But we strive to integrate
         sharpness into the general generalization guarantees.

For point 1, their defined feature robustness trivially depends on the sharpness. Because the sharpness
(the curvature information) is just defined by the robust perturbation areas around the desired point.
From step 2 in the above proof sketch we can see, the hessian w.r.t. ω is exactly the second expansion
of perturbed expected risk. So we think this definition provides less information about the optimization
landscape. In contrast, we consider the loss robustness for two reasons: 1) it is easy to get in practice
without finding the orthogonal matrices Om first. 2) we highlight its dependence on the data manifold.
For point 2, we try to integrate this optimization property (sharpness) into the standard generalization
frameworks in order to get a clearer interplay. Unlike feature robustness, the robustness defined by
loss function will be easier analyzed in generalization tools, because it’s hard and vague to define the
"feature" in general. Besides, our result will also benefit the data-dependent bounds Xu & Mannor
(2012); Kawaguchi et al. (2022).

G     E XPERIMENTS AND DETAILS
G.1    R IDGE REGRESSION WITH DISTRIBUTIONAL SHIFTING

As we stated before, we followed the Duchi & Namkoong (2021) to investigate the ridge regression
on distributional shift. We randomly generate θ0∗ ∈ Rd in spherical space, and data from
                                         iid
                                      X ∼ N (0, 1), y = Xθ0∗                                       (122)
To simulate distributional shift, we randomly generate a perpendicular unit vector θ0⊥ to θ0∗ . Let
θ0⊥ , θ0∗ be the basis vectors, then shifted ground-truth will be computed from the basis by θα∗ =
θ0∗ · cos(α) + θ0⊥ · sin(α). For the source domain, we use θ0∗ as our training distribution. We randomly


                                                    35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


sample 50 data points and train a linear classifier with a gradient descent of 3000 iterations. Starting
from α = 0, we gradually increase the α to generate different distributional shifts.
From the left panel in Figure 7 we can see that a larger penalty suffers from lower loss increasing
when β ranges from 0 to 2. Since we consider a cycling shift of label space, 180◦ corresponds to the
maximum shift thus leading to the highest loss increase. According to our analysis of ridge regression,
larger β means a flatter minimum and more robustness, resulting in a better OOD generalization.
This experiment verifies our theoretical analysis. However, it is important to note that too large a
coefficient of ℓ2 regularization will hurt the performance. As shown in Figure 7 (right panel), the
curse of underfitting (indicated by brown colors) appears when β > 4.

                      Maximum Shift                                        Maximum Shift


                                                   Poor
                                                  fitting


Figure 7: OOD test losses are increasing along distributional shifting. The X-axis is the shifting
angle α and the Y-axis is the test loss of the model which is trained on distribution α = 0. Left: The
larger regularization β causes a lower increase in test loss (Darker purple lines have lower test losses).
Right: Too large ℓ2 penalty coefficient β brings poor fitting and thus fails to generalize on both ID
and OOD datasets (orange lines). Best viewed in colors.


G.2    A DDITIONAL RESULTS ON SHARPNESS

Here we show more experimental results on RotatedMNIST which is a rotation of MNIST handwritten
digit dataset with different angles ranging from 0◦ , 15◦ , 30◦ , 45◦ , 60◦ , 75◦ (6 domains/distributions).
For each environment, we select a domain as a test domain and train the model on all other domains.
Then OOD generalization test accuracy will be reported on the test domain. In our experiments, we
run each algorithm with 12 different seeds, thus getting 12 trained models of different minima. Then
we compute the sharpness (see Algorithm 1) for all these models and then plot them in Figure 8. For
algorithms, we choose Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM), and Stochastic Weight Averaging (SWA)
as the plain OOD generalization algorithm which is shown in the first column. In robust optimization
algorithms, we choose Group Distributional Robust Optimization Sagawa et al. (2019). We also
choose CORALSun & Saenko (2016) as a multi-source domain generalization algorithm. Among
these different types of out-of-domain generalization algorithms, we can conclude that sharpness will
affect the test accuracy on the OOD dataset.
Experimental configurations are listed in Table 1. For each model, we run the 5000 iterations and
choose the last model as the test model. To ease the computational burden, we choose the 3-layer
MLP to compute the sharpness.

       Algorithms       Optimizer       lr     WD           batch size   MLP size     eta   MMD γ
       ERM(SWA)          Adam         0.001     0               64        265*3        -      -
         DRO             Adam         0.001     0               64        265*3      0.01     -
        CORAL            Adam         0.001     0               64        265*3        -      1

         Table 1: Hyperparameters we use for different DG algorithms in the experiments.

From Figure 8 we can see, the sharpness has an inverse relationship with the out-of-domain general-
ization performance for every model in each individual environment. To make it clear, we plot similar


                                                    36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


tasks from environment 1 to 4 as the last row. Thus, we can see a clearer tendency in all algorithms.
It verified our Theorem 3.1. Note that all algorithms have different feature scales. One may need to
normalize the results of different algorithms when plotting them together.

Algorithm 1 Pseudocode of model sharpness computation
Require: feature layer f (x), training loss ℓ
Ensure: Sharpness S
  Get Jacobian matrix w.r.t. feature layer J = ∇ℓ(f (x), y)
  for each gradient vector Ji in J⊤ do
     Compute Hessian w.r.t. element i, j of f (x) by ∂f∂J   i
                                                         l (x)
  end for
  We store Hessian in the variable H
  Initialize sharpness S = 0
  for i in feature layer.shape[0] do
     for j in feature layer.shape[0] do
        Retrieve the hessian value of i, j element via h ← H[:, j, i, :]
        Sharpness sij ← T race(h) ∗ fij (x)2
        S = S + sij
     end for
  end for


G.3     C OMPARE OUR ROBUST BOUND TO OTHER OOD GENERALIZATION BOUNDS

G.3.1    C OMPUTATION OF OUR BOUNDS
First, we follow Kawaguchi et al. (2022) to compute the K in an inverse image of the ϵ− covering
in a randomly projected space. The main idea is to partition input space in a projected space with
transformation matrix Ã. The specific steps will be (1) To generate a random matrix Ã, we i.i.d.
sample each entry from the Uniform Distribution U(0, 1). (2) Each row of the random matrix
                                                                    Pd
A ∈ R3×d is then normalized so that Ax ∈ [0, 1]3 , i.e. Aij = Ãij / j=1 Ãij (3) After generating a
random matrix A, we use the ϵ-covering of the space of u = Ax to define the pre-partition {C̃i }Ki=1 .


G.3.2    C OMPUTATION OF PAC-BAYES BOUND
We follow the definition to compute expected disρ in Germain et al. (2013) where
Definition G.1. Let H be a hypothesis class. For any marginal distributions DS and DT over X, any
distribution ρ on H, the domain disagreement disρ (DS , DT ) between DS and DT is defined by,

                                      def
                     disρ (DS , DT ) =         E       [RDT (h, h′ ) − RDS (h, h′ )] .
                                            h,h′ ∼ρ2


Since the disρ (DS , DT ) is defined as the expected distance, we can compute its empirical version
according to their theoretical upper bound as follows.
Proposition G.2 (Germain et al. Germain et al. (2013) Theorem 3). For any distributions DS and
DT over X, any set of hypothesis H, any prior distribution π over H, any δ ∈ (0, 1], and any real
                                                                                      m
number α > 0, with a probability at least 1 − δ over the choice of S × T ∼ (DS × DT ) , for every
ρ on H, we have
                                                          2KL(ρ∥π) ln δ2
                                          h                                  i
                                      2α disρ (S, T ) +      m×α         + 1   −1
                  disρ (DS , DT ) ≤
                                                       1 − e−2α

. With disρ (S, T ), we can then compute the final generalization bound by the following inequality

                      ∀ρ on H, RPT (Gρ ) − RPT Gρ∗T ≤ RPS (Gρ )

                         + disρ (DS , DT ) + RDT Gρ , Gρ∗T + RDS Gρ , Gρ∗T

                                                       37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                            ERM           DRO                         CORAL
    Out-of-Domain Generalization Accuracy


                                                  Sharpness

Figure 8: Domain generalization test accuracy on RotatedMNIST. From top to the bottom: environ-
ment 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 with angles: [0◦ , 15◦ , 30◦ , 45◦ , 60◦ , 75◦ ] and a plot together. Each column shows
the 12 runs of each algorithm.


                                                     38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


with ρ∗T = argminρ RPT (Gρ ) is the best target posterior, and RD Gρ , Gρ∗T

                                                                                                 =
Eh∼ρ Eh′ ∼ρ∗T RD (h, h′ ).

Note that we ignore the expected errors over the best hypothesis by assuming the RD Gρ , Gρ∗T = 0.
We apply the same operation in E ∗ of Proposition C.6 as well.

G.3.3   C OMPARISONS
In this section, we add some additional experiments on comparing to other baselines, i.e. PAC-Bayes
bounds Germain et al. (2013). As shown in the first row of Figure 9, our robust framework has a
smaller distribution distance in the bound compared to the two baselines when increasing the model
size. In the second row, we have similar results in final generalization bounds. From the third and
fourth rows we can see, our bound is tighter than baselines when suffering distributional shifts.


                                                39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                (a)                               (b)                              (c)


                (d)                               (e)                              (f)


                (g)                               (h)                               (i)


                (j)                               (k)                               (l)

Figure 9: Additional spurious feature synthetic experiment. Each dot represents a trained model. The
dash curves are the smoothed function fit by the test data points. The baseline is Proposition 2.1.
(a),(d),(g),(j): the generalization error of the logistic regression models with increasing the model
size/correlation probability. (b), (e): distribution distances for PAC-Bayes Germain et al. (2013) along
model size increases. (h), (k): distribution distances for PAC-Bayes Germain et al. (2013) along
model distribution shift. (c), (f), (i), (l): comparisons among baselines Proposition C.6, Germain
et al. (2013) and ours. Note that model size > 500 is the overparameterized regime. The further the
correlation probability is from 0.5, the greater the distributional shift is.


                                                  40
