E FFICIENT H YPERPARAMETER O PTIMIZATION WITH A DAPTIVE
F IDELITY I DENTIFICATION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                     A BSTRACT

         Hyperparameter optimization is powerful in automatically tuning hyperparameters, with Bayesian
         Optimization (BO) being a mainstream method for this task. Extending BO into the multi-fidelity
         setting has been an emerging research topic in this field, but faces the challenge of determining
         an appropriate fidelity for each hyperparameter configuration to fit the surrogate model. To tackle
         the challenge, we propose a multi-fidelity BO method named FastBO, which excels in adaptively
         deciding the fidelity for each configuration and providing strong performance while ensuring ef-
         ficient resource usage. These advantages are achieved through our proposed techniques based on
         the concepts of efficient point and saturation point for each configuration, which can be obtained
         from the empirical learning curve of the configuration, estimated from early observations. Extensive
         experiments demonstrate FastBO’s superior anytime performance and efficiency in identifying high-
         quality configurations. We also show that our method provides a way to extend any single-fidelity
         method to the multi-fidelity setting, highlighting the wide applicability of our approach.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Hyperparameters are crucial in machine learning (ML) pipelines, driving both the efficiency and quality of ML ap-
plications. Hyperparameter optimization (HPO) (Feurer & Hutter, 2019) aims to find the hyperparameters for an ML
algorithm that can yield good performance without human experts, which is a key topic of automated machine learning
(AutoML) (Zöller & Huber, 2021). Among different HPO methods, Bayesian Optimization (BO) (Snoek et al., 2012;
Hutter et al., 2011; Bergstra et al., 2011) is an effective model-based method that has shown remarkable success (Dong
& Yang, 2020; Siems et al., 2020). BO maintains a surrogate model of the target performance metric based on past
evaluations of hyperparameter configurations, which guides the choice of more promising configurations to evaluate.
Despite its sample efficiency, standard BO requires a full evaluation of each configuration, involving full-scale training
and testing of ML models, which can be highly time-consuming, particularly with the recent trend to larger models. To
avoid expensive full evaluations, multi-fidelity methods (Jamieson & Talwalkar, 2016; Li et al., 2017; 2020; Bohdal
et al., 2023) have been proposed, where the fidelities refer to the levels of performance metrics obtained under different
resource levels. These methods follow the principle of successive halving (SHA) (Jamieson & Talwalkar, 2016):
initially, they evaluate a set of randomly selected configurations using a small number of resources; then, based on the
low-fidelity performances, the poorly-performing ones are successively eliminated, while the well-performing ones
continue to be evaluated with progressively increasing resources. Follow-up studies (Falkner et al., 2018; Wang et al.,
2018; Klein et al., 2020; Li et al., 2022; Salinas et al., 2023) propose model-based multi-fidelity methods, replacing
the random configuration selection with a more informed model to improve sample efficiency.
Nevertheless, the current model-based multi-fidelity methods face a major limitation: they are built upon the SHA
framework, which operates under the assumption that learning curves of different configurations rarely intersect. This
assumption does not hold in practice (Viering & Loog, 2022), i.e., early performance observations cannot always
indicate the final fidelity performance at the full resource level. This leads to a fundamental challenge when extending
model-based methods to the multi-fidelity setting: What is the appropriate fidelity for each configuration to fit the
surrogate model? In other words, which fidelity can provide performance observations that reliably indicate the final
fidelity performance? Existing methods struggle to address this fundamental challenge. In particular, BOHB (Falkner
et al., 2018) and Hyper-Tune (Li et al., 2022) fit separate surrogate models for different fidelities, failing to capture
inter-fidelity correlations. Freeze-Thaw BO (Swersky et al., 2014) and A-BOHB (Klein et al., 2020) fit a joint model
but require strong assumptions to remain tractable. Another work by Salinas et al. (2023) suggests using the last


                                                            1
observed fidelity performance to fit the surrogate model. However, it widens the gap between poorly- and well-
performing configurations at the early stage, potentially leading to an inaccurate surrogate model.
To this end, we propose a multi-fidelity extension of BO, namely FastBO, which tackles the challenge of determining
the appropriate fidelity for each configuration to fit the surrogate model. FastBO identifies a so-called efficient point for
each configuration to be the fidelity. The point balances computational cost and performance quality while capturing
valuable learning curve trends. In essence, FastBO dynamically selects the fidelity for each configuration instead
of evaluating all the configurations at the same fidelity. Additionally, FastBO identifies a saturation point for each
configuration to be an approximation of the final fidelity, leading to high-quality performance while reducing resource
wastage. The two crucial points are adaptively derived from the learning curve of each configuration estimated based
on early observations. Furthermore, the warm-up and post-processing stages are carefully designed to enable judicious
early-termination detection and efficient saturation level evaluation. Our empirical evaluation against the state-of-the-
art methods shows that FastBO has strong anytime performance and can considerably save up to 87% of the time
required to identify a good configuration. In summary, we make the following major contributions.
1. We propose a multi-fidelity model-based HPO method that can adaptively decide the fidelities for configurations
   and efficiently offer strong performance, thanks to the introduced concepts of efficient and saturation points.
2. We develop the learning curve modeling technique to enable adaptive derivation of the two key points, a warm-up
   stage to allow early-termination detection, and a post-processing stage to ensure efficient saturation level evaluation.
3. We show that our strategy can be used to extend existing single-fidelity methods to the multi-fidelity setting, demon-
   strating the effectiveness and generality of our method and highlighting promising future opportunities.


2    R ELATED W ORK

The rising costs of evaluating machine learning models have made it intractable to use simple methods like random
search (Bergstra & Bengio, 2012) to find suitable hyperparameter configurations within a reasonable amount of time.
Two crucial directions to efficiently solve the HPO problem are model-based methods and multi-fidelity methods, both
of which are highly relevant to our work. Ideas from these two directions can also be combined.
Model-based methods. Bayesian Optimization (BO) stands as the representative of model-based methods. Based on
the surrogate model constructed by historical evaluation results, BO selects the next configuration to evaluate via an
acquisition function that balances exploration and exploitation. Commonly used surrogate models are Gaussian pro-
cesses (Snoek et al., 2012), random forests (Hutter et al., 2011), the tree-structured Parzen estimator (TPE) (Bergstra
et al., 2011), and deep neural networks (Snoek et al., 2015; Springenberg et al., 2016). Popular choices of the ac-
quisition function include Expected Improvement (Mockus, 1998), Upper Confidence Bound (Srinivas et al., 2009),
Entropy Search (Hennig & Schuler, 2012), and Predictive Entropy Search (Hernández-Lobato et al., 2014). Recent
studies on BO have explored the utilization of expert priors (Shahriari et al., 2016; Oh et al., 2018; Li et al., 2018;
Hvarfner et al., 2022) and derivative information (Wu et al., 2017; Padidar et al., 2021; Ament & Gomes, 2022).
Multi-fidelity methods. Multi-fidelity methods exploit low and high fidelities for configuration evaluations in order
to save the evaluation time. Different fidelities correspond to different resource levels, typically training epochs or
training subset ratios. Successive halving algorithm (SHA) (Jamieson & Talwalkar, 2016) runs a set of hyperparame-
ter configurations using a small number of resources and then successively promotes only the best-performing half of
configurations to continue for twice as many resources. Hyperband (Li et al., 2017) calls SHA as a sub-routine with
varying maximum resources for a single configuration and introduces a reduction factor to control the fraction of con-
figuration promotion. ASHA (Li et al., 2020) extends SHA to the asynchronous setting by aggressive early-stopping.
Later, PAHSA (Bohdal et al., 2023) further extends ASHA through more aggressive early-stopping according to the
ranking of configurations during the tuning procedure.
Combination of model-based and multi-fidelity methods. Several studies propose to combine the model-based and
multi-fidelity methods to leverage the advantages of both. BOHB (Falkner et al., 2018) and a parallel work (Wang
et al., 2018) first combine BO and Hyperband by replacing the random sampling in Hyperband with TPE-based BO. A-
BOHB (Klein et al., 2020) employs a joint GP surrogate model over fidelities and supports asynchronous scheduling.
Hyper-Tune (Li et al., 2022) improves its Hyperband component by D-ASHA, which is a delayed strategy to decrease
inaccurate promotions. Salinas et al. (2023) proposed to extend single-fidelity methods to multi-fidelity settings by
using the performance of the last fidelity in a standard ASHA running.


                                                             2
3     P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
Given a machine learning algorithm having hyperparameters λ1 , ..., λm with respective domains Λ1 , ..., Λm , we define
its hyperparameter space as Λ = Λ1 × ... × Λm . Here, we formally define the problem and outline the key challenge
related to hyperparameter optimization (HPO). All the notations used are summarized in Appendix A.1 for reference.
Single-fidelity setting. For each hyperparameter configuration λ, we denote f (λ) as the performance metric achieved
using λ. For consistency, the metric in this paper refers to descending metrics like validation loss, with ascending
metrics being treated similarly. In the single-fidelity HPO setting, we aim to find λ∗ minimizing the function f (λ):
                                                    λ∗ = arg min f (λ).                                                    (1)
                                                             λ∈Λ

Bayesian Optimization (BO) is arguably one of the most popular approaches to solve the HPO problem. The vanilla
BO has two key components: a probabilistic surrogate model to approximate the objective function f (λ), and an
acquisition function to identify a promising configuration from search space that can trade-off exploration and ex-
ploitation. With these ingredients, BO iterates the following three steps: (i) select the most promising configuration
λi by maximizing the acquisition function; (ii) evaluate the configuration λi to get its performance yi and add the
resulting data (λi , yi ) into the current observation set Di−1 = {(λ1 , y1 ), ..., (λi−1 , yi−1 )}; (iii) update the surrogate
model and the acquisition function based on the augmented Di .
Multi-fidelity setting. Multi-fidelity HPO methods consider additional resource information, such as training epochs
or training subset ratios. Evaluating configurations at various resource levels results in different performance levels,
known as the fidelities. Different fidelities provide a way to balance computational cost and performance quality. In
the multi-fidelity setting, the target optimization problem in Equation 1 is extended to λ∗ = arg min f (λ, rmax ),
                                                                                                          λ∈Λ
where f (λ, rmax ) is the objective function obtained for configuration λ at the maximum resource level rmax . We use
r to denote the resource level, which can also be interpreted as the fidelity, and r ∈ {rmin , ..., rmax }.
Extending single-fidelity methods to the multi-fidelity setting. The inefficiency of single-fidelity methods stems
from their reliance on the final fidelity evaluation of f (λ, rmax ) to fit a surrogate model, which incurs high cost due to
the full evaluation of the configurations. Notably, low-fidelity evaluations of f (λ, r) for r < rmax provide informative
insights into f (λ, rmax ) but are computationally cheaper, which are valuable to the optimization process. Therefore,
we seek an effective way to extend single-fidelity methods like BO to the multi-fidelity setting. More specifically,
recalling the earlier steps of BO, when evaluating the configuration λi in the second step, we instead acquire its low-
fidelity performance yiri at ri , where ri denotes the fidelity used for λi to fit the surrogate model. The observations Di
then becomes {(λ1 , y1r1 ), ..., (λi , yiri )}. To conclude, in order to extend single-fidelity methods to the multi-fidelity
setting, the key challenge to be addressed is to determine ri for each λi .
4     M ETHODOLOGY
In this section, we propose a novel multi-fidelity model-based algorithm FastBO. We first propose the key concepts
of efficient point and saturation point, which are crucial in deciding the fidelity level to fit the surrogate model and to
approximate the final fidelity respectively. Secondly, we elaborate on the details of learning curve modeling, where the
two crucial points can be extracted. Then, we present the techniques associated with the auxiliary warm-up and post-
processing stages. Finally, we summarize FastBO and discuss its wide applicability to any single-fidelity methods.
4.1   A DAPTIVE E STIMATION OF E FFICIENT AND S ATURATION P OINTS

In our method, we adaptively identify two pivotal points for each configuration λi : the efficient point and the saturation
point, which are crucial in the optimization process. We first formally define the efficient point as follows.
Definition 1 (Efficient point). For a given learning curve Ci (r) of hyperparameter configuration λi , where r represents
the resource level (also referred to as fidelity), the efficient point ei of λi is defined as: ei = min{r | Ci (r) − Ci (2r) <
δ1 }, where δ1 is a predefined small threshold.

The semantic of Definition 1 is that starting from the efficient point onwards, when the resources are doubled (i.e., from
r to 2r), the performance improvement falls below a small threshold δ1 . Consequently, this point characterizes the
fidelity at which a configuration demonstrates strong performance while still efficiently utilizing resources. In simpler
terms, it signifies an appropriate fidelity of performance that can be achieved with comparably efficient resource usage.
Building upon the above definition, we make the following remark.


                                                              3
Remark 1. The efficient points of the hyperparameter configurations can serve as their appropriate fidelities used for
fitting the surrogate model. This is due to their (i) optimal resource-to-performance balance, (ii) ability to capture
valuable learning curve trends, and (iii) customization for different hyperparameter configurations.
We elaborate on the reasons in Remark 1 as follows. Firstly, efficient points balance the trade-off between compu-
tational cost and result quality. Beyond the efficient point of a given configuration, allocating additional resources
to that configuration becomes less efficient. Secondly, efficient points capture valuable trends within the learning
curves. For example, the learning rate influences the shape of learning curves; the identification of efficient points
for configurations with smaller learning rates often occurs at later stages. The insights into learning curve behaviors
enable more informed decision-making. Thirdly, the ability to customize the fidelity for each specific configuration is
a significant advantage. This adaptive approach is more reasonable than previous studies that use a fixed fidelity for
all configurations, as it better accounts for the unique characteristics of each learning curve.
This insight leads us to leverage the efficient point ei identified for each configuration λi as its fidelity used to fit the
surrogate model. More specifically, we evaluate λi until reaching ei and obtain the observed performance yiei . The
resulting data point (λi , yiei ) is then added into the current observation set Di−1 to refit the surrogate model.
In addition to efficient points, we identify saturation points for all configurations from their learning curves as well.
We provide the formal definition of the saturation point as follows.
Definition 2 (Saturation point). For a given learning curve Ci (r) of hyperparameter configuration λi , where r repre-
sents the resource level (also referred to as fidelity), the saturation point si of λi is defined as: si = min{r | ∀r′ >
r, |Ci (r′ ) − Ci (r)| < δ2 }, where δ2 is a predefined small threshold.
The semantic of Definition 2 is that beyond the saturation point, the observed performance no longer exhibits notable
variations with more resources. Consequently, this point characterizes the fidelity at which the performance of a
configuration stabilizes. The concept of saturation point is well-recognized within the machine learning community.
Building upon the above definition, we make the following remark.
Remark 2. The saturation points of the hyperparameter configurations can serve as their approximate final fidelities,
as they provide performance results that meet predefined quality thresholds while reducing resource wastage.
This insight leads us to use the saturation point si identified for each configuration λi as its final fidelity approximation.
The point is used in the post-processing stage for promoting some well-performing configurations to get higher-fidelity
performances. In essence, when aiming for a full evaluation of the configurations, we suggest that terminating the
evaluation at the saturation point is sufficient. A more intuitive illustration of the concepts is provided in Appendix A.2.

4.2   L EARNING C URVE M ODELING

From Definitions 1 and 2, we can extract the efficient points and saturation points of the configurations from their re-
spective learning curves. The learning curve Ci (r) corresponds to hyperparameter configuration λi and describes the
predictive performance with λi as a function of the fidelity r. Here, r can be either the number of training instances or
the number of training epochs or iterations. In the context of learning curves, the former is referred to as observation
learning curves, while the latter is iteration learning curves (Mohr & van Rijn, 2022). Both types are applicable to
FastBO, so we use the term learning curve to encompass both. Given the observation set Oiw = {(r, yir )}r=rmin ,...,w
for configuration λi , which comprises pairs of data points representing fidelities r ∈ {rmin , ..., w} and the corre-
sponding evaluations yir , FastBO can estimate a learning curve for λi based on Oiw by first constructing a parametric
learning curve model, then estimating parameters in the model.
Constructing a parametric learning curve model. Empirical Table 1: Parametric learning curve models used.
learning curves can be modeled with function classes relying on
some parameters. Viering & Loog (2022) comprehensively sum-
marized the parametric models studied in machine learning. In         Model         Formula         Family
practice, different problems have different learning curves; even     POW3       y = d + ax −α
                                                                                                    Power law
under the same problem, different hyperparameter configurations
                                                                      EXP3      y = d + e−ax+b Exponential
(e.g., learning rate, regularization, etc.) may lead to significantly
                                                                      LOG2 y = d + a log(x) Logarithmic
different learning curves. Since one single parametric model is
not enough to characterize all the learning curves by itself, we
consider combining different parametric models into a single model. Specifically, we consider three parametric mod-
els POW3, EXP3 and LOG2, as listed in Table 1, which have shown good fitting and predicting performance in


                                                              4
previous empirical studies (Viering & Loog, 2022; Mohr & van Rijn, 2022). Sigmoidal models like MMF and Weibull
are not being considered, since they tend to fit well if enough observations are used for fitting; but in situations like
ours where observations are limited, their performance is suboptimal (Mohr et al., 2022).
Here, we denote each of the three parametric models as cj (r|θj ) with parameters θj , where the independent variable
r represents the fidelity. We combine three models into one model through a weighted linear combination:
                                    X
                           C(r|ϕ) =            ωj cj (r|θj ), ϕ = {ω1 , ω2 , ω3 , θ1 , θ2 , θ3 },                 (2)
                                         j∈{1,2,3}

where ϕ is the parameter of the combined model, which consists of parameters {θ1 , θ2 , θ3 } and weight {ω1 , ω2 , ω3 }
of every single model. Therefore, each pair of observations (r, yir ) in Oiw can be modeled by the combined parametric
model as yir = C(r|ϕ) + ϵ, where yir is the observed dependent variable and ϵ represents the error term.
Estimating parameters in the parametric learning curve model. We employ maximum likelihood estimation to
estimate the parameters ϕ in the parametric model C(r|ϕ). Assuming that ϵ ∼ N (0, σ 2 ), the probability of an
observed performance yir under parameters is given by p(yir |ϕ, σ 2 ) = N (yir ; C(r|ϕ), σ 2 ). Given the observations Oiw
of λi that contains a set of observed data points (r, yir ), the likelihood function can be expressed as:
                                                              w
                                                                                   (yir − C(r = k|ϕ))2

                         2     r
                                    Y
                                            k      2
                                                             Y         1
                 L(ϕ, σ ; r, yi ) =     p(yi |ϕ, σ ) =               √    exp −                           .            (3)
                                                                    σ 2π                   2σ 2
                                                          k=r
                                                            min


We find the parameters ϕ by maximizing the log-likelihood function, which can be easily calculated given Equation 3.
An existing model-free method (Domhan et al., 2015) also considers using learning curves for the HPO problem.
However, it targets predicting the high-fidelity performance from the low-fidelity observations and thus stopping con-
figurations that are unlikely to beat the current best values, which is different from our main target of identifying
appropriate fidelity levels for the configurations to fit the surrogate model from their estimated learning curves.
4.3   AUXILIARY WARM - UP A ND P OST- PROCESSING S TAGES

In addition to its core components, FastBO incorporates two auxiliary stages: the warm-up and post-processing stages.
For the completeness of our method, we provide an overview of these stages, outlining their targets and presenting the
key techniques of early-termination detection and saturation-level evaluation that are applied within.
Warm-up stage. The warm-up stage prepares the early observation set Oiw for each configuration λi that is used
to estimate its learning curve, as discussed in § 4.2. Here w ∈ (rmin , rmax ) a pre-determined fidelity, denoted
as warm-up point. Specifically, we initiate the evaluation of each newly selected λi , proceeding until reaching w.
During this process, we record each fidelity r and its corresponding evaluation result yir , forming pairs (r, yir ). Upon
reaching w, we pause the evaluation for λi and obtain its early observation set Oiw = {(r, yir )}r=rmin ,...,w , and thus
start modeling the learning curve. During the warm-up stage, we monitor the performance changes across every two
continuous fidelities. If we detect that the performance of a configuration λi has consecutively dropped twice by
more than a ratio α, i.e., (yir−1 − yir−2 ) > αyir−2 and (yir − yir−1 ) > αyir−1 , we promptly terminate the evaluation
for λi at its current fidelity r, because such consecutive performance deterioration indicates that λi is unlikely to
achieve satisfactory performance. Once terminated, we directly incorporate the current performance yir of λi into
the observation set Di−1 that is used for updating the surrogate model. Thus, further operations like learning curve
modeling are discontinued for λi . Moreover, if we observe a single case of performance drop without subsequent
occurrences, i.e, yir−1 − yir−2 > αyir−2 and yir − yir−1 ≤ αyir−1 , we opt not to include data from fidelity r − 1 in Oiw .
This is to manually filter out potential noise in the data that may adversely affect the fitting of the learning curve.
Post-processing stage. The post-processing stage aims at two tasks: promoting the well-performing configurations
for saturation-level evaluations and identifying the best configuration and its performance. Firstly, FastBO promotes
the top-k well-performing configurations and evaluates them to their saturation points to ensure high-quality perfor-
mance while maintaining efficient resource utilization. We set k to be always less than or equal to the number of
parallel workers available, ensuring a manageable overhead of saturation-level evaluations. It is worth noting that the
additional time required is factored into the overall time. Secondly, FastBO finds the best configuration along with
its performance achieved so far, which is a standard final step in most HPO methods. However, we observe that an
increase in fidelities does not always result in performance improvement. Factors such as overfitting, resource satura-
tion, or problem complexity can contribute to this phenomenon. Therefore, we treat the evaluation at each fidelity as
an individual task, recording all these intermediate evaluation results. In this way, FastBO finds the best performance


                                                            5
by considering all the results, rather than relying solely on the highest-fidelity performances of the configurations.
In the parallel setting, treating each fidelity evaluation as an individual task offers an added benefit due to its finer
granularity. More specifically, when a worker is idle, it takes on a new task of evaluating a configuration at a specific
fidelity, rather than evaluating an entire configuration.
4.4   FAST BO AND G ENERALIZATION

Algorithm 1 summarizes our proposed FastBO. It Algorithm 1: FastBO algorithm
takes surrogate model M, acquisition function a,
warm-up point w, performance decrease ratio α, pro- input : M,          ∗
                                                                            a, w, α, k, δ1 , δ2 .
                                                                              ∗
motion number k, and thresholds δ1 , δ2 as inputs, and     output:   λ    , y
output the best-founded configuration λ∗ and its per- 1 i ← 0, D ← ∅
formance y ∗ . FastBO follows a similar iterative pro- 2 while not meet the stop criterion do
cess of model-based methods but replaces the expen- 3          find λi ← arg maxλ∈Λ a(λ, Mi−1 )
sive full evaluations with a more intelligent and effi-  4     Oiw , t ← warm-up given w, α // cf. §4.3
cient alternative (cf. Lines 4-10). Specifically, each 5       if Oiw is not empty then
new configuration λi first enters a warm-up stage to 6              fit Ci (r) to Oiw for λi // cf. §4.2
                                   w
collect its early observation set Oi and to be detected  7          find ei , si of λi given Ci (r), δ1 , δ2 // cf. §4.1
and terminated if it exhibits consecutive performance    8          yiei ← continue evaluating λi to ei
deterioration (cf. Line 4). If λi is not terminated, 9         else
FastBO then estimates a learning curve Ci (r) for λi 10             ei ← t, si ← rmax
based on Oiw (cf. Line 6), and thus the efficient point 11     Di ← Di−1 ∩ (λi , yiei )
and saturation point of λi can be adaptively obtained 12       refit Mi to Di
(cf. Line 7). After that, λi continues to be evaluated 13      i←i+1
until reaching ei (cf. Line 8); the result is added to      ∗    ∗
                                                        14 λ , y ← post-process given s = {si }, k // cf. §4.3
the observation set D (cf. Line 11) that is used for
updating M (cf. Line 12). On the other hand, the
poorly-performing configuration will be terminated early at fidelity t with its result being added directly to D (cf.
Lines 10, 11). Finally, the post-processing stage promotes the most promising configurations to their saturation points
and finds the best-founded configuration λ∗ and its performance y ∗ (Line 14).
Generalizing FastBO to single-fidelity methods. The core of FastBO is to tackle the key challenge of determining an
appropriate fidelity for each configuration to fit the surrogate model by adaptively identifying its efficient point. This
adaptive strategy of using the efficient point performances of configurations for surrogate model fitting also provides a
simple but effective way to bridge the gap between single- and multi-fidelity methods. While it is primarily described
in the context of model-based methods, the strategy can be generalized to various single-fidelity methods. For exam-
ple, when evaluating the configurations within the population for an evolutionary algorithm-based HPO method, we
can similarly evaluate the efficient point performances instead of the final performances of these configurations and
integrate the performances in the subsequent processes, such as selection and variation. Relying on the efficient point
of each configuration rather than the final fidelity or all fidelities available simplifies the extension of the single-fidelity
methods to the multi-fidelity setting. The rationale behind this adaptive fidelity identification strategy is discussed in
Remark 1. We also demonstrate in our experiments the efficacy of this strategy in extending a range of single-fidelity
methods to the multi-fidelity setting.
5     E XPERIMENTS
We empirically evaluate the performance of FastBO and compare it with the random search baseline (RS) and 8 com-
petitive baselines from 3 most related categories, including (i) model-based methods: standard Gaussian Process-based
Bayesian Optimization (BO) (Snoek et al., 2012); (ii) multi-fidelity methods: ASHA (Li et al., 2020), Hyperband (Li
et al., 2017), PASHA (Bohdal et al., 2023); and (iii) model-based multi-fidelity methods: A-BOHB (Klein et al., 2020),
A-CQR (Salinas et al., 2023), BOHB (Falkner et al., 2018), Hyper-Tune (Li et al., 2022). Among these baselines, RS
and BO are single-fidelity baselines, while the others are multi-fidelity baselines. Our experiments are conducted
on 10 datasets, coming from 3 commonly-used benchmarks including LCBench (Zimmer et al., 2021), NAS-Bench-
201 (Dong & Yang, 2020) and FCNet (Klein & Hutter, 2019) that have 7, 6, and 9 hyperparameters, respectively.
Detailed information on the benchmarks is provided in Appendix A.5.1.
All the experiments are evaluated with four workers and are repeated using 10 random seeds. FastBO uses a Matérn
5
2 kernel with automatic relevance determination parameters and the expected improvement acquisition function. We


                                                               6
              Airlines                   Albert                  Christine                Covertype               Fashion-MNIST


                     Figure 1: Performance of average validation accuracy on the LCBench benchmark.


             CIFAR-10                CIFAR-100             ImageNet16-120                  Protein                     Slice


                           (a) NAS-Bench-201 benchmark                                            (b) FCNet benchmark

Figure 2: Performance of (a) average validation error on NAS-Bench-201 and (b) average validation loss on FCNet.


allocate 20% total resource budget to the warm-up stage, i.e., w = rmin + 0.2 · (rmax − rmin ). Ratio α is set to 0.1;
thresholds δ1 and δ2 are set to 0.001 and 0.0005 1 . We set k according to the number of workers #workers and the
number of started configurations #conf igs: k = max{⌈#conf igs/10⌉, #workers}. We use implementations of the
baselines provided in Syne Tune (Salinas et al., 2022). Further details of the baseline settings are in Appendix A.5.2.
5.1      A NYTIME P ERFORMANCE
To evaluate the anytime performance, we compare FastBO against the baselines on wall-clock time. For fair compar-
isons, all the baselines, even single-fidelity methods BO and RS, are extended to consider intermediate results at all
the fidelities, akin to FastBO as discussed in § 4.3. Consequently, all the baselines identify the best configuration from
all the intermediate results and thus are able to achieve their best possible anytime performance.
The results on the LCBench, NAS-Bench-201, and FCNet benchmarks are shown in Figures 1 and 2. We report the
validation accuracy, validation error, and validation loss over wall-clock time for the three benchmarks, as provided by
the benchmarks. Overall, FastBO can handle various performance metrics and shows strong anytime performance for
all the datasets. We can observe that FastBO gains an advantage earlier than other methods, rapidly converging to the
global optimum after the initial phase. The superiority can be attributed to two main factors. Firstly, FastBO maintains,
and in some cases even surpasses, the sample efficiency of vanilla BO, thanks to our techniques that enable quick and
precise identification of the fidelities for configurations to update the surrogate model. We provide more explanations
and conduct more experiments on sample efficiency in Appendix A.3. Secondly, the multi-fidelity extension speeds
up the evaluation for each configuration, contributing to its overall efficiency. In contrast, the single-fidelity baselines
tend to waste more time on the full evaluation of the configurations. While the multi-fidelity baselines efficiently
explore numerous configurations, they limit their evaluations to only constrained resource levels for some time, thus
struggling to provide relatively high performance in a short time. This issue in multi-fidelity methods is particularly
pronounced in the PASHA algorithm when applied to NAS-Bench-201 and FCNet, as shown in Figure 2. It is worth
noting that the additional computational overhead introduced by FastBO is taken into account in the wall-clock time.
Regarding the final performance, most methods are able to converge to satisfactory solutions, with negligible dif-
ferences among them in most cases. Although our goal is not to offer the best final performance as we limit the
   1
       Parameters δ1 and δ2 given here are derived after standardizing the various performance metrics to a uniform scale from 0 to 1.


                                                                   7
Table 2: Comparison of relative efficiency on configuration identification. Wall-clock time (abbr. WC time) reports the
elapsed time spent for each method on finding configurations with similar performance metrics, i.e., validation error
for Covertype and ImageNet16-120 (×10−2 ) and validation loss for Slice (×10−5 ). Regarding relative efficiency,
FastBO is set as the baseline with a relative efficiency of 1.00.


          Metric        Method
                                        FastBO       BO           PASHA       A-BOHB         A-CQR       BOHB       Hyper-Tune
          Dataset
                    Val. error          22.9±0.2     23.0±0.3     25.1±2.5    23.5±1.1       31.6±1.9    32.5±0.8   23.0±0.2
  Covertype         WC time (h)         0.7±0.3      2.9±0.7      3.9±1.0     2.0±1.0        3.9±0.2     2.5±1.0    1.8±0.7
                    Rel. efficiency     1.00         0.25         0.18        0.37           0.19        0.29       0.40
                    Val. error          55.3±0.2     57.4±1.2     55.7±0.3    55.8±1.6       55.5±0.9    55.5±1.1   55.3±2.0
   ImageNet
                    WC time (h)         2.2±0.7      6.6±0.9      2.5±1.2     5.9±1.1        6.0±1.3     3.2±0.7    3.4±1.1
    16-120
                    Rel. efficiency     1.00         0.34         0.90        0.38           0.37        0.68       0.67
                    Val. loss           26.3±2.6     26.4±4.4     26.8±9.5    26.3±6.3       27.1±4.2    26.8±5.6   28.7±1.3
        Slice       WC time (h)         0.4±0.1      3.1±0.7      1.2±0.9     2.1±0.7        2.5±0.7     2.2±0.9    1.8±0.6
                    Rel. efficiency     1.00         0.13         0.35        0.20           0.17        0.19       0.24



evaluations to at most the saturation point even for those we consider most promising, FastBO still achieves top-2
final performance on 8 out of 10 datasets. In contrast, model-free methods sometimes cannot obtain a satisfactory
final performance because they randomly select the configurations. For example, on the “Covertype” dataset, only 3
out of 2000 configurations yield a validation accuracy exceeding 75%. As a result, all the model-free methods face
challenges in converging to a satisfactory final performance.
5.2      E FFICIENCY ON C ONFIGURATION I DENTIFICATION
One explanation for PASHA’s suboptimal anytime performance, as shown in Figure 2, lies in its primary goal (Bohdal
et al., 2023): the goal of PASHA is not high accuracy but to identify the best configuration more quickly. To ensure
equitable comparisons, we report the time spent for each HPO method on identifying a satisfactory configuration,
consistent with the experiments described in Bohdal et al. (2023). Results on three expensive datasets “Covertype”2 ,
“ImageNet16-120”, and “Slice” of the three benchmarks are shown in Table 2. Similar results on additional datasets
can be found in Appendix A.4.1. Besides PASHA, results of other model-free multi-fidelity methods are not included,
as PASHA demonstrates its superiority over them.
Table 2 shows that FastBO saves 10% to 87% wall-clock time over other methods when achieving up to 9.6% better
performance values. It can be observed from the “rel. efficiency” rows, where we set FastBO as the baseline with
a relative efficiency of 1.00 and report the efficiency of other methods relative to ours. When compared with vanilla
BO, FastBO significantly shortens the time in identifying a good configuration by a factor of 3 to 8, because FastBO
can pause a configuration earlier at an appropriate fidelity and fit the surrogate model to guide the next configuration
search. This advantage creates opportunities to efficiently explore more configurations, leading to high efficiency in
identifying good configurations. Another observation is that PASHA always gets a relatively high variance in wall-
clock time. This is due to the fact that different random seeds can have a larger impact on such model-free methods.
5.3      E FFECTIVENESS OF A DAPTIVE F IDELITY I DENTIFICATION

As discussed in § 4.1, FastBO is able to adaptively identify the efficient point ei for each configuration λi and serves ei
as its fidelity ri for surrogate model fitting. To investigate how the adaptive fidelity identification strategy impacts the
optimization process, we conduct an ablation study to evaluate the performance achieved with and without applying
this strategy. Specifically, we compare FastBO, where ri is adaptively set to ei , with the partial evaluation schemes
that employ fixed predefined values as the fidelity for all the configurations to fit the surrogate model. We consider
three representative fixed fidelities, including 25%, 50%, and 75% of the total resource budget. In addition, we
include a comparison with vanilla BO that can be viewed as using 100% resource budget as the fixed fidelity for all
configurations for surrogate model fitting. We provide the results on three representative datasets of the benchmarks in
   2
       We convert the validation accuracy of “Covertype” into validation error for better readability.


                                                                    8
Figure 3, with more results available
in Appendix A.4.2. We have three
main observations. Firstly, FastBO
always outperforms the partial eval-
uation baselines that use a fixed fi-
delity for all the configurations, indi-
cating the effectiveness of the adap-
tive fidelity identification strategy.
Secondly, compared to the vanilla
BO, partial evaluation schemes with                    (a) Slice            (b) ImageNet16-120          (c) Covertype
fixed ri converge faster in the ini-
                                         Figure 3: Performance of (i) FastBO that adaptively sets ri = ei , (ii) the
tial stage due to their ability to eval-
                                         schemes that use fixed 25%, 50%, 75% of the total resource budget as ri for all
uate more configurations promptly.
                                         configurations, and (ii) vanilla BO that uses 100% total resource budget as ri .
However, this advantage is gradually
offset over time because they fail to find appropriate fidelities to create an accurate surrogate model. This results in a
suboptimal final performance compared to vanilla BO, as shown in Figures 3(a) and 3(b). In the case of Figure 3(c),
we can observe a noticeable upward trend exhibited by the vanilla BO towards the end of the evaluation, indicating its
potential to improve the final performance given abundant time. The comparison between the partial evaluation base-
lines and vanilla BO also demonstrates the importance of our adaptive strategy, which ensures that the fidelities align
optimally with each configuration. Thirdly, FastBO shows stronger performance than vanilla BO. The superiority of
FastBO is due to its good sample efficiency and its fast evaluation of each configuration, as discussed in § 5.1. The
limitation of vanilla BO lies in the additional time required for full evaluations.
5.4   G ENERALITY OF T HE P ROPOSED E XTENSION M ETHOD

The adaptive fidelity identification
strategy provides a simple way to
extend single-fidelity methods to the
multi-fidelity setting, as discussed
in § 4.4. To examine the ability
of our adaptive strategy as an ex-
tension method, we conduct exper-
iments using three popular single-
fidelity methods CQR (Salinas et al.,
2023), BORE (Tiao et al., 2021) and                   (a) Slice            (b) ImageNet16-120          (c) Covertype
REA (Real et al., 2019), extending
                                       Figure 4: Performance of single-fidelity methods CQR, BORE, REA and their
them to the multi-fidelity variants
                                       multi-fidelity variants using our extension method.
with our extension method, referred
to as FastCQR, FastBORE, and FastREA respectively. Similar to FastBO, all the multi-fidelity extensions evaluate
the configurations to the adaptively identified efficient point and use the corresponding performances for the subse-
quent operations. The results on three representative datasets are illustrated in Figure 4 and similar results on other
datasets are provided in Appendix A.4.3. We can clearly observe that the multi-fidelity variants with our extension
method always outperform their single-fidelity counterparts. It is worth noting that REA is an evolutionary algorithm-
based HPO method and is also significantly improved by our extension. The observation highlights the ability of the
proposed adaptive strategy to extend any single-fidelity method to the multi-fidelity setting. It also suggests future
opportunities to extend other advanced single-fidelity techniques into the multi-fidelity setting.

6     C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a new model-based multi-fidelity HPO method named FastBO, which adaptively identifies
the appropriate fidelity for each configuration to fit the surrogate model and offers high-quality performance while
ensuring efficient resource utilization. The advantages are achieved through our introduced concepts of efficient point
and saturation point, the proposed techniques of learning curve modeling, and well-designed warm-up and post-
processing stages with judicious early-termination detection and efficient saturation-level evaluation. Moreover, the
proposed adaptive fidelity identification strategy provides a simple way to extend any single-fidelity method to the
multi-fidelity setting. Our empirical evaluation demonstrates the effectiveness and wide generality of our proposed
techniques. FastBO source code to reproduce our results is freely available at [url omitted].


                                                            9
R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

The detailed hyperparameter setting of FastBO is provided in § 5, and the detailed hyperparameter setting of the
baseline methods can be found in Appendix A.5.2. We use publicly available tabular benchmarks that allow run-
ning the experiments without large computational costs. Detailed information on the benchmarks can be found in
Appendix A.5.1. In addition, we include the code for our method in the supplementary material.

R EFERENCES
Sebastian E Ament and Carla P Gomes. Scalable first-order Bayesian Optimization via structured automatic differen-
  tiation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 500–516. PMLR, 2022.
James Bergstra and Yoshua Bengio. Random search for hyper-parameter optimization. Journal of Machine Learning
  Research, 13(2), 2012.
James Bergstra, Rémi Bardenet, Yoshua Bengio, and Balázs Kégl. Algorithms for hyper-parameter optimization.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 24, 2011.
Ondrej Bohdal, Lukas Balles, Martin Wistuba, Beyza Ermis, Cédric Archambeau, and Giovanni Zappella. PASHA:
  efficient HPO and NAS with progressive resource allocation. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions. OpenReview.net, 2023.
Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system. In Proceedings of the 22nd acm sigkdd
  international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 785–794, 2016.
Tobias Domhan, Jost Tobias Springenberg, and Frank Hutter. Speeding up automatic hyperparameter optimization of
  deep neural networks by extrapolation of learning curves. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelli-
  gence, 2015.
Xuanyi Dong and Yi Yang. NAS-Bench-201: Extending the scope of reproducible neural architecture search. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Stefan Falkner, Aaron Klein, and Frank Hutter. BOHB: Robust and efficient hyperparameter optimization at scale. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1437–1446. PMLR, 2018.
Matthias Feurer and Frank Hutter. Hyperparameter optimization. Automated Machine Learning: Methods, Systems,
 Challenges, pp. 3–33, 2019.
Philipp Hennig and Christian J Schuler. Entropy search for information-efficient global optimization. Journal of
  Machine Learning Research, 13(6), 2012.
José Miguel Hernández-Lobato, Matthew W Hoffman, and Zoubin Ghahramani. Predictive entropy search for efficient
  global optimization of black-box functions. Advances in Neural Information Processing systems, 27, 2014.
Frank Hutter, Holger H Hoos, and Kevin Leyton-Brown. Sequential model-based optimization for general algorithm
  configuration. In Learning and Intelligent Optimization, pp. 507–523. Springer, 2011.
Carl Hvarfner, Danny Stoll, Artur L. F. Souza, Marius Lindauer, Frank Hutter, and Luigi Nardi. $\pi$BO: Aug-
  menting acquisition functions with user beliefs for bayesian optimization. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations. OpenReview.net, 2022.
Kevin Jamieson and Ameet Talwalkar. Non-stochastic best arm identification and hyperparameter optimization. In
  Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 240–248. PMLR, 2016.
Aaron Klein and Frank Hutter. Tabular benchmarks for joint architecture and hyperparameter optimization. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1905.04970, 2019.
Aaron Klein, Louis C Tiao, Thibaut Lienart, Cedric Archambeau, and Matthias Seeger. Model-based asynchronous
  hyperparameter and neural architecture search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.10865, 2020.


                                                        10
Cheng Li, Santu Rana, Sunil Gupta, Vu Nguyen, Svetha Venkatesh, Alessandra Sutti, David Rubin de Celis Leal, Teo
  Slezak, Murray Height, Mazher Mohammed, and Ian Gibson. Accelerating experimental design by incorporating
  experimenter hunches. In International Conference on Data Mining, pp. 257–266. IEEE Computer Society, 2018.
Liam Li, Kevin Jamieson, Afshin Rostamizadeh, Ekaterina Gonina, Jonathan Ben-Tzur, Moritz Hardt, Benjamin
  Recht, and Ameet Talwalkar. A system for massively parallel hyperparameter tuning. Proceedings of Machine
  Learning and Systems, 2:230–246, 2020.
Lisha Li, Kevin Jamieson, Giulia DeSalvo, Afshin Rostamizadeh, and Ameet Talwalkar. Hyperband: A novel bandit-
  based approach to hyperparameter optimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 18(1):6765–6816, 2017.
Yang Li, Yu Shen, Huaijun Jiang, Wentao Zhang, Jixiang Li, Ji Liu, Ce Zhang, and Bin Cui. Hyper-tune: Towards
  efficient hyper-parameter tuning at scale. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 15(6):1256–1265, 2022.
Jonas Mockus. The application of Bayesian methods for seeking the extremum. Towards global optimization, 2:117,
  1998.
Felix Mohr and Jan N van Rijn. Learning curves for decision making in supervised machine learning–a survey. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2201.12150, 2022.
Felix Mohr, Tom J Viering, Marco Loog, and Jan N van Rijn. Lcdb 1.0: An extensive learning curves database for
  classification tasks. In Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases,
  pp. 3–19. Springer, 2022.
ChangYong Oh, Efstratios Gavves, and Max Welling. BOCK: Bayesian optimization with cylindrical kernels. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3868–3877. PMLR, 2018.
Misha Padidar, Xinran Zhu, Leo Huang, Jacob Gardner, and David Bindel. Scaling gaussian processes with derivative
 information using variational inference. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:6442–6453, 2021.
Esteban Real, Alok Aggarwal, Yanping Huang, and Quoc V Le. Regularized evolution for image classifier architecture
  search. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 33, pp. 4780–4789, 2019.
David Salinas, Matthias Seeger, Aaron Klein, Valerio Perrone, Martin Wistuba, and Cedric Archambeau. Syne tune: A
  library for large scale hyperparameter tuning and reproducible research. In International Conference on Automated
  Machine Learning, pp. 16–1. PMLR, 2022.
David Salinas, Jacek Golebiowski, Aaron Klein, Matthias W. Seeger, and Cédric Archambeau. Optimizing hyperpa-
  rameters with conformal quantile regression. In International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202, pp.
  29876–29893. PMLR, 2023.
Bobak Shahriari, Alexandre Bouchard-Côté, and Nando Freitas. Unbounded Bayesian Optimization via regularization.
  In Artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 1168–1176. PMLR, 2016.
Julien Siems, Lucas Zimmer, Arber Zela, Jovita Lukasik, Margret Keuper, and Frank Hutter. Nas-bench-301 and the
  case for surrogate benchmarks for neural architecture search. CoRR, abs/2008.09777, 2020.
Jasper Snoek, Hugo Larochelle, and Ryan P Adams. Practical Bayesian optimization of machine learning algorithms.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 25, 2012.
Jasper Snoek, Oren Rippel, Kevin Swersky, Ryan Kiros, Nadathur Satish, Narayanan Sundaram, Mostofa Patwary,
  Mr Prabhat, and Ryan Adams. Scalable Bayesian optimization using deep neural networks. In International Con-
  ference on Machine Learning, pp. 2171–2180. PMLR, 2015.
Jost Tobias Springenberg, Aaron Klein, Stefan Falkner, and Frank Hutter. Bayesian optimization with robust bayesian
  neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 29, 2016.
Niranjan Srinivas, Andreas Krause, Sham M Kakade, and Matthias Seeger. Gaussian process optimization in the
  bandit setting: No regret and experimental design. arXiv preprint arXiv:0912.3995, 2009.
Kevin Swersky, Jasper Snoek, and Ryan Prescott Adams. Freeze-thaw Bayesian optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1406.3896, 2014.


                                                        11
Louis C Tiao, Aaron Klein, Matthias W Seeger, Edwin V Bonilla, Cedric Archambeau, and Fabio Ramos. BORE:
  Bayesian optimization by density-ratio estimation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10289–
  10300. PMLR, 2021.
Tom Viering and Marco Loog. The shape of learning curves: a review. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
  Machine Intelligence, 2022.
Jiazhuo Wang, Jason Xu, and Xuejun Wang. Combination of hyperband and bayesian optimization for hyperparameter
   optimization in deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.01596, 2018.
Jian Wu, Matthias Poloczek, Andrew G Wilson, and Peter Frazier. Bayesian optimization with gradients. Advances in
   neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Lucas Zimmer, Marius Thomas Lindauer, and Frank Hutter. Auto-Pytorch: Multi-fidelity metalearning for efficient
  and robust AutoDL. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 43:3079–3090, 2021.
Marc-André Zöller and Marco F Huber. Benchmark and survey of automated machine learning frameworks. Journal
 of Artificial Intelligence Research, 70:409–472, 2021.


                                                       12
A    A PPENDIX

C ONTENTS

A Appendix                                                                                                             13
    A.1 Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   14
    A.2 Illustration on Efficient Point and Saturation Point . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   14
    A.3 Experiments of Sample Efficiency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       15
    A.4 Extended Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       16
         A.4.1 Extended Experiments of Efficiency on Configuration Identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          16
         A.4.2 Extended Experiments of Effectiveness of Efficient Point . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        17
         A.4.3 Extended Experiments of Generality of Extension Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            18
    A.5 Experimental Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     18
         A.5.1 Benchmark Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       19
         A.5.2 Choice of Parameters on Baseline Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          19


                                                           13
                  Table 3: The notations used throughout the paper and the corresponding definitions.

   Notation             Definition
   a                    Acquisition function.
   cj (r|θj ), C(r|ϕ)   One of, and the combined parametric learning curve model.
   Ci (r)               Empirical learning curve for λi .
   Di                   Observation set that used to fit the surrogate model, containing i pairs of data points.
   ei                   The efficient point of λi .
   f (λ), f (λ, r)      Performance with configuration λ in the single-fidelity and multi-fidelity settings.
   k                    The number of configurations to be promoted.
   M                    Surrogate model.
   Oiw                  Early observation set of λi across different fidelities, with a maximum level w considered.
   r, rmax , rmin       Fidelity; the maximum and minimum fidelity.
   si                   The saturation point of λi .
   w                    Warm-up point for all the configurations.
   yi , yir             Evaluation results of f (λi ) and f (λi , r) in the single-fidelity and multi-fidelity settings.
   α                    Performance decrease ratio.
   δ1 , δ2              Small thresholds used in identifying efficient points and saturation points.
   θj , ϕ               Parameters in one of, and the combined parametric learning curve model.
   λi , λ               A hyperparameter and a hyperparameter configuration.
   Λi , Λ               Domain of λi and search space of λ.
   ωj                   The weight of a parametric learning curve model.


A.1    N OTATION

In Table 3, we provide a comprehensive summary of the notations utilized throughout the paper, along with their
detailed definitions and explanations.

A.2    I LLUSTRATION ON E FFICIENT P OINT AND S ATURATION P OINT

In § 4.1, we provide formal definitions for the efficient point and saturation
point. Here, we provide a more intuitive understanding of the concepts.                                    C1(r)
                                                                                                           C2(r)
Figure 5 shows an intuitive visualization of two learning curves C1 (r), C2 (r),                           Efficient point & performance
                                                                                     Performance


together with their respective efficient points e1 , e2 and saturation points s1 ,                         Saturation point & performance
s2 . We can easily grasp that the saturation points signify that the perfor-
mance has nearly reached full convergence, while the efficient points, located                         Crossing point
at a relatively earlier stage, represent a position where performance can be
achieved with high efficiency.
From Figure 5, we can clearly see a significant difference in the shapes of
                                                                                       e       s     e                    s
the two learning curves. C2 (r) experiences rapid initial descent and quick                        2   2
                                                                                                       Fidelity
                                                                                                               1                      1


convergence; while C1 (r) experiences a slower initial descent, but eventually
converges to a better performance than C2 (r). Due to this difference, we can Figure 5: Illustration of efficient point
find a crossing point where the two curves meet. Suppose that C1 (r) and and saturation point associated with
C2 (r) correspond to configurations λ1 and λ2 respectively, we can know λ1 learning curves.
outranks λ2 in terms of configuration performance ranking. Since FastBO
utilizes efficient points e1 and e2 as their fidelities for fitting the surrogate model, it is able to capture the distinctive
trends in the learning curves of λ1 and λ2 . This ensures that the observed performance y1e1 surpasses y2e2 , i.e.,
consistent with the configuration performance ranking, where both y1e1 and y2e2 are used to update the surrogate model.
In contrast, existing successive halving-based methods may fail to maintain ranking consistency. Specifically, they are
susceptible to erroneous termination of λ1 if the decision is made before the crossing point. Even with the aid of
surrogate models, fitting before the crossing point leads to an inaccurate surrogate model.
Furthermore, we can observe that there is often a gap between the saturation point and the final fidelity, which becomes
more pronounced on curves that converge rapidly, such as C2 . FastBO utilizes the saturation point as an approximation


                                                             14
Validation accuracy (%)   64                                                           67                                                           75                                                           77                                                           90


                                                             Validation accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                          Validation accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                       Validation accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Validation accuracy (%)
                          63                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  89
                                                                                       66                                                           74                                                           72                                                           88
                          62
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              87
                          61
                                       FastBO                                          65           FastBO                                          73           FastBO                                          67           FastBO                                          86           FastBO
                          60           BO                                                           BO                                                           BO                                                           BO                                              85           BO
                                       ri = 20% budget                                              ri = 20% budget                                              ri = 20% budget                                              ri = 20% budget                                              ri = 20% budget
                          59 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40                                    64 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40                                    72 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40                                    62 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40                                    84 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
                               Number of configurations                                     Number of configurations                                     Number of configurations                                     Number of configurations                                     Number of configurations
                                 (a) Airlines                                                  (b) Albert                                                 (c) Christine                                               (d) Covertype                                            (e) Fashion-MNIST

                   Figure 6: Performance of average validation accuracy against the number of evaluated configurations on LCBench.

                                                                                                                                                0.67                                                         0.37
                                           FastBO                                  0.34                 FastBO                                                       FastBO                                                       FastBO                                  10 2.6                FastBO
                                           BO                                                           BO                                                           BO                                                           BO                                                            BO
                      0.09                 ri = 20% budget                                              ri = 20% budget                                              ri = 20% budget                                              ri = 20% budget
Validation error


                                                             Validation error


                                                                                                                          Validation error
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10 2.8


                                                                                                                                                                                       Validation loss
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ri = 20% budget


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Validation loss
                                                                                   0.32                                                         0.62                                                         0.32
                      0.08                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10 3.0
                      0.07                                                                                                                      0.57
                                                                                   0.30                                                                                                                      0.27                                                         10 3.2
                      0.06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10 3.4
                      0.05                                                         0.28                                                         0.52                                                         0.22
                                 10   20    30    40     50                                   10   20    30    40     50                                   10   20    30    40     50                                   10   20    30    40     50                                    10   20    30    40     50
                                Number of configurations                                     Number of configurations                                     Number of configurations                                     Number of configurations                                      Number of configurations
                               (a) CIFAR-10                                                 (b) CIFAR-100                                            (c) ImageNet16-120                                                 (d) Protein                                                    (e) Slice

        Figure 7: Performance of average validation error against the number of evaluated configurations on the NAS-Bench-
        201 benchmark (i.e. (a)-(c)) and performance of average validation loss against the number of evaluated configurations
        on the FCNet benchmark (i.e., (d) and (e)).



        for the final fidelity. Intuitively, it can achieve performance that is very close to the performance at the final fidelity
        while saving a considerable amount of computational cost.


         A.3                     E XPERIMENTS OF S AMPLE E FFICIENCY

        In § 5.1, we compare the anytime performance of FastBO with a wide range of HPO methods. One reason for FastBO’s
        good anytime performance can be attributed to its good sample efficiency. Sample efficiency refers to the ability of an
        algorithm to find the optimal solution with the minimum number of samples. In the context of HPO, sample efficiency
        quantifies how effectively the algorithm explores the hyperparameter space and identifies promising configurations
        while minimizing the number of evaluated configurations. Methods with higher sample efficiency, such as BO, are
        capable of identifying satisfactory configurations with fewer evaluations.
        In order to investigate the sample efficiency of FastBO, we conduct experiments using the same settings as the ex-
        periments in § 5.1 but plotting the achieved performance as a function of the number of evaluated configurations.
        Figures 6 and 7 illustrate the results obtained on the three benchmarks. We can see that FastBO is able to achieve
        comparable, and in some cases, even superior performance to vanilla BO. It is particularly noteworthy considering
        that FastBO only performs partial evaluations of the configurations and is unsure about their performance at the final
        fidelity. The results demonstrate that FastBO has the ability to identify the appropriate fidelity for each configuration
        that can reliably indicate its performance. This remarkable ability is achieved by our proposed adaptive strategy that
        adaptively finds the efficient point ei for each configuration ri as its fidelity ri for surrogate model fitting.
        In order to facilitate a clearer comparison, we also incorporate the results on an additional baseline: a partial evaluation
        scheme that replaces the adaptive strategy with the adoption of a fixed value as the fidelity for all the configurations
        to fit the surrogate model. Specifically, we set the fixed fidelity to 20% of the total resource budget and present the
        corresponding results in Figures 6 and 7. It can be observed that this partial evaluation baseline consistently lags
        behind both FastBO and vanilla BO. It underscores the challenge of using a fixed fidelity value for all configurations
        in reflecting their final fidelity performance, which highlights the importance of the adoption of our adaptive strategy.


                                                                                                                                                                15
Table 4: Comparison of relative efficiency for configuration identification. Wall-clock time (abbr. WC time) reports
the elapsed time spent for each method on finding configurations with similar performance metrics, i.e., validation
error (×10−2 ) and validation loss (×10−2 ). Regarding relative efficiency, FastBO is set as the baseline with a relative
efficiency of 1.00.


        Metric      Method
                                    FastBO     BO          PASHA      A-BOHB       A-CQR       BOHB        Hyper-Tune
        Dataset
                  Val. error        36.2±0.1   36.3±0.5    36.2±0.1   36.3±0.3     38.9±0.5    38.5±0.1    36.2±0.1
    Airlines      WC time (h)       0.5±0.3    2.4±1.3     1.1±0.7    1.1±0.6      2.7±0.6     2.2±0.4     1.1±0.6
                  Rel. efficiency   1.00       0.23        0.51       0.36         0.20        0.25        0.48
                  Val. error        33.9±0.1   34.0±0.1    34.3±0.1   34.0±0.0     34.8±0.7    34.7±0.2    34.0±0.3
      Albert      WC time (h)       0.5±0.3    1.0±0.7     1.2±0.8    1.6±1.0      3.2±0.4     1.9±1.4     1.2±1.1
                  Rel. efficiency   1.00       0.48        0.39       0.28         0.14        0.24        0.39
                  Val. error        25.3±0.1   25.5±0.1    25.6±0.1   25.5±0.1     26.7±0.0    26.8±0.2    25.4±0.0
   Christine      WC time (h)       0.8±0.3    2.4±1.3     2.4±2.2    2.1±1.2      1.6±2.1     1.5±0.9     2.9±0.8
                  Rel. efficiency   1.00       0.33        0.33       0.37         0.48        0.54        0.27
                  Val. error        10.7±0.1   10.7±0.1    10.7±0.1   10.7±0.1     11.6±0.3    11.4±0.2    10.7±0.1
   Fashion-
                  WC time (h)       0.2±0.1    0.8±0.7     1.8±1.4    0.5±0.2      2.5±1.1     3.2±0.8     0.6±0.4
   MNIST
                  Rel. efficiency   1.00       0.21        0.10       0.34         0.07        0.19        0.27
                  Val. error        6.2±0.4    6.5±0.4     6.4±0.7    6.2±0.2      6.3±0.4     6.3±0.2     6.2±0.2
  CIFAR-10        WC time (h)       0.6±0.4    3.9±2.0     1.3±0.6    2.3±1.1      2.6±0.9     2.1±0.5     1.6±0.8
                  Rel. efficiency   1.00       0.16        0.49       0.27         0.25        0.31        0.39
                  Val. error        28.7±1.3   29.6±1.4    32.8±8.9   28.7±1.2     28.8±1.5    28.8±0.7    29.4±1.1
  CIFAR-100       WC time (h)       1.2±0.9    2.4±1.6     1.6±1.4    2.8±1.2      2.8±1.3     1.7±0.4     1.7±0.5
                  Rel. efficiency   1.00       0.50        0.73       0.43         0.42        0.72        0.72
                  Val. loss         22.6±0.4   22.9±0.7    23.6±0.9   22.6±0.3     22.7±0.5    23.2±0.4    22.7±0.7
      Protein     WC time (h)       0.3±0.1    1.2±0.7     0.7±0.6    0.8±0.5      0.6±0.3     1.3±0.7     1.1±0.5
                  Rel. efficiency   1.00       0.23        0.38       0.32         0.42        0.21        0.25



A.4     E XTENDED E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we provide additional experimental results running on more datasets, including the experiments to
investigate the efficiency in identifying high-quality configurations, the effectiveness of the proposed adaptive fidelity
identification strategy, and the generality of the extension method.


A.4.1     E XTENDED E XPERIMENTS OF E FFICIENCY ON C ONFIGURATION I DENTIFICATION

In § 5.2, we compare the time spent for the HPO methods on identifying a satisfactory configuration. Here, we report
additional results on the datasets from the LCBench, NAS-Bench-201 and FCNet benchmarks in Table 4. For the
“Airlines”, “Albert”, “Christine” and “Fashion-MNIST” datasets from LCBench, we convert their performance metric
from validation accuracy to validation error for better readability.
The experimental results shown in Table 4 are consistent with those shown in § 5.2. For the “rel. efficiency” rows,
FastBO is set as the baseline with a relative efficiency of 1.00, and then we compute the relative efficiency of other
methods. We can observe that FastBO saves considerable wall-clock time over the baseline methods when achieving
similar or better performance values, demonstrating the high efficiency of FastBO in identifying a good configuration.
The model-free PASHA method often gets a high variance in wall-clock time because different random seeds can have
a larger impact on it. Results of other model-free methods are not included in Table 4, since PASHA demonstrates its
superiority over them (Bohdal et al., 2023).


                                                           16
          (a) Airlines                    (b) Albert                    (c) Christine                 (d) Fashion-MNIST

Figure 8: Average validation accuracy on the LCBench benchmark of (i) FastBO that set ri = ei , (ii) the schemes that
use fixed 25%, 50%, 75% of the total resource budget as ri for all configurations, and (iii) vanilla BO that uses 100%
total resource budget as ri .


                         (a) CIFAR-10                  (b) CIFAR-100                    (c) Protein

Figure 9: Average validation error on the NAS-Bench-201 benchmark (including the “CIFAR-10”, “CIFAR-100”
datasets) and average validation loss on the FCNet benchmark (including the “Protein” dataset) of (i) FastBO that set
ri = ei , (ii) the schemes that use fixed 25%, 50%, 75% of the total resource budget as ri for all configurations, and
(iii) vanilla BO that uses 100% total resource budget as ri .



A.4.2    E XTENDED E XPERIMENTS OF E FFECTIVENESS OF E FFICIENT P OINT

In § 5.3, we examine the effectiveness of the proposed adaptive fidelity identification strategy. Here, we provide
additional results on more datasets.
We show the results on the LCBench benchmark in Figure 8 and the results on the NAS-Bench-201 and FCNet
benchmarks in Figure 9. Specifically, our FastBO with the adaptive fidelity identification strategy sets the efficient
point ei for each configuration λi as its fidelity ri to fit the surrogate model. In contrast, the vanilla BO is a full
evaluation scheme that uses 100% of the total resource budget as ri . The other three baselines are also partial evaluation
schemes like FastBO but without the adaptive fidelity identification strategy. They replace the adaptive choice of
ri = ei with a fixed fidelity, including 25%, 50%, and 75% of the total resource budget, for all the configurations to fit
the surrogate model.
The results shown in Figures 8 and 9 are consistent with those shown in § 5.3. We have two main observations.
Firstly, FastBO outperforms the other partial evaluation schemes that remove the adaptive fidelity identification strat-
egy, showing the effectiveness of the proposed adaptive strategy. Secondly, although the partial evaluation schemes
with fixed ri are able to converge faster than the full evaluation counterpart (i.e., the vanilla BO) in the initial stage,
this early advantage diminishes progressively over time. Finally, these partial evaluation baselines show significant
differences in their final performance on 4 out of 7 datasets when compared to vanilla BO. The main reason is that
these partial evaluation schemes naively use a fixed ri for all the configurations and thus fail to create an accurate
surrogate model to identify more promising configurations. This observation also highlights the importance of the
adoption of our adaptive fidelity identification strategy.


                                                            17
          (a) Airlines                    (b) Albert                    (c) Christine                 (d) Fashion-MNIST

Figure 10: Performance of single-fidelity methods CQR, BORE, REA and their multi-fidelity variants FastCQR,
FastBORE, FastREA using our extension method: average validation accuracy on the LCBench benchmark.


                         (a) CIFAR-10                  (b) CIFAR-100                    (c) Protein

Figure 11: Performance of single-fidelity methods CQR, BORE, REA and their multi-fidelity variants FastCQR,
FastBORE, FastREA using our extension method: average validation error on NAS-Bench-201 and average validation
loss on FCNet.



A.4.3    E XTENDED E XPERIMENTS OF G ENERALITY OF E XTENSION M ETHOD

In § 5.4, we investigate the ability of our proposed extension method. Here, we provide additional results on the
datasets from LCBench in Figure 10 and more results on the datasets from NAS-Bench-201 and FCNet in Figure 11.
We run three well-known single-fidelity methods CQR (Salinas et al., 2023), BORE (Tiao et al., 2021), and REA (Real
et al., 2019), and extend them to the multi-fidelity setting using our extension method, denoted as FastCQR, FastBORE,
and FastREA respectively. More specifically, all the multi-fidelity variants evaluate the configurations to their efficient
points and use the corresponding performances for the subsequent operations, i.e., fitting the surrogate model for
FastCQR and FastBORE, selection and variation for FastREA.
From Figures 10 and 11, we can clearly observe that the multi-fidelity variants with our extension method always
outperform their single-fidelity counterparts. For the relatively simple task presented by the “Christine” dataset, the
distinctions are not as pronounced as they are in the case of other datasets. However, it is still evident that the multi-
fidelity methods are able to converge towards a higher accuracy more rapidly. Moreover, the evolutionary algorithm
REA can also be enhanced by our extension method. The results are consistent with the observations shown in § 5.4
and highlight the wide applicability of the proposed adaptive strategy to extend any single-fidelity method to the
multi-fidelity setting.


A.5     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Here we provide more details on the experimental setup, including details of the used benchmarks and choice of
parameters on the baseline methods.


                                                            18
                Table 5: Detailed information of LCBench, NAS-Bench-201 and FCNet benchmarks.

                          Benchmark            #Evaluations      #Hyperparameters     #Fidelities
                          LCBench                     2,000              7                    50
                          NAS-Bench-201              15,625              6                   200
                          FCNet                      62,208              9                   100


A.5.1    B ENCHMARK D ETAILS
In our experiments, we use 3 well-known tabular benchmarks: LCBench (Zimmer et al., 2021), NAS-Bench-
201 (Dong & Yang, 2020), and FCNet (Klein & Hutter, 2019). We conclude detailed information on these benchmarks
in Tables 5, including the number of provided evaluations, the number of hyperparameters, and the number of fideli-
ties. Table 6 provides information on the hyperparameters in the benchmarks and their corresponding configuration
spaces.
LCBench. LCBench is a neural network benchmark that consists of 2000 hyperparameter configurations. LCBench
features a search space of 7 numerical hyperparameters of neural networks, including the number of layers, the maxi-
mum number of units per layer, batch size, learning rate, weight decay, momentum, and dropout. The fidelity refers to
the number of epochs in LCBench and each hyperparameter configuration is trained for 50 epochs. LCBench contains
35 datasets and we run the 5 most expensive ones.
NAS-Bench-201. NAS-Bench-201 is a benchmark that consists of 15625 hyperparameter configurations. NAS-
Bench-201 features a search space of 6 categorical hyperparameters that correspond to 6 operations within the macro
architecture cell. The fidelity refers to the number of epochs in NAS-Bench-201 and each hyperparameter config-
uration, which represents a network architecture, is trained for 200 epochs. NAS-Bench-201 contains the image
classification datasets cifar-10, cifar-100 and ImageNet16-120.
FCNet. FCNet is a benchmark that consists of 62208 hyperparameter configurations. FCNet features a search space
of 4 architectural choices (i.e., the number of units and activation functions for two layers) and 5 hyperparameters (i.e.,
dropout rates per layer, batch size, initial learning rate and learning rate schedule). The fidelity refers to the number of
epochs in FCNet and each hyperparameter configuration is trained for 100 epochs. FCNet uses 4 popular UCI datasets
for regression.

A.5.2    C HOICE OF PARAMETERS ON BASELINE M ETHODS
We use implementations of all the baseline HPO methods provided in Syne Tune (Salinas et al., 2022). We here list
the parameters used for running the baselines in our experiments. In general, we follow the default settings in Syne
Tune which are also recommended in the previous work.

        • Vanilla Bayesian Optimization (BO) (Snoek et al., 2012) uses a Matérn 25 kernel with automatic relevance
          determination parameters and the expected improvement (EI) acquisition function.
        • ASHA (Li et al., 2020), Hyperband (Li et al., 2017) and PASHA (Bohdal et al., 2023) follow the successive
          halving (SHA) (Jamieson & Talwalkar, 2016) framework and sample new hyperparameter configurations at
          random. We use the recommended reduction factor η of 3 in all of them. In other words, the evaluations are
          stopped after 1, 3, 9, 27, ... resource levels.
        • A-BOHB (Klein et al., 2020) follows the SHA framework with η = 3. It uses a stopping variant asynchronous
          scheduling, which is different from the promotion variant asynchronous scheduling used in ASHA. New
          configurations are selected as in the vanilla BO.
        • A-CQR (Salinas et al., 2023) follows the SHA framework with η = 3 and uses the promotion variant asyn-
          chronous scheduling as ASHA. It uses BO to select the configuration and uses the last observed values from
          the SHA framework to fit the surrogate model. It uses a conformal quantile regression-based surrogate model.
        • BOHB (Falkner et al., 2018) follows the SHA framework with η = 3 and uses synchronous scheduling. It
          uses BO with a multi-variate kernel density estimator to select new configurations.
        • Hyper-Tune (Li et al., 2022) follows the SHA framework with η = 3 and uses the promotion variant asyn-
          chronous scheduling as ASHA. It fits independent Gaussian process models at different resource levels.


                                                            19
                       Table 6: Hyperparameters and configuration spaces for benchmarks.

      Benchmark          Hyperparameter     Configuration space
                         num layers         [1, 5]
                         max units          [64, 512]
                         batch size         [16, 512]
      LCBench            learning rate      [1e-4, 1e-1]
                         weight decay       [1e-5, 0.1]
                         momentum           [0.1, 0.99]
                         max dropout        [0.0, 1.0]
                         x0                 [avg pool 3x3, nor conv 3x3, skip connect, nor conv 1x1, none]
                         x1                 [avg pool 3x3, nor conv 3x3, skip connect, nor conv 1x1, none]
                         x2                 [avg pool 3x3, nor conv 3x3, skip connect, nor conv 1x1, none]
      NAS-Bench-201
                         x4                 [avg pool 3x3, nor conv 3x3, skip connect, nor conv 1x1, none]
                         x3                 [avg pool 3x3, nor conv 3x3, skip connect, nor conv 1x1, none]
                         x5                 [avg pool 3x3, nor conv 3x3, skip connect, nor conv 1x1, none]
                         activation 1       [tanh, relu]
                         activation 2       [tanh, relu]
                         batch size         [8, 16, 32, 64]
                         dropout 1          [0.0, 0.3, 0.6]
      FCNet              dropout 2          [0.0, 0.3, 0.6]
                         init lr            [0.0005, 0.001, 0.005, 0.01, 0.05, 0.1]
                         lr schedule        [cosine, const]
                         n units 1          [16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512]
                         n units 2          [16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512]


The experiments in § 5.4 contain three HPO methods and we use implementations of them provided in Syne Tune. We
also provide the parameter settings of the three methods as follows.

      • CQR (Salinas et al., 2023) uses BO with a conformal quantile regression-based surrogate model to select new
        configurations.
      • BORE (Tiao et al., 2021) is evaluated with XGBoost (Chen & Guestrin, 2016) as the classifier with its default
        setting. We set γ = 1/4, consistent with BORE’s default hyperparameter setting.
      • REA (Real et al., 2019) is an evolutionary algorithm that uses a population size of 10, and 5 samples are
        drawn to select a mutation from.


                                                        20
