Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L ARGE C ONTENT AND B EHAVIOR M ODELS TO U N -
DERSTAND , S IMULATE , AND O PTIMIZE C ONTENT AND
B EHAVIOR
 Ashmit Khandelwal⋆1                                   Aditya Agrawal⋆1                                 Aanisha Bhattacharyya⋆                          Yaman K Singla⋆
 Somesh Singh                    Uttaran Bhattacharya                                              Ishita Dasgupta         Stefano Petrangeli
 Rajiv Ratn Shah                            Changyou Chen                                     Balaji Krishnamurthy
    Adobe,         BITS, Pilani,                 IIIT-Delhi,                    State University of New York at Buffalo


                                                                                 A BSTRACT
            Shannon and Weaver’s seminal information theory divides communication into
            three levels: technical, semantic, and effectiveness. While the technical level deals
            with the accurate reconstruction of transmitted symbols, the semantic and effec-
            tiveness levels deal with the inferred meaning and its effect on the receiver. Large
            Language Models (LLMs), with their wide generalizability, make some progress
            towards the second level. However, LLMs and other communication models are
            not conventionally designed for predicting and optimizing communication for de-
            sired receiver behaviors and intents. As a result, the effectiveness level remains
            largely untouched by modern communication systems. In this paper, we intro-
            duce the receivers’ “behavior tokens,” such as shares, likes, clicks, purchases,
            and retweets, in the LLM’s training corpora to optimize content for the receivers
            and predict their behaviors. Other than showing similar performance to LLMs on
            content understanding tasks, our trained models show generalization capabilities
            on the behavior dimension for behavior simulation, content simulation, behav-
            ior understanding, and behavior domain adaptation. We show results on all these
            capabilities using a wide range of tasks on three corpora. We call these models
            Large Content and Behavior Models (LCBMs). Further, to spur more research
            on LCBMs, we release our new Content Behavior Corpus (CBC), a repository
            containing communicator, message, and corresponding receiver behavior* .


1    I NTRODUCTION

                                                                              Verbalized Content
                                                                                and Behavior
                                     Text    Video Image Behavior
                        I have two ad variants A and B, which one will the user like?                                   Variant A
            Behavior
                        Today is Jan 1 2023, how many people in Texas will buy this shoe                                  224k
           Simulation                           by Jul 1 2023?

           Content       If my target segment is new parents, how can I modify my
                                                                                                          Large         Make the baby face the camera
                                                                                                                           rather than her mother
          Simulation        message such that I get a click through rate of 2.5%?                    Content-Behavior
                                                                                                                          White
                                                                                                      Model (LCBM)
          Content       What is the color of the wall behind the man?
                                                                                                                        Emily was elated to see her
        Understanding    What does the narrator say when Emily gets into the car?                                        grandma after a long time

          Behavior                                                                                                      The ad sells cheese burger but gets shown
                         If 100k people viewed this food ad, why did only 500 people
        Understanding                                                                                                      during morning time. People usually
                                                 click on it?
                                                                                                                         prefer healthier options during morning.


Figure 1: Encoding and predicting content (images, videos, and text) and behavior in the language space. Large
Content Behavior Models (LCBMs), once trained, can enable a host of different applications, including behav-
ior simulation, content understanding, content-behavior optimization, and content-behavior understanding.

    ⋆
       Equal Contribution. Contact ykumar@adobe.com for questions and suggestions.
    1
       Work done while at Adobe.
    * https://behavior-in-the-wild.github.io/LCBM


                                                                                              1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            (a)                        (b)                         (c)                        (d)

Figure 2: Comparison of GPT-3.5, GPT-4, Vicuna-13B, and LCBM-13B on: (a) Behavior Simulation accuracy
on two types of behaviors: replay value prediction and likes/views prediction. The task is, given the video
content and channel information, to predict replay values corresponding to each scene and the ratio of likes
to views. (b) Content simulation and behavior understanding tasks. The task for content simulation is, given
the channel information and scene-level behavior, to predict the scene content. Given information on the video
platform and the video content, the task of behavior understanding is to predict and explain the sentiments
of the viewers and the commenters. Six evaluators scored the models’ explanations between 0-5 to get the
predicted sentiment and explanation scores by comparing the ratings and reasons with the user comments. The
annotators did not know which model gave the reasoning. (c) Content understanding tasks. We evaluate four
tasks: emotion, topic, and persuasion strategy prediction, and action-and-reason understanding. (d) Behavior
Simulation on in-house Email Marketing Data (R2 score) and Twitter likes (accuracy), and Content Simulation
on Twitter tweet prediction (BLEU/ROUGE scores). It can be noted that on the behavior simulation, content
simulation, and behavior understanding tasks, LCBM performs better than 3-shot GPT-3.5 and 10-shot GPT-4
(covering a larger area. On the content understanding tasks, while LCBM outperforms similar-sized Vicuna
models, GPT-3.5 performs better. However, we also note that GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 are at least 12 times larger
than LCBM-13B. Further, we show the behavior domain adaptation results in Table 6, 7, 8.



Shannon & Weaver (1949), in their seminal paper on communication, includes all of the proce-
dures by which one mind may affect another. This includes all forms of expression, such as words,
gestures, speech, pictures, and musical sounds. They mentioned that the broad problem of commu-
nication can be studied at three levels: technical, semantic, and effectiveness.
Level A: Technical. How accurately can the symbols of communication be transmitted?
Level B: Semantic. How precisely do the transmitted symbols convey the desired meaning?
Level C: Effectiveness. How well does the received meaning induce the desired conduct in the
receiver?
These three levels build on top of each other. Thus, solving the problem at Level C necessarily
requires solving the corresponding problems at Levels A and B.
Since the publication of this seminal paper, the tremendous growth in the field of telecommunica-
tions, particularly the advent of the Internet and mobile devices, has led to affordable, wide-scale
solutions for Level A. With the recent advances in large language models (LLMs) such as BERT
(Devlin et al., 2018), GPT-3 and 4 (Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2023), T5 (Raffel et al., 2020),
and many more, we have witnessed a significant improvement in the performance of various Natural
Language Processing (NLP) tasks. LLMs in zero- or few-shot settings can easily handle tasks such
as question answering, summarization, translation, and many more. This has helped us progress
towards solving Level B to a large extent. However, the Level C problem of effectiveness remains
largely unsolved. Effectiveness refers to designing messages that can fulfill the communicators’
underlying objectives, such as explaining complex concepts to the receivers and informing the re-
ceivers’ choices (e.g., when making purchase decisions).
How do we solve the effectiveness problem while retaining the other two levels? To solve the
effectiveness problem, we can take inspiration from how the semantic problem is being solved. Raf-
fel et al. (2020), in their seminal work on T5, mention that the basic idea underlying large language
models is to treat every text processing problem as a “text-to-text” problem, i.e., taking the text as
input and producing new text as output. This framework allows for a direct application of the same
model, objective, training procedure, and decoding process to every task we consider. Further, this
allows us to pre-train a model on a data-rich task like the next-word prediction, which can then be
transferred to downstream tasks. Notably, thanks to the Internet, the next-word prediction task has
huge amounts of available data. Consider the Common Crawl project (https://commoncrawl.org),


                                                      2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         {                    }
                                           description: a sunny
                                              football ground
                                           objects: a football,


                                                                                                 {              }
                                              players, grass
                                         asr: even after hours of
                               Message           practice,                                           likes: 15k
                                                                                                     views: 60M


                                              { }
                                                                                                   scene replays:
                                                 Youtube                                         [73,85,99,...,24]

           Communicator                                                 Receiver

                                                                    {              }
                                                                                        Effect

        {       Nike
                          }
          Subscribers: 754K
                               Channel
                                                                    Nike Subscribers/
                                                                     General Youtube
                                                                         Audience


     Figure 3: Five factors of communication: Communicator, Message, Channel, Receiver, and Effect.


one common source of data included in most language models. It produces more than 20TB of text
per month sampled from random web pages across the internet.
T5 and other language models like GPT-3, Pythia (Biderman et al., 2023), and Llama (Touvron et al.,
2023) can solve a wide variety of tasks, including the ones for which they were not explicitly trained.
For instance, language models trained on the next word prediction task showed generalization ca-
pabilities across a wide variety of tasks like question-answering, summarization, natural language
inference, and translation (Brown et al., 2020). Recently, a series of papers have shown that this
generalized “world understanding” captured in LLMs can be leveraged to enable them to “see” (Liu
et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023b;a; Zhu et al., 2023; Ge et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023; Bhattacharyya
et al., 2023). This is a significant capability enhancement since a model trained in language only
settings can be made to reason about images and videos. These papers follow the same transfer
learning approach advocated by T5, where they convert visual information to language space to
leverage the “text-to-text” framework. They show that it is possible to teach a large language model,
the new modality of vision, without needing to pre-train the model from scratch. Rather, using only
a few million tokens, it is possible to scale LLMs’ abilities to vision as well. Following this chain
of thought, it could be possible to solve the effectiveness problem by posing it as a “text-to-text”
problem. This is the paradigm we explore in this work.
How can we pose the effectiveness problem as a text-to-text problem? The problem of effect is
to know what the receiver does after receiving the message (Shannon & Weaver, 1949). In general,
for a piece of content, other than the content itself, we often have information about who consumes
the content and what his action is on consuming the content. The latter is the effect described in
Shannon’s three levels of communication. For instance, an email, as a message from the communi-
cator to the receiver, elicits certain actions from the receiver like link-clicks, replies, and read-time.
While LLMs are trained on trillions of tokens of content, the training does not include the receiver
effect. For instance, Enron Email (Klimt & Yang, 2004) is a popular corpus that is included in the
training of LLMs like Pythia (Biderman et al., 2023). It contains 600K email content sourced from
the Enron corporation, which LLMs use to learn how to write emails. However, it does not contain
data about the receivers’ activities, such as whether they opened the email, how long they kept it
open (read-time), and what their reply was. Similarly, while major text corpora include a large num-
ber of public blogs and user forums to train LLMs like CommonCrawl, they are stripped of receiver
behavior on forum messages, such as the number of likes, shares, and replies, before including them
in LLM training (for instance, see (Biderman et al., 2022; Penedo et al., 2023)). To pose the effec-
tiveness problem as a text-to-text problem, we can include these behavior tokens in the text along
with content tokens and train the LLM to model both of those in the same space. This might help
the LLM simulate the receiver effect, optimize for it, and reason about it.
In this paper, we show initial experiments to integrate behavior as a new modality to increase the
scope of multimodal LLMs from only content to both content and behavior. We call this new type
of model a Large Content Behavior Model (LCBM). This class of models shows promise in en-
abling the LLMs to not only reason about content but also reason about and predict human behavior
over that content. Further, LCBMs have the potential for behavior domain adaptation where models
trained on one type of behavior can generalize on another behavior type (Fig. 2). Behavior simula-
tion can enable many real-world applications, such as content recommendation, customer journey
optimization, and A/B testing. To build LCBM, we introduce behavior instruction tuning (§2.4),
an attempt to extend the instruction tuning paradigm to behavior space, bringing all five communi-
cation factors (communicator, message, channel, receiver, and effect) into the same space (Fig. 3).
Similar to Brown et al. (2020); Raffel et al. (2020); Liu et al. (2023); Ge et al. (2023), we do not


                                                            3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


design best-in-class predictors for any of the downstream tasks. Rather, we show a model which
shows generalization capabilities across a wide variety of content- and behavior-related tasks. To
summarize, our paper makes the following two contributions:
• Large Content Behavior Model (LCBM). We develop a large multimodal model that shows
  capabilities of behavior simulation (given content), content simulation (given behavior), content
  understanding, and behavior understanding (Fig. 1). Following the text-to-text framework, we
  connect the Vicuna LLM (Touvron et al., 2023; Chiang et al., 2023) with an open-set visual
  encoder of EVA-CLIP (Sun et al., 2023) and instruction fine-tune it end-to-end on behavior in-
  struction data. EVA-CLIP and QFormer (Li et al., 2023a) help the model to understand visual
  content in the language space, making it a Vision Language Model (VLM). During behavior in-
  struction tuning, we teach the model to predict behavior given content and content given behavior
  using various instruction tasks (§2.4). This helps us teach behavior modality to the VLM while
  grounding it in the natural language space. We use three datasets to show the performance of
  LCBM: a dataset consisting of YouTube videos as the content and the corresponding retention
  graph, likes, the number of views, and comment sentiment as receiver behavior; a dataset consist-
  ing of Twitter posts (text, images, and videos) and corresponding human behavior (like counts)
  extracted from 168 million tweets across 10135 enterprise Twitter accounts from 2007 to 2023
  Khurana et al. (2023b); and an internal dataset of In-house Marketing Emails|| (content) and the
  click-through rate corresponding to each segment they were sent to (behavior). We observe that
  teaching the LCBM behavior and content simulation improves its capabilities on them (expected),
  but the model also shows signs of domain-adaptation in behavior modality (few-shot capability,
  unexpected) (Tables 6,7,8) and improvements in behavior understanding (Figs. 5,6,§3) (zero-shot
  capability, unexpected) (Brown et al., 2020). See Fig. 2 for a radar plot of all the capabilities and
  comparisons of performances across LCBM and state-of-the-art LLMs: GPT-3.5 and GPT-4.
• Dataset and Test Benchmark. To spur research on the topic of large content and behavior
  models, we release our generated behavior instruction fine-tuning data from over 40,000 public-
  domain YouTube videos and 168 million Twitter posts. The data contains: 1) YouTube video
  links, automatically extracted key scenes, scene verbalizations, replay graph data, video views,
  likes, comments, channel name, and subscriber count at the time of collection, and 2) Twitter ex-
  tracted account names, tweet text, associated media (image and video) verbalizations (including
  image captions, keywords, colors, and tones), tweet timestamps, and like counts Khurana et al.
  (2023b). We also release a benchmark to test performance on the joint content behavior space
  (§2.3), introducing two types of tasks in this space: predictive and descriptive. In the predictive
  benchmark, we test the model’s ability to predict behavior given the content and predict content
  given the behavior. In the descriptive benchmark, we validate its explanation of human behav-
  ior by comparing it with ground-truth annotations we obtain from human annotators that try to
  explain human behavior. See Figs. 5,6 for a few examples.


2          S ETUP

In this section, we introduce our approach to model content and behavior together as a text-to-text
problem. Since most publicly available corpora strip off receiver behavior from content, we first
introduce our dataset, “The Content Behavior Corpus (CBC)”, a dataset consisting of content and
the corresponding receiver behavior. Next, we introduce our methodology to convert the content and
behavior into text and our approach to model it using an LLM. Then, we cover the tasks through
which we test various capabilities of LCBM (Fig. 1): content-understanding, behavior understand-
ing, content simulation, behavior simulation, and behavior domain adaptation.

2.1         T HE C ONTENT B EHAVIOR C ORPUS (CBC)

The availability of large-scale unlabeled text data for unsupervised learning has fueled much of
the progress of LLMs. In this paper, we are interested in modeling content and the corresponding
receiver behavior in the same space. While available datasets contain trillions of content tokens
(text, images, audio, and videos), they unfortunately do not contain the receiver effect. To address
this, we utilize YouTube and Twitter, two large publicly available sources of content-behavior data,
      ||
           We obtain In-house Marketing Emails dataset by collaborating with the In-house team.


                                                          4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: Encoding and predicting content (images, videos, and text) and behavior in the language space. Strat-
egy to behavior instruction fine-tune (BFT) LLMs to create LCBMs. We capture visual concepts through the
visual encoder (EVA-CLIP), and world knowledge is through an LLM (Llama). To leverage the rich knowl-
edge of LLMs, we use GMHRA and QFormer to convert visual tokens of ViT to language tokens that Llama
can understand. Further, we find that verbalizing the visual stimulus helps Llama to gather information more
explicitly than what is provided by ViT+QFormer. We fine-tune the combined model end-to-end to predict
1) behavior given content and 2) content given behavior. Snowflake and fire symbols denote the frozen and
unfrozen parts of the architecture.



consisting of (a) account name, account description, and number of subscribers and followers (com-
municator data) , (b) rich content in the form of videos, images, creator-provided captions, titles,
and descriptions (message), (c) behavior in the form of likes, views, user comments, and replay
graph (receiver effect). This covers all the five factors of communication (Fig. 3), with the channel
being fixed (as YouTube or Twitter) and receivers being average channel followers and viewers of
the communicator. Since content data is multimodal in the form of a combination of images, videos,
and text, and behavior data is in the form of numbers, to model it using a text-to-text paradigm, we
verbalize both of them following the methodology we detail next.
Verbalization: For the video V , YouTube provides us with 100 average viewer retention values
ri for i ∈ [0..100), corresponding to the entire video. The sampling rate of 100 is constant and inde-
pendent of video length (T ). Replay value ri corresponds to video frames between the timestamps
(T /100 × i, T /100 × (i + 1)), which denotes how often these frames were replayed compared to the
most replayed frames. The metric has a value between 0 and 1 that identifies the video’s relative re-
tention performance at a given point in the video. To accommodate longer video lengths, we merge
replay values until T /100 × (i + j) − T /100 × i > 1 second with j ∈ {i + 1, 100}. We choose
the replay value for this merged group of scenes as max(ri , ..., rj ). Using this logic, we get replay
values Ri for i ∈ [0..m], where m = ⌊100/(⌈100/T ⌉)⌋. Next, we sample two frames randomly
corresponding to each i ∈ [0..m]. We caption the frames using BLIP (Li et al., 2023a). We also
obtain the automatic speech recognition for the speech for the video between the timestamps corre-
sponding to replay value Ri using Whisper (Radford et al., 2023). The ASR and BLIP captions are
content for scenes, and replay values are the behavior corresponding to them. We include the scene
content and behavior in the video verbalization (Listing 1) with the sampling for both scene content
and behavior as described above.
We also include video content by encoding video frames through EVA-CLIP (Sun et al., 2023)
(explained in §2.2). Other than video embeddings, we include the video title and description as
part of the video content. Corresponding to the overall video content, we verbalize overall video
behavior metrics like video views and the ratio of likes and views. Finally, we append it with
communicator information on the video channel and the subscriber count. The Listing 1 presents
the overall verbalization for video and frame level content and behavior. The verbalization for
Twitter posts is similar and is given in Listing 7.
         Listing 1: Verbalization pattern for inputting content and behavior in the same space
Input : <video> ..[Video Tokens] .. </video>
The video has the following scenes :
Scene 1: {ASR: Welcome to a quick tutorial , OCR: Adobe Premiere Pro, Captions : A desktop interface , Replays: 60},
Scene 2: {ASR: on using Premiere Pro to edit , Captions : A computer interface , with an image of a white horse . Objects − Horse,
        Grass, Fence ., Replays: 53},
 ...
It was posted on Adobe's YouTube channel with the title ' Using Premiere Pro like a Pro ' on Aug 15 2022. Adobe's YouTube
       channel has 100k subscribers . This video was viewed by 346 thousand people and liked (as a percentage of likes /views) by
        2.3% people.


                                                                5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Model     #Params    Training             Past                   Future                         Random                             All Masked
                                                                                                Window Size
                                                                                        5                      7
                                   RMSE      Accuracy     RMSE       Accuracy   RMSE        Accuracy   RMSE        Accuracy   RMSE       Accuracy
 LCBM                  3-BFT       8.12           55.10   15.05        42.42    8.55         61.41      9.91        55.10       -            -
 LCBM       13B        5-BFT       11.53          52.06   12.02        53.06    8.13         64.83      9.22        60.26     31.34        17.16
 LCBM                  7-BFT       16.17          35.61   15.14        44.11    9.02         59.22     10.47        53.84       -            -
 LCBM                  11-BFT      18.25          30.95   15.05        41.44    10.01        55.15     10.49        52.61       -            -
 GPT-4               10-shot-ICL   34.45          20.55   19.51        36.08    22.99        26.99     27.25        17.27     38.52        14.26
           >100B†
 GPT-4                2-shot-ICL   35.05          19.34   18.07        39.33    17.42        38.10     21.26        28.05     37.60        13.73
 GPT-3.5              3-shot-ICL   34.10          19.06   24.71        27.14    24.52        24.81     26.30        18.74     38.77        13.47
            175B
 GPT-3.5              2-shot-ICL   33.36          18.02   26.44        25.42    23.35        25.35     24.68        21.24     37.16        13.39
 Random       -            -       34.10          10.00   34.10        10.00    34.10        10.00     34.10        10.00     34.10        10.00


Table 1: Behavior Simulation. Mean RMSE and accuracy scores for scene-by-scene predictions of video
replay values. Replay values are the normalized replay scores of each scene as provided by YouTube. The
normalized scores are considered to 2 decimal places and multiplied by hundred to convert the score to an
integer score in the range 0-100. RMSE is calculated for each video in the test set and the mean is calculated
for this score and reported. The model is said to classify correctly if the absolute error between the predicted
and ground truth value is less than or equal to 5. The scores are calculated in four regimes: past, future, random,
and all-masked. In the past (future) regimes, first (last) 5-20% scenes are masked; in the random setting, 5-20%
scenes are masked randomly, and in all masked setting, everything is masked. LCBM was behavior-fine-tuned
(BFT) with 3,5,7,11 context window masking strategy, while GPT was compared with an in-context learning
(ICL) setting. We note that behavior fine-tuned LCBM, while being at least 10x smaller than other models,
performs the best. Best models are denoted in green and runner-ups in blue .



2.2      M ODEL

To understand both visual and textual contents, we follow a similar approach as was taken by recent
models like BLIP, Llava, VideoLlama, and others (Liu et al., 2023; Ge et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023a;
Zhu et al., 2023), we use visual encoders to encode visual knowledge and an LLM to encode text
and world knowledge. Fig. 4 shows our architecture to encode visual content into the language
space. We include video content by encoding video frames through EVA-CLIP (Sun et al., 2023)
and Global Multi-Head Relation Aggregator (GMHRA) from Uniformer (Li et al., 2021). GMHRA
helps aggregate the information better across the time dimension. The combination of ViT and
GMHRA gives us a good representation of the visual content. Next, to effectively leverage the
LLM’s rich language representations, we use Q-Former from BLIP-2 (Li et al., 2023a) with an
extra linear layer and additional query tokens to convert from visual tokens to language tokens.
Further, similar to Bhattacharyya et al. (2023), we find that while encoding visual tokens is powerful,
converting visual content to text adds to the downstream performance. Therefore, we include the
BLIP caption for each scene along with the scene replay graph.
We use the Llama-based Vicuna-13B LLM (Touvron et al., 2023; Chiang et al., 2023) as our base
LLM. Similar to prior works (Liu et al., 2023; Ge et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023a; Zhu et al., 2023),
we follow a two-stage training paradigm where in the first stage, we utilize the WebVid (Bain et al.,
2021), COCO caption (Chen et al., 2015), Visual Genome (Krishna et al., 2017), CC3M (Sharma
et al., 2018), and CC12M (Changpinyo et al., 2021) datasets to align the visual encoder embeddings
with LLM. In the second stage, we train the model with behavior instructions prepared by following
the approach described in §2.4. In summary, LCBM takes concatenated inputs of visual tokens,
scene ASR, caption, scene behavior of replays, channel information, and video title and behavior
metrics of views and a ratio of likes to views. Based on the instruction, we test LCBM’s abilities on
various tasks we cover in the next paragraphs.


2.3      C ONTENT B EHAVIOR T EST B ENCHMARK

We test the capabilities of large content-behavior models on predictive and descriptive abilities on
content and behavior, as illustrated in Fig: 1. We design the following five tasks to test these ca-
pabilities: behavior simulation, content simulation, content understanding, behavior understanding,
and behavior domain adaptation. We cover each of these tasks next.


                                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


1. Behavior Simulation. We test simulation capability on four behaviors across two datasets:
   YouTube replay values, the ratio of YouTube likes to views, Twitter likes, and the number of
   views of the YouTube video. The common task amongst all of them is to predict the behavior
   given the content and content attributes like captions, scene-by-scene descriptions for videos, and
   sender characteristics like account and subscriber count and date of posting. The behavior to be
   predicted is masked and asked as a question to the LLM. Listings 6 and 7 lists the verbalization
   pattern for this task. For replay value prediction, we test the masked behavior in three settings:
   Masked Past (all replay values of the first 5-20% scenes are masked), Masked Future (all replay
   values of last 5-20% scenes are masked), and Random Masks (random masking of replay values
   for 5-20% scenes).
2. Content Simulation. Here, the task is to predict content given receiver behavior (Listing 5, 8).
   For YouTube, given the video content in terms of scene-by-scene descriptions with the content
   of one group of five consecutive scenes content being masked, behavior values of all scenes, and
   channel information, the task is to choose the masked scene speech from a list of 25 options,
   chosen randomly from the entire test set. For YouTube, we chose to model this task as a dis-
   criminative task instead of a generative one since videos are generally long, and there could be
   multiple possible contents for a given behavior, whereas the ground truth is available only for
   one specific characterization of the content for a given behavior. For Twitter, we model this task
   as content generation. The Listing 8 presents the format for this task.
3. Behavior Understanding. The goal of this task is to check if the model can reason about ob-
   served or unobserved receiver behavior. For this task, we could ask the model to explain any
   behaviors given the content. However, only the YouTube receiver comments have ground truth
   available with the video. Without ground truth, we found that other behaviors, such as replay
   values, likes, and views, are difficult to explain by non-experts. Therefore, we ask the model
   to simulate the sentiment of the receivers’ comments and describe its reasoning. To evaluate,
   we asked six annotators to annotate the reasons provided by the model on a scale of 0-5, with 0
   implying the LLMs provided no sentiment or reasoning and 5 implying perfect reasoning. The
   annotators were free to rate the LLMs as they seemed fit. The annotators were asked to review
   the video content and the comments to help them evaluate the reasons. We average the ratings
   of three annotators to get an average rating for every video. Similarly, to review the sentiment
   correctness, we asked the annotators to judge the predicted sentiment rating with respect to user
   comments.
4. Content Understanding. To check if a model trained on both content and behavior tokens
   does not forget its original content understanding capabilities, we test the content understanding
   tasks on YouTube videos, following Bhattacharyya et al. (2023). They use the following tasks
   for video-understanding: topic, emotion, persuasion, and action-reason classification. For topic,
   emotion, and action-reason classification tasks, they use the advertisements dataset by Hussain
   et al. (2017), which contains 3,477 video advertisements and the corresponding annotations for
   emotion and topic tags and action-reason statements for each video. There are a total of 38
   topics and 30 unique emotion tags per video. Further, we have 5 action-reason statements for
   each video for the action-reason generation task. For our experiment, we use the subset of 1,785
   public videos. Following Bhattacharyya et al. (2023), for the topic and emotion classification
   task, we evaluate our pipeline using top-1 accuracy as the evaluation metric. Further, we evaluate
   emotion classification on clubbed emotion labels as well. For action and reason prediction, we
   evaluate our accuracy on the action and reason retrieval tasks where 29 random options along
   with 1 ground truth are provided to the model to find which one is the ground truth. In the per-
   suasion strategy classification, we use the 1002 persuasion strategy videos and corresponding
   labels released by Bhattacharyya et al. (2023). Given the video, the model has to predict which
   persuasion strategy the video conveys. Persuasion strategy classification could be an important
   task for evaluating LCBM since the concept of persuasion in psychology views human commu-
   nication as the means to change the receiver’s beliefs and actions (i.e., to persuade) (Kumar et al.,
   2023), and understanding the different strategies present in communication may help understand
   human behavior better. We evaluate the top-1 accuracy of the model on this task.
5. Behavior Domain Adaptation. In the past work, we have observed strong generalization ca-
   pabilities from LLMs (OpenAI, 2023; Ouyang et al., 2022; Raffel et al., 2020). While training
   on next token prediction, LLMs show generalization across tasks, including question answer-
   ing, natural language inference, and sentiment analysis. Given this, the natural question is, does
   LCBM, too, show this kind of generalization, where a model trained on one kind of behavior,
   can show performance on another behavior? To understand this, we test the model on a different


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    dataset and task than what it was originally trained for. We do this over three datasets, LVU
    (Wu & Krahenbuhl, 2021), In-house Email Marketing|| , and generalization between Twitter and
    YouTube likes.
       • LVU Benchmark. Wu & Krahenbuhl (2021) released a benchmark for long video under-
         standing with over 1000 hours of video. In the benchmark, they have two behavior related
         tasks: ratio of likes to likes+dislikes and view prediction. YouTube has discontinued the
         dislike count, therefore, our corpus does not contain the dislike count. We use the LVU test
         benchmark to check if a model trained on other available behaviors (views, likes, and replay
         graphs) is able to predict the like ratio.
       • In-house Email Marketing. In this task, we ask the model to predict the click-through
         rate for a given target segment of an email, given the email content, subject, and verbalized
         descriptions of the images in the email. We use the emails sent by In-house marketing team
         to its subscribers. The emails were sent from April 1, 2022 to June 12, 2023 and covered
         many of the premiere products The emails were sent to many customer segments (as defined
         by the marketing team) across 225 countries (Table 9). Listing 3 lists the verbalization
         format to verbalize emails to input to the LCBM.

2.4   B EHAVIOR I NSTRUCTION F INE -T UNING (BFT)

To teach an LLM the behavior modality over multimodal content, we convert both the visual tokens
and behavior modality in the text format and instruction fine-tune the LLM end to end. This follows
a two-stage approach: first, we teach the LLM the visual modality (§2.2), and next, we teach the
LLM the behavior modality. We call the latter “Behavior Instruction Fine-Tuning (BFT)” inspired
by instruction fine-tuning (IFT) and its variants like visual instruction tuning (Liu et al., 2023).
We prepare the content-behavior instruction datasets as explained next.
Teaching behavior in the forward direction (predict behavior given content): In this instruction
tuning task, we teach the model to predict behavior given the message sent by the communica-
tor. Essentially, this teaches the model to predict behavior in the forward direction (as in Fig. 3).
Concretely, we include the following information as part of verbalization - image and video embed-
ding converted to the text space (using EvaCLiP (Sun et al., 2023)), scene-by-scene verbalization
covering automatic speech recognition, scene captions, video/post caption and description, receiver
behavior covering replay rates, views, and likes, and communicator information covering account
name and follower count. The verbalisation pattern for this task is the same as given in the Listing 6.
Teaching behavior in the reverse direction (predict content given behavior): This task teaches the
model to learn about behavior in the reverse direction (Fig. 3). Here, the model learns to simulate
content given behavior. The instruction for this task is given in Listing 4.
Using the prepared content and behavior instruction datasets consisting of pairs of content and be-
havior tokens, we treat the content tokens (XC ) as input and behavior tokens (XB , xi ∈ XB ) as
output of the language model. We then perform instruction-tuning of the LLM on the prediction
tokens, using its original auto-regressive training objective. Specifically, for a sequence of length L,
we compute the probability of generating target answers (XB ) by:
                                               L
                                               Y
                                p(XB |XC ) =         pθ (xi |XC , XB,<i )                           (1)
                                               i=1

For the behavior instruction tuning, we keep the visual encoder weights frozen and continue to
update the pre-trained weights of the LLM in LCBM.


3     R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
Here, we discuss the results for the five tasks we discuss in Section 2.3, namely, behavior simulation,
content simulation, behavior understanding, content understanding, and behavior domain adapta-
tion. We compare the behavior fine-tuned model discussed in §2.4 with state-of-the-art content-only
models like GPT-3.5, GPT-4, and Vicuna-13B. This allows us to compare how much including be-
havior tokens in the training of an LLM helps in improving the LLM’s understanding of behavior
and joint content and behavior spaces while retaining its understanding of the content space.


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 Model        #Params        Accuracy                          Model           #Params   Sentiment Accuracy   Reasoning Score
                 Vicuna         13B           19.30%                           Vicuna           13B           65.66%               2.23
                 LCBM           13B           48.68%
                                                                               LCBM             13B           72.73%               4.00
                 GPT-3.5       175B           34.98%
                                                                               GPT-3.5          175B          61.62%               1.67
                 Random          -              4%


Table 2: Content Simulation. In this task, the                               Table 3: Behavior Understanding. In this task, the mod-
models have to choose the speech segment from a                              els have to simulate the sentiment of comments that a
list of 25 options given the video description, non-                         video would get by looking at only the video. Further,
masked scenes. and replay behavior. We see that                              they also have to explain the reason for such sentiment.
despite being similar to masked language mod-                                The responses were annotated by humans on a scale of 0-
eling (which is a content-only task), LCBM per-                              5 for the reason, with 0 being no response provided and
forms better than both Vicuna and GPT-3.5. Best                              5 being the response matches exactly with the (ground
models are denoted in green and runner-ups in                                truth) comments received on the video. Best models are
blue .                                                                       denoted in green and runner-ups in blue .



The results for the five tasks are presented in Tables 1,4,2,3,5, 6,7, and 8. We note a few general
trends. LCBM, while being 10x smaller than GPT-3.5 and 4, performs better than them on all
behavior-related tasks. Further, we see that there is no significant difference between 10-shot and
2-shot GPT-4 or between GPT-3.5 and GPT-4, indicating that unlike other tasks, it is harder to
achieve good performance through in-context-learning on the behavior modality. It can be observed
that often GPT-3.5 and 4 achieve performance comparable to (or worse than) random baselines.
Interestingly, the performance of GPTs on the content simulation task is also substantially behind
LCBM. The way we formulate the content simulation task (Listing 5), it can be seen that a substantial
performance could be achieved by strong content knowledge, and behavior brings in little variance.
We still see a substantial performance gap between the two models. All of this indicates that large
models like GPT-3.5 and 4 are not trained on behavior tokens.
For the content understanding tasks (Table 5), predictably GPT-3.5, being the largest model, achieves
the best results. However, we see that BFT helps the LLM to learn most content understanding tasks
better than the base LLM. LCBM gets better results than both Vicuna and VideoChat. This indicates
that behavior modality might carry additional information about the content, which might help an
LLM understand content better (Khurana et al., 2023a; Klerke et al., 2016; Plank, 2016). Next, we
see that LCBM also shows signs of domain adaptation in the behavior modality. We see that on
five tasks: comment sentiment prediction, comment sentiment reasoning (Table 3), email behavior
simulation (Table 6), and Twitter behavior (Table 7) and content simulation (Table 8). We note that if
the LCBM is trained on only email behavior simulation samples, it underperforms the model trained
on both YouTube data and a few samples to make the model learn email format. Similarly, LCBM
trained on both Twitter and YouTube performs better than the one just trained on Twitter, showing
performance improvement by domain adaptation. Finally, Figs. 5,6 show a few samples where we
query LCBM to explain replay and comment behavior and compare it with human explanations. We
see that LCBM while verbose, can explain behavior well.


4       C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we make initial strides towards solving the effectiveness problem proposed by Shan-
non in his seminal paper on communication. The effectiveness problem deals with predicting and
optimizing communication to get the desired receiver behavior. This can be seen as consisting of a
string of capabilities: behavior simulation, content simulation, and behavior domain adaptation. We
show that while large language models have great generalization capabilities, are unable to perform
well on the effectiveness problem. We posit that the reason for this could be a lack of “behavior
tokens” in their training corpora. Next, we train LLMs on behavior tokens to show that other than
content understanding tasks, the trained models are now able to have good performance across all
the behavior-related tasks as well. We also introduce a new Content Behavior Corpus (CBC) to spur
research on these large content and behavior models (LCBMs).

    §
        Note that we cannot compare this model with GPT-3 due to the private nature of data.


                                                                                9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Rajiv Ratn Shah is partly supported by the Infosys Center for AI, the Center of Design and New
Media, and the Center of Excellence in Healthcare at IIIT Delhi.
Changyou Chen is partially supported by NSF AI Institute-2229873, NSF RI-2223292, an Amazon
research award, and an Adobe gift fund. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Science Foundation, the Institute of Education Sciences, or the U.S. Department of
Education.

R EFERENCES
Max Bain, Arsha Nagrani, Gül Varol, and Andrew Zisserman. Frozen in time: A joint video and image encoder
  for end-to-end retrieval. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  1728–1738, 2021.

Steven C Bankes. Agent-based modeling: A revolution? Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 99
   (suppl 3):7199–7200, 2002.

Aanisha Bhattacharyya, Yaman K Singla, Balaji Krishnamurthy, Rajiv Ratn Shah, and Changyou Chen. A video
  is worth 4096 tokens: Verbalize videos to understand them in zero shot. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino,
  and Kalika Bali (eds.), Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing, pp. 9822–9839, Singapore, December 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.608. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.608.

Stella Biderman, Kieran Bicheno, and Leo Gao. Datasheet for the pile. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.07311, 2022.

Stella Biderman, Hailey Schoelkopf, Quentin Gregory Anthony, Herbie Bradley, Kyle O’Brien, Eric Hallahan,
   Mohammad Aflah Khan, Shivanshu Purohit, USVSN Sai Prashanth, Edward Raff, et al. Pythia: A suite
   for analyzing large language models across training and scaling. In International Conference on Machine
   Learning, pp. 2397–2430. PMLR, 2023.

Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Nee-
  lakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen
  Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Win-
  ter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark,
  Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models
  are few-shot learners, 2020.

Soravit Changpinyo, Piyush Sharma, Nan Ding, and Radu Soricut. Conceptual 12m: Pushing web-scale image-
  text pre-training to recognize long-tail visual concepts. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3558–3568, 2021.

Lili Chen, Kevin Lu, Aravind Rajeswaran, Kimin Lee, Aditya Grover, Misha Laskin, Pieter Abbeel, Aravind
   Srinivas, and Igor Mordatch. Decision transformer: Reinforcement learning via sequence modeling. Ad-
   vances in neural information processing systems, 34:15084–15097, 2021.

Xinlei Chen, Hao Fang, Tsung-Yi Lin, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Saurabh Gupta, Piotr Dollár, and C Lawrence
  Zitnick. Microsoft coco captions: Data collection and evaluation server. arXiv preprint arXiv:1504.00325,
  2015.

Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng, Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng, Siyuan
  Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion Stoica, and Eric P. Xing. Vicuna: An open-source
  chatbot impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality, March 2023. URL https://lmsys.org/blog/
  2023-03-30-vicuna/.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional
   transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.

Keyan Ding, Ronggang Wang, and Shiqi Wang. Social media popularity prediction: A multiple feature fu-
  sion approach with deep neural networks. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM International Conference on
  Multimedia, pp. 2682–2686, 2019.

Yuying Ge, Yixiao Ge, Ziyun Zeng, Xintao Wang, and Ying Shan. Planting a seed of vision in large language
  model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.08041, 2023.


                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Zaeem Hussain, Mingda Zhang, Xiaozhong Zhang, Keren Ye, Christopher Thomas, Zuha Agha, Nathan Ong,
  and Adriana Kovashka. Automatic understanding of image and video advertisements, 2017.

Wang-Cheng Kang, Jianmo Ni, Nikhil Mehta, Maheswaran Sathiamoorthy, Lichan Hong, Ed Chi, and
  Derek Zhiyuan Cheng. Do llms understand user preferences? evaluating llms on user rating prediction.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06474, 2023.

Aditya Khosla, Atish Das Sarma, and Raffay Hamid. What makes an image popular? In Proceedings of the
  23rd international conference on World wide web, pp. 867–876, 2014.

Varun Khurana, Yaman Kumar, Nora Hollenstein, Rajesh Kumar, and Balaji Krishnamurthy. Synthesizing
  human gaze feedback for improved NLP performance. In Proceedings of the 17th Conference of the
  European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 1895–1908, Dubrovnik, Croa-
  tia, May 2023a. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.eacl-main.139. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2023.eacl-main.139.

Varun Khurana, Yaman K Singla, Jayakumar Subramanian, Rajiv Ratn Shah, Changyou Chen, Zhiqiang Xu,
  and Balaji Krishnamurthy. Behavior optimized image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.10995, 2023b.

Sigrid Klerke, Yoav Goldberg, and Anders Søgaard. Improving sentence compression by learning to predict
   gaze. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Com-
   putational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 1528–1533, San Diego, California, June 2016.
   Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N16-1179. URL https://aclanthology.
   org/N16-1179.

Bryan Klimt and Yiming Yang. The enron corpus: A new dataset for email classification research. In European
  conference on machine learning, pp. 217–226. Springer, 2004.

Ranjay Krishna, Kenji Hata, Frederic Ren, Li Fei-Fei, and Juan Carlos Niebles. Dense-captioning events in
  videos. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 706–715, 2017.

Yaman Kumar, Rajat Jha, Arunim Gupta, Milan Aggarwal, Aditya Garg, Tushar Malyan, Ayush Bhardwaj,
  Rajiv Ratn Shah, Balaji Krishnamurthy, and Changyou Chen. Persuasion strategies in advertisements. In
  Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 37, pp. 57–66, 2023.

Harold D Lasswell. The structure and function of communication in society. The communication of ideas, 37
  (1):136–139, 1948.

Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image pre-training
  with frozen image encoders and large language models, 2023a.

Kunchang Li, Yali Wang, Gao Peng, Guanglu Song, Yu Liu, Hongsheng Li, and Yu Qiao. Uniformer: Unified
  transformer for efficient spatial-temporal representation learning. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2021.

KunChang Li, Yinan He, Yi Wang, Yizhuo Li, Wenhai Wang, Ping Luo, Yali Wang, Limin Wang, and Yu Qiao.
  Videochat: Chat-centric video understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06355, 2023b.

Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.08485, 2023.

Masoud Mazloom, Robert Rietveld, Stevan Rudinac, Marcel Worring, and Willemijn Van Dolen. Multimodal
  popularity prediction of brand-related social media posts. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM international
  conference on Multimedia, pp. 197–201, 2016.

Denis McQuail and Sven Windahl. Communication models for the study of mass communications. Routledge,
  2015.

Gerald R Miller. On defining communication: Another stab. Journal of Communication, 1966.

OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.

Charles Egerton Osgood, George J Suci, and Percy H Tannenbaum. The measurement of meaning. Number 47.
  University of Illinois press, 1957.

Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang,
  Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow instructions with
  human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:27730–27744, 2022.


                                                     11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Joon Sung Park, Joseph C O’Brien, Carrie J Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S Bern-
  stein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.03442, 2023.

Guilherme Penedo, Quentin Malartic, Daniel Hesslow, Ruxandra Cojocaru, Alessandro Cappelli, Hamza
  Alobeidli, Baptiste Pannier, Ebtesam Almazrouei, and Julien Launay. The refinedweb dataset for falcon
  llm: outperforming curated corpora with web data, and web data only. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.01116,
  2023.
Barbara Plank. Keystroke dynamics as signal for shallow syntactic parsing. In Proceedings of COLING 2016,
  the 26th International Conference on Computational Linguistics: Technical Papers, pp. 609–619, 2016.

Rui Qian, Tianjian Meng, Boqing Gong, Ming-Hsuan Yang, Huisheng Wang, Serge Belongie, and Yin Cui.
  Spatiotemporal contrastive video representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6964–6974, 2021.

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Tao Xu, Greg Brockman, Christine McLeavey, and Ilya Sutskever. Robust
  speech recognition via large-scale weak supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  28492–28518. PMLR, 2023.

Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou,
  Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer. The
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(1):5485–5551, 2020.

Elena Romero, Manuel Chica, Sergio Damas, and William Rand. Two decades of agent-based modeling in
   marketing: a bibliometric analysis. Progress in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 1–17, 2023.
Claude E. Shannon and Warren Weaver. The mathematical theory of communication. The mathematical theory
  of communication. University of Illinois Press, Champaign, IL, US, 1949.

Piyush Sharma, Nan Ding, Sebastian Goodman, and Radu Soricut. Conceptual captions: A cleaned, hyper-
   nymed, image alt-text dataset for automatic image captioning. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting
   of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 2556–2565, 2018.

Chen Sun, Austin Myers, Carl Vondrick, Kevin Murphy, and Cordelia Schmid. Videobert: A joint model for
  video and language representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on
  computer vision, pp. 7464–7473, 2019.

Quan Sun, Yuxin Fang, Ledell Wu, Xinlong Wang, and Yue Cao. Eva-clip: Improved training techniques for
  clip at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.15389, 2023.

Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix,
  Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and efficient foundation
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.

Francisco Villarroel Ordenes, Dhruv Grewal, Stephan Ludwig, Ko De Ruyter, Dominik Mahr, and Martin
   Wetzels. Cutting through content clutter: How speech and image acts drive consumer sharing of social
   media brand messages. Journal of Consumer Research, 45(5):988–1012, 2019.
Ke Wang, Mohit Bansal, and Jan-Michael Frahm. Retweet wars: Tweet popularity prediction via dynamic
  multimodal regression. In 2018 IEEE winter conference on applications of computer vision (WACV), pp.
  1842–1851. IEEE, 2018.
Chao-Yuan Wu and Philipp Krahenbuhl. Towards long-form video understanding. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1884–1894, 2021.

Fanyi Xiao, Kaustav Kundu, Joseph Tighe, and Davide Modolo. Hierarchical self-supervised representation
  learning for movie understanding. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 9727–9736, 2022.

Yunhu Ye, Binyuan Hui, Min Yang, Binhua Li, Fei Huang, and Yongbin Li. Large language models are
  versatile decomposers: Decompose evidence and questions for table-based reasoning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2301.13808, 2023.

Hang Zhang, Xin Li, and Lidong Bing. Video-llama: An instruction-tuned audio-visual language model for
  video understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.02858, 2023.

Deyao Zhu, Jun Chen, Xiaoqian Shen, Xiang Li, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. Minigpt-4: Enhancing vision-
  language understanding with advanced large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.10592, 2023.



                                                       12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A      A PPENDIX

A.1      V ERBALIZATION L ISTINGS
              Listing 2: Verbalization pattern of videos for the behavior understanding task:
Input : <video> .. </video>
The video has the following scenes :
Scene 1: {ASR: Welcome to a quick tutorial , OCR: Adobe Premiere Pro, Captions : A desktop interface , Replays: 60},
Scene 2: {ASR: on using Premiere Pro to edit , Captions : A computer interface , with an image of a white horse . Objects − Horse,
        Grass, Fence ., Replays: 53},
 ...
It was posted on Adobe's YouTube channel with the title ' Using Premiere Pro like a Pro ' on Aug 15 2022. Adobe's YouTube
       channel has 100k subscribers . This video was viewed by 346 thousand people and liked (as a percentage of likes /views) by
        2.3% people. Why is the scene 23 one of the most replayed scenes?

Output: The scene shows the transformation of the image after the changes.

Listing 3: Verbalization pattern of emails for the behavior domain adapation task. The email content
and CTR is for demonstration purposes only.
Input : Email with Subject : Lock it down before you send it out .
Header: Nobody messes with your PDFs.
Body text : Add password protection , secure encryption , and restricted editing to your PDFs with Adobe Acrobat Pro DC. Share
       only what you want and nothing more. A button that says ' Get started '. An image of a laptop , with window open on it .
       Image text : ” Protect using password”.
Foreground colors : grey , blue . Background colors : lavender , white . Image Emotions: security , serious . Image keywords: laptop ,
        protect , password, lock . Aesthetic value : low. Clutter level : medium. The email is created by a Creative Professional ,
        for the product Adobe Acrobat Pro. It is sent to users in the United States , in the commercial market. Specifically , it
         is sent to Power users with the intent of Active Use.
The email was sent 109 times between 25 August, 2022 and 26 August, 2022, and had a click through rate of [MASK]%.

Output: 0.037%.

Listing 4: Verbalization pattern to teach behavior in the reverse direction (predicting content given
behavior):
Input : <video> .. </video> The video has the following scenes : Scene 1: {ASR: [MASK], Replays: 60%}, Scene 2: {ASR: with
       Premiere, Captions: Woman looking at screen , Replays: 34%},
 ...
Scene 5: {ASR: has never been, Captions : Colour Pallete , Replays: 47%},
Scene 6: {ASR: been easier , Captions : Colour Pallete , Replays: 54%},
 ...
It was posted on Adobe's YouTube channel with the title ' Using Premiere Pro like a Pro ' on Aug 15 2022. It is viewed 203k
        times and liked 1.2%. Adobe's YouTube channel has 100k subscribers . Predict the masked ASR value for the masked scenes.

Output: Scene 1:{ASR: Welcome to a quick tutorial .}

                  Listing 5: Verbalization pattern of videos for the content simulation task:
Input : <video> .. </video> The video has the following scenes : Scene 1: {ASR: [MASK], Replays: 60%}, Scene 2: {ASR: with
       Premiere, Captions: Woman looking at screen , Replays: 34%},
 ...
Scene 5: {ASR: has never been, Captions : Colour Pallete , Replays: 47%},
Scene 6: {ASR: been easier , Captions : Colour Pallete , Replays: 54%},
 ...
It was posted on Adobe's YouTube channel with the title ' Using Premiere Pro like a Pro ' on Aug 15 2022. It is viewed 203k
        times and liked 1.2%. Adobe's YouTube channel has 100k subscribers . Predict the masked ASR value for scene 1. Choose
       from the given options .
Option−1: Welcome to a quick tutorial ,
Option−2: Samsung Galaxy A20 smartphone,
 ...
Option−25: regulations . We haven't had.

                  Listing 6: Verbalization pattern of videos for the behavior simulation task:
Input : <video> .. </video> The video has the following scenes :
Scene 1: {ASR: Welcome to a quick tutorial , OCR: Adobe Premiere Pro, Captions : A desktop interface , Replays: [MASK]},
Scene 2: {ASR: on using Premiere Pro to edit , Captions : A computer interface , with an image of a white horse . Objects − Horse,
        Grass, Fence ., Replays: [MASK] }, ...
It was posted on Adobe's YouTube channel with the title ' Using Premiere Pro like a Pro ' on Aug 15 2022. Adobe's YouTube
       channel has 100k subscribers . Can you tell the replay values for scenes 2 to 5. How many times will this video be
       viewed and liked as a percentage of likes /views?

Output: Scene 1: {Replay: 60%}, Scene 2: {Replay: 85%}, ..., Views: 2.1 Million , Likes−per−View: 2.5%

            Listing 7: Verbalization pattern of Twitter posts for the behavior simulation task:
Input : Given a tweet of pfizer posted by the account PfizerMed on 2023−01−12. Tweet : Announcing a new ASGCT−Pfizer grant to
        support independent medical education initiatives on genetic medicines. For details , click Request for Proposals . <



                                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      hyperlink>. Apply by January 30, 2022 # raredisease #ASGCT #GeneTherapy <hyperlink>. Verbalisation of media content : \”
      caption\”: \”A close−up of a DNA double helix, showcasing its structure and blue color\”,\”keywords\”: \”DNA, double
      helix, structure , blue , close−up, molecular biology , genetics , biology , scientific illustration \”}. Predict whether it
      will recieve high or low likes ?”,

Output: This tweet has low likes .

             Listing 8: Verbalization pattern of Twitter posts for the content simulation task:
Input : Generate a tweet given the media verbalization and the likes it got . Tweet is for pfizer to be posted by the account
       PfizerMed on 2023−01−12. Verbalisation of media content : \”caption\”: \”A close−up of a DNA double helix, showcasing
        its structure and blue color\”,\”keywords\”: \”DNA, double helix, structure , blue , close−up, molecular biology ,
        genetics , biology , scientific illustration \”}. This tweet has low likes .”

Output: ”Tweet : Announcing a new ASGCT−Pfizer grant to support independent medical education initiatives on genetic medicines
      . For details , click Request for Proposals . <hyperlink>. Apply by January 30, 2022 # raredisease #ASGCT #GeneTherapy
      <hyperlink>”}



A.2     OTHER R ELATED W ORK

Models of Human Communication: Communication is the situation in which a source transmits
a message to a receiver with conscious intent to affect the latter’s behaviors (Osgood et al., 1957;
Miller, 1966). Thus, in the most general terms, communication implies a sender, a channel, a mes-
sage, a receiver, a relationship between sender and receiver, an effect, a context in which communi-
cation occurs and a range of things to which ’messages’ refer (McQuail & Windahl, 2015; Lasswell,
1948). As per this, all of the content produced by humanity is essentially communication from a
sender to a receiver over some channel and with some effect. Despite much research on commu-
nication in social sciences since the 1900s, there has been little adoption of it in machine learning
modeling. A prime artefact of this is that the biggest models in machine learning (LLMs) are trained
only on content (messages) and ignore other factors in communication (the intended receiver, chan-
nel, and behavior) even when they are available.
Prior Efforts To Model Behavior: While there has been much research in ML to model human
behavior, it has been disconnected from language and, sometimes, real-world data. For instance,
Agent-based modeling (ABMs), a popular paradigm in Reinforcement Learning, has been employed
to model behavior (Bankes, 2002; Romero et al., 2023; Park et al., 2023). Nevertheless, ABMs tend
to view humans as rational economic agents who communicate primarily through their actions, ne-
glecting the significance of content in communication. In ABMs, agents strive to maximize their
rewards, whereas communication does not always aim to optimize specific, well-defined reward
signals. Moreover, the scarcity of large repositories containing extensive records of human actions
poses a challenge when training ABMs to learn human behavior. Consequently, existing large mod-
els trained on human behavior, such as the ABMs and decision transformer and its variants, often
rely on simulated data, such as game environments, rather than real human behavior (Chen et al.,
2021). This reliance on artificially generated data introduces biases inherent to the creators of the
training data, making it difficult to capture authentic human behavior. However, recent advance-
ments have demonstrated the potential of large models trained on real-world tokens encompassing
various modalities, like images, videos, audio, and text, as the basis for diverse tasks (Ge et al.,
2023; Li et al., 2023a). Notably, LLMs, as exemplars of foundation models, have exhibited impres-
sive performance across a range of tasks, including those they were not explicitly trained for, such
as emotion recognition, named entity recognition, and complex tasks like table understanding (Ye
et al., 2023; Bhattacharyya et al., 2023).
Further, there has also been much work in modeling behavior using conventional modeling tech-
niques, such as regression, bagging and boosting (Mazloom et al., 2016; Villarroel Ordenes et al.,
2019), neural networks (Ding et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2018; Khosla et al., 2014), and transformers
(Wu & Krahenbuhl, 2021; Xiao et al., 2022). While these models can certainly model behavior,
LLMs show generalization powers which extend to capabilities much beyond just behavior simu-
lation. For instance, once trained on behavior tokens, other than behavior simulation, LLMs can
now generate behavior optimized content (Table 2), explain behavior (Table 3), and domain-adapt
to other behaviors (Table 6), none of which are shown by other models. The other concurrent works
which model behavior using LLMs (Kang et al., 2023) model just behavior (for example, by CTR
prediction) by attaching classification or regression heads to LLMs and thereby lose out on the
text-to-text paradigm where LLMs show their best performance and generalization capabilities. In


                                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


addition, similar to non LLM paradigm, this method loses out on other capabilities like generating
behavior optimized content and explaining behavior.

A.3     R EMAINING TABLES AND F IGURES

                    Model      #Params     Training type           Training             RMSE       R2     Accuracy
                    LCBM                       BFT          Replay values 3-masked       1.31     0.87     15.89
                    LCBM          13B          BFT          Replay values 5-masked       1.48     0.82     19.93
                    LCBM                       BFT          Replay values 7-masked       1.71     0.78     15.20
                    LCBM                       BFT          Replay values 11-masked      1.55     0.82     13.94
                    GPT-4                      ICL                  10-shot              3.50    -0.01      7.84
                                >100B†
                    GPT-4                      ICL                   2-shot              3.58    -0.03      5.39
                    GPT-3.5                    ICL                   3-shot             64.40   -256.96     2.48
                                 175B
                    GPT-3.5                    ICL                   2-shot             64.88   -375.83     1.27
                    Random         -             -                      -                4.67       0       3.94


Table 4: Behavior Simulation. RMSE, R2 , and accuracy scores for like/view ratio prediction task. To calculate
accuracy, the model is said to classify correctly if the absolute error between the predicted and ground truth
likes/views is less than or equal to 10%. BFT denotes behavior fine-tuning, and ICL stands for in-context
learning. Replay values k-masked means a model which is trained by masking k consecutive values of the
replay graph while doing BFT. We note that LCBM while being at least 10x smaller than the other models,
performs the best. The best results over four runs are reported for all models. Best models are denoted in
 green and runner-ups in blue .



                                           #Params         Topic            Emotion         Persuasion     Action    Reason
        Training      Model
                                                       All labels    Clubbed
        Random        Random                  -            2.63          3.37     14.3          8.37        3.34      3.34
        Zero-shot     GPT-3.5               175B           51.6          11.68    79.69         35.02      66.27     59.59
                      Vicuna                 13B           11.75         10.5     68.13         26.59      20.72     21.00
                      VideoChat
                                             13B           9.07          3.09         5.1       10.28        -         -
                      (Li et al., 2023b)
                      LCBM                   13B           42.17         7.08     58.83         32.83      39.55     27.91


Table 5: Content Understanding. Comparison of several models, including behavior instruction tuned models
before and after BFT. We compare the models across topic, emotion, and persuasion strategy detection tasks
as per the framework given by Bhattacharyya et al. (2023). We see that our model outperforms similarly sized
models (Vicuna, VideoChat) in most tasks. Best models are denoted in green and runner-ups in blue .


    †
     The exact size of GPT-4 is unknown.
    ‡
     Brand Separated means that the train and test set don’t have any overlap in terms of brands, Time Separated
means that the test set starts after the last tweet in the train set. BFT denotes behavior fine-tuning, and ICL
stands for in-context learning. The best results over four runs are reported for all models. Best models are
denoted in green and runner-ups in blue .


                                                                    15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                              In-house Email Marketing
 LCBM Type      Fine-tuned                      Trained On                              Tested On         RMSE    R2
                    on          Unique        Unique         Email-Segment
                 YouTube?       Emails       Segments            Pairs
   Domain-
                    Yes           100              10              1k                Different Segment    14.47   0.64
   Adapted
                                                                                       (emails could
     In-
                    No            600          560k                350k                   be same)        25.28   0.55
   Domain
   Domain-
                    Yes           100              10              1k                Different Segments   27.28   0.54
   Adapted
                                                                                     & Different Emails
     In-
                    No            600          560k                350k                                   29.28   0.5
   Domain


                                                        LVU Benchmark
                            Training               Model                  Testing           MSE
                                         R101-slowfast+NL
                            Trained                                       Test set          0.386
                                         (Wu & Krahenbuhl, 2021)
                                         VideoBERT
                            Trained                                       Test set          0.32
                                         (Sun et al., 2019)
                            Trained      Qian et al. (2021)               Test set          0.353
                            Trained      Xiao et al. (2022)               Test set          0.444
                                         Object Transformers
                            Trained                                       Test set          0.23
                                         (Wu & Krahenbuhl, 2021)
                            Zero-shot    LCBM (Ours)                      Test set          0.14
                            Zero-shot    GPT-3.5                          Test set          0.03
                            Zero-shot    Vicuna                      Complete dataset       0.44
                            Zero-shot    LCBM (Ours)                 Complete dataset       0.30
                            Zero-shot    GPT-3.5                     Complete dataset       0.02


Table 6: Behavior Domain Adaptation. We test the generalization capability of LCBM on two tasks: (1) Be-
havior simulation on In-house Email Marketing Data, (2) Behavior simulation on the LVU benchmark. For (1),
we train two versions of LCBM with the In-house Email Marketing data: one was trained on YouTube videos
and further BFT on a few email samples (domain-adapted), and the other was BFT on a larger set of emails, but
not including YouTube data (in-domain)§ . We report the RMSE and R2 scores for this task. For (2), we compare
LCBM with other state-of-the-art results and GPT-3. In (1), we note that the domain-adapted LCBM performs
better than the in-domain LCBM in both settings. We posit that YouTube data helps LCBM understand how a
company’s viewers like to hear from it, giving LCBM an edge over a model trained on a small amount of the
same data (600 unique emails). In (2), LCBM performs better than the existing state-of-the-art. Surprisingly,
GPT-3.5 does better than LCBM on this task. From both (1) and (2), we gather that a model trained on certain
YouTube behaviors performs better on other behaviors, thus showing promise of domain-adaptation in the be-
havior modality. Best models are denoted in green and runner-ups in blue .


                                                             16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                            Training                                       Time                   Brand
                   Model              #Params                                    Training
                                                              type                                       Separated              Separated
                   GPT-3.5               175B                 ICL                Few-shot                  58.84                  64.19
                   LCBM                  13B                  BFT                 Twitter                   74.3                  97.69
                                                                                Twitter and
                   LCBM                    13B                  BFT                                          76.87                  92.19
                                                                               YouTube data

Table 7: Behavior Simulation and Behavior Domain Adaptation‡ . Two-way classification accuracies for
like prediction on Twitter. Given content, channel, and time, predict behavior (High, Low). We note that
LCBM trained on Twitter and YouTube performs better than the one trained only on Twitter, showing signs of
performance improvement by domain adaptation.

 Model              Training                      Test                       BLEU-1          BLEU-2              BLEU-3             BLEU-4               ROUGE-l
                                             Brand Separated                  53.95           42.36               31.84              24.28                15.24
 GPT-3.5                ICL
                                             Time Separated                   57.69           45.11               33.67              25.52                15.27
                     BFT on                  Brand Separated                  62.29           46.59               33.98              25.64                14.44
 LCBM
                     Twitter                 Time Separated                    70              54.4               41.43              32.48                17.38
               BFT on Twitter                Brand Separated                  64.28            48.1               35.17              26.63                14.83
 LCBM
                 + Youtube                   Time Separated                   70.23           54.54               41.52              32.54                17.45


Table 8: Content Simulation and Behavior Domain Adaptation‡ . Given behavior, channel, time, tweet
media caption as prompt, predict content (tweet text). We note that LCBM trained on Twitter and YouTube
performs better than the one trained only on Twitter, showing signs of performance improvement by domain
adaptation.


                                             Video Title: Robber hangs
                                             from the 23rd-floor window to
                                             escape the police in China                  Question: Would the average sentiment of the comments of
                                             Posted by: South China                      the audience be positive, neutral, or negative? Explain why.
                                             Morning Post
                                             Link: youtu.be/P7iDWZiT3Kg        LCBM: The average sentiment of the comments of the audience watching
                                                                               the video would be negative. This is because the video shows a man
         Comments from Video:                                                  jumping out of a high-rise building to escape the police. The audience is
         (not shown to LLMs/LCBM)                                              likely to feel sympathy and sadness towards the man's situation.
               Commenter: I feel bad for the dude. Nobody in
               the right mind robs a local shop.. To then hang                 Vicuna: The audience would likely have a mix of positive and negative
               out a window. I wonder what he is going through.                sentiment towards the video. Viewers may feel sympathetic towards the
                                                                               person trying to escape and praise their bravery.
               Commenter: Kinda feel sorry for him when he
               cried, he must have been in a bad situation to
               do what he did but it does not justify his actions.             GPT-3.5: The video depicts a dangerous and potentially life-threatening
                                                                               situation, which may cause some viewers to feel uneasy or uncomfortable.
               Commenter: Aw, i felt his desperation.                          However, others may find the events exciting or thrilling to watch.
               sorry young man but you did wrong. :(


                                                Video Title: The new Porsche
                                                718 Spyder. Perfectly
                                                                                             Question: Given the video, would the average audience
                                                irrational.
                                                                                             sentiment be positive, neutral, or negative? Explain why.
                                                Posted by: Porsche
                                                Link: youtu.be/573YaSAP5H0
                                                                               LCBM: Positive average sentiment of the audience. The video features a
                                                                               luxury car driving along a scenic coastal road, which is would evoke a
                                                                               sense of awe and admiration in the viewers. Additionally, the Porsche 718
         Comments from Video:
         (not shown to LLMs/LCBM)                                              in the video is an iconic sports car that is widely recognized and respected
                                                                               in the automotive community, contributing to the positive sentiment.
               Commenter: Dream car. Mid engine, natural
               aspiration, b6, rwd, manual, lightweight, open top              Vicuna: The average sentiment of the comments would be positive. The
                                                                               video showcases a beautiful scenic drive through the mountains, which is
               Commenter: All the makings of a epic sports car 👌               likely to evoke a sense of awe and enjoyment in the viewers. Additionally,
                                                                               the presence of a luxury car in the video may also contribute to a positive
               Commenter: This car is perfect. I’m in                          sentiment, as it may be seen as a symbol of success and wealth.
               love. New dream car, no questions asked!
                                                                               GPT-3.5: The sentiment of the audience watching the video is positive
               Commenter: I add my vote and wishes to yours ...                because the video showcases a new sports car, which is exciting and
               a great car I’d love to own and pilot                           desirable to car enthusiasts.



Figure 5: A few examples showing LCBM’s ability to understand and explain human behavior of audience
sentiment. We also compare it against other models like Vicuna and GPT-3.5.


                                                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 6: A few examples showing LCBM’s ability to understand and explain human behavior of scene re-
playability. We compare it against human-provided explanations of the same.


                   Date Range                                 April 1, 2022 to June 12, 2023
                   Number of Countries                        225
                   Target Products                            Top Products used by millions of users
                   Customers Segmented on the basis of        Type of use, user expertise, frequency of use,
                                                              and others


Table 9: Details of the In-house Marketing Email dataset used to evaluate behavior generalization capabilities
of the LCBM


                                                         18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    Logo                                               Logo



                           product

                                                                               product


                                                                    Logo



  Figure 7: The In-house marketing emails used in the Email dataset look similar to the ones shown here.


                                                   19
