Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


T E X T 2R E W A R D : R EWARD S HAPING WITH L ANGUAGE
M ODELS FOR R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
 Tianbao Xie∗ ♠∗
                   Siheng Zhao∗ ♠♡ Chen Henry Wu♢ Yitao Liu♠ Qian Luo♠
              ♣♦
 Victor Zhong      Yanchao Yang†♠       Tao Yu†♠
 ♠                                ♡
   The University of Hong Kong      Nanjing University ♢ Carnegie Mellon University
 ♣                      ♦
   Microsoft Research     University of Waterloo



                                               A BSTRACT
           Designing reward functions is a longstanding challenge in reinforcement learning
           (RL); it requires specialized knowledge or domain data, leading to high costs for
           development. To address this, we introduce T EXT 2R EWARD, a data-free frame-
           work that automates the generation and shaping of dense reward functions based
           on large language models (LLMs). Given a goal described in natural language,
           T EXT 2R EWARD generates shaped dense reward functions as an executable pro-
           gram grounded in a compact representation of the environment. Unlike inverse
           RL and recent work that uses LLMs to write sparse reward codes or unshaped
           dense rewards with a constant function across timesteps, T EXT 2R EWARD produces
           interpretable, free-form dense reward codes that cover a wide range of tasks, utilize
           existing packages, and allow iterative refinement with human feedback. We eval-
           uate T EXT 2R EWARD on two robotic manipulation benchmarks (M ANI S KILL 2,
           M ETAW ORLD) and two locomotion environments of M U J O C O. On 13 of the 17
           manipulation tasks, policies trained with generated reward codes achieve similar or
           better task success rates and convergence speed than expert-written reward codes.
           For locomotion tasks, our method learns six novel locomotion behaviors with
           a success rate exceeding 94%. Furthermore, we show that the policies trained
           in the simulator with our method can be deployed in the real world. Finally,
           T EXT 2R EWARD further improves the policies by refining their reward functions
           with human feedback. Video results are available at https://text-to-reward.github.io.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Reward shaping (Ng et al., 1999) remains a long-standing challenge in reinforcement learning (RL);
it aims to design reward functions that guide an agent towards desired behaviors more efficiently.
Traditionally, reward shaping is often done by manually designing rewards based on expert intuition
and heuristics, while it is a time-consuming process that demands expertise and can be sub-optimal.
Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) (Ziebart et al., 2008; Wulfmeier et al., 2016; Finn et al., 2016)
and preference learning (Christiano et al., 2017; Ibarz et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2021; Park et al., 2022)
have emerged as potential solutions to reward shaping. A reward model is learned from human
demonstrations or preference-based feedback. However, both strategies still require considerable
human effort or data collection; also, the neural network-based reward models are not interpretable
and cannot be generalized out of the domains of the training data.
This paper introduces a novel framework, T EXT 2R EWARD, to generate and shape dense reward
code based on goal descriptions. Given an RL goal (e.g., “push the chair to the marked position”),
T EXT 2R EWARD generates dense reward code (Figure 1 middle) based on large language mod-
els (LLMs), grounded on a compact, Pythonic representation of the environment (Figure 1 left).
The dense reward code is then used by an RL algorithm such as PPO (Schulman et al., 2017)
and SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018) to train a policy (Figure 1 right). Different from inverse RL,
T EXT 2R EWARD is data-free and generates symbolic reward with high interpretability. Different from
recent work (Yu et al., 2023) that used LLMs to write unshaped reward code with hand-designed APIs,
our free-form shaped dense reward code has a wider coverage of tasks and can utilize established
    ∗
        Equal contribution. Work mainly done at the University of Hong Kong. †Corresponding author.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                 Feedback: keep the chair standing                        User



                                                                              Dense reward function
                                                                              def compute_reward(self, action):
                                                                              ...
                                                                              # EE approach chair
    Goal: push the chair to the marked position                               reward += -dist_ee_to_chair
                                                                              # Keep chair standing
                                                                              chair_tilt = np.arccos(z_axis_chair[2])
    Environment description                       GPT-4 /                     # Stage reward
     class BaseEnv:                               Codex ...                   if chair_tilt < 0.2 * np.pi:
       self.chair: ArticulateObject                                                                                     RL training   Policy
                                                                                  if dist_ee_to_chair < 0.1:
                                                                                                                                               Rollout
       self.robot: DualArmPanda                                                    stage_reward += 2
     class ArticulateObject:                                                       ...
       self.pose: ObjectPose                                                  else:
       # get the point cloud of the object                                        stage_reward = -5

       def get_pcd(self) -> np.ndarray[(N,3)]                                 return reward

     class DualArmPanda:
       # 3D positions of 4 gripper fingers
                                                                                              Environment
       self.ee_coords -> np.ndarray[(4,3)]               Expert abstraction
       ...



Figure 1: An overview of T EXT 2R EWARD of three stages: Expert Abstraction provides an abstraction
of the environment as a hierarchy of Pythonic classes. User Instruction describes the goal to be
achieved in natural language. User Feedback allows users to summarize the failure mode or their
preferences, which are used to improve the reward code.



coding packages (e.g. NumPy operations over point clouds and agent positions). Finally, given the
sensitivity of RL training and the ambiguity of language, the RL policy may fail to achieve the goal
or achieve it in unintended ways. T EXT 2R EWARD addresses this problem by executing the learned
policy in the environment, requesting human feedback, and refining the reward accordingly.
We conduct systematic experiments on two robotics manipulation benchmarks (M ANI S KILL 2 (Gu
et al., 2023), M ETAW ORLD (Yu et al., 2020)) and two locomotion environments of M U J O C O (Brock-
man et al., 2016), as cases. On 13 out of 17 manipulation tasks, policies trained with our generated
reward code achieve comparable or better success rates and convergence speed than the ground truth
reward code carefully tuned by human experts. For locomotion, T EXT 2R EWARD learns 6 novel
locomotion behaviors with over 94% success rate. We also demonstrate that the policy trained in
the simulator can be deployed on a real Franka Panda robot. With human feedback of less than 3
iterations, our method can iteratively improve the success rate of learned policy from 0 to almost
100%, as well as resolve task ambiguity. In summary, the experimental results demonstrated that
T EXT 2R EWARD can generate generalizable and interpretable dense reward code, enabling a wide
coverage of RL tasks and a human-in-the-loop pipeline. We hope that the results can inspire further
explorations in the intersection of reinforcement learning and code generation.


2      A PPROACH

2.1      BACKGROUND

Reward code Reinforcement learning (RL) aims to learn a policy that maximizes the expected
reward in an episode. To train a policy to achieve a goal, the key is to design a reward function that
specifies the goal. The reward function can take various forms such as a neural network or a piece of
reward code. In this paper, we focus on the reward code given its interpretability. In this case, the
observation and the action are represented as variables, such that the reward does not need to handle
perception – it only reasons about abstract variables and APIs in code.


Reward shaping Reinforcement learning from task completion rewards is difficult because the
reward signals are sparse and delayed (Sutton & Barto, 2005). A shaped dense reward function is
useful since it encourages key intermediate steps and regularization that help achieve the goal. In the
form of code, the shaped dense reward can take different functional forms at each timestep, instead of
being constant across timesteps or just at the end of the episode.


                                                                              2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2.2   Z ERO -S HOT AND F EW-S HOT D ENSE R EWARD G ENERATION

In this part, we describe the core of T EXT 2R EWARD for zero-shot and few-shot dense reward
generation. Detailed prompt examples can be found in the Appendix C. Interactive generation is
described in the next subsection.

Instruction The instruction is a natural language sentence that describes what we want the agent to
achieve (e.g. “push the chair to the marked position”). It can be provided by the user, or it can be one
of the subgoals for a long-horizon task, planned by the LLM.

Environment abstraction To ground reward generation in an environment, it is necessary for the
model to know how object states are represented in the environment, such as the configuration of
robots and objects, and what functions can be called. We adopt a compact representation in Pythonic
style as shown in Figure 1, which utilizes Python class, typing, and comment. Compared to listing
all environment-specific information in the list or table format, Pythonic representation has a higher
level of abstraction and allows us to write general, reusable prompts across different environments.
Moreover, this Pythonic representation is prevalent in LLMs pre-training data, making it easier for
the LLM to understand the environment.

Background knowledge Generating dense reward codes can be challenging for LLMs due to
the scarcity of data in these domains. Recent works have shown the benefits of providing relevant
function information and usage examples to facilitate code generation (Shi et al., 2022; Zhou et al.,
2022). Inspired by them, we provide functions that can be helpful in this environment as background
knowledge (e.g., NumPy/SciPy functions for pairwise distance and quaternion computation, specified
by their input and output types and natural language explanations).

Few-shot examples Providing relevant examples as input has been shown to be useful in helping
LLMs solve tasks. We assume access to a pool of pairs of instructions and verified reward codes. The
library can be initialized by experts and then continually extended by our generated dense reward code.
We utilize the sentence embedding model from Su et al. (2022) to encode each instruction. Given a
new instruction, we use the embedding to retrieve the top-k similar instructions and concatenate the
instruction-code pairs as few-shot examples. We set the k to 1 since context length limits and filter
out the oracle code of the task from the retrieved pool to make sure that the LLMs do not cheat.

Reducing error with code execution Once the reward code is generated, we execute the code in
the code interpreter. This step may give us valuable feedback, e.g., syntax errors and runtime errors
(e.g., shape mismatch between matrices). In line with previous works (Le et al., 2022; Olausson et al.,
2023), we utilize the feedback from code execution as a tool for ongoing refinement within the LLM.
This iterative process fosters the systematic rectification of errors and continues until the code is
devoid of errors. Our experiments show that this step decreases error rates from 10% to near zero.

2.3   I MPROVING R EWARD C ODE FROM H UMAN F EEDBACK

Humans seldom specify precise intent in a single interaction. In an optimistic scenario, the initial
generated reward functions may be semantically correct but practically sub-optimal. For instance,
users instructing a robot to open a cabinet may not specify whether to pull the handle or the edge of
the door. While both methods open the cabinet, the former is preferable because it is less likely to
damage the furniture and the robot. In a pessimistic scenario, the initially generated reward function
may be too difficult to accomplish. For instance, telling a robot to “clean up the desk” results in a
more difficult learning process than telling the robot to “pick up items on the desk and then put them
in the drawer below”. While both descriptions specify the same intent, the latter provides intermediate
objectives that simplify the learning problem.
To address the problem of under-specified instructions resulting in sub-optimal reward func-
tions, T EXT 2R EWARD actively requests human feedback from users to improve the generated
reward functions. After every RL training cycle, the users are provided with rollout videos of task
execution by the current policy. Users then offer critical insights and feedback based on the video,
identifying areas of improvement or errors. This feedback is integrated into subsequent prompts to
generate more refined and efficient reward functions. In the first example of opening a cabinet, the


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


user may say “use the door handles” to discourage the robot from damaging itself and the furniture
by opening using the door edges. In the second example of cleaning a desk, the user may say “pick
up the items and store them in the drawer” to encourage the robot to solve sub-tasks. It is noteworthy
that this setup encourages the participation of general users, devoid of expertise in programming or
RL, enabling a democratized approach to optimizing system functionality through natural language
instructions, thus eliminating the necessity for expert intervention.


3       E XPERIMENT S ETUP

We evaluate T EXT 2R EWARD on manipulation and locomotion tasks across three environments:
M ETAW ORLD, M ANI S KILL 2, and Gym M U J O C O. We use GPT-41 as the LLM to demonstrate our
method and further includes an examination of other open-source models, as presented in Appendix F.
This is done not only to ensure reproducibility but also to clarify the complexity of the task at
hand. We choose the RL algorithm (PPO or SAC) and set default hyper-parameters according to the
performance of human-written reward, and fix that in all experiments on this task to do RL training.
Experiment hyperparameters are listed in Appendix A.

3.1       M ANIPULATION TASKS

We demonstrate manipulation on M ETAW ORLD, a commonly used benchmark for Multi-task Robotics
Learning and Preference-based Reinforcement Learning (Nair et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2021; Hejna III
& Sadigh, 2023), and M ANI S KILL 2, a platform showcasing a diverse range of object manipulation
tasks executed within environments with realistic physical simulations. We evaluate a diverse set of
manipulation tasks including pick-and-place, assembly, articulated object manipulation with revolute
or sliding joint, and mobile manipulation. For all tasks, we compare T EXT 2R EWARD with oracle
reward functions tuned by human experts (provided in the original codebases). We also establish a
baseline by adapting the prompt from Yu et al. (2023) to suit our reinforcement learning framework,
as opposed to the Model Predictive Control (MPC) setting originally described in Yu et al. (2023)
since designing the physics model demands a considerable amount of additional expert labor. For
RL training, we tune the hyperparameters such that the oracle reward functions have the best results,
and then keep them fixed when running T EXT 2R EWARD. The full list of tasks, corresponding input
instructions, and details of simulated environments are found in Appendix B.

3.2       L OCOMOTION TASKS

For locomotion tasks, we demonstrate our method using Gym M U J O C O. Due to the lack of expert-
written reward functions for locomotion tasks, we follow previous work (Christiano et al., 2017; Lee
et al., 2021) to evaluate the policy based on human judgment of the rollout video. We develop six
novel tasks in total for two different locomotion agents, Hopper (a 2D unipedal robot) and Ant (a 3D
quadruped robot). The tasks include Move Forward, Front Flip and Back Flip for Hopper, as well as
Move Forward, Lie Down, and Wave Leg for Ant.

3.3       R EAL ROBOT M ANIPULATION

Unlike model-based methods such as model predictive control (MPC) (Howell et al., 2022), which
require further parameter adjustment, our RL agents—trained in a simulator—can be directly deployed
in the real world, necessitating only minor calibration and the introduction of random noise for sim-
to-real transfer. To demonstrate this benefit, as well as verify the generalization ability of RL policy
trained from our generated reward, we conducted a real robot manipulation experiment with the
Franka Panda robot arm. We verify our approach on two manipulation tasks: Pick Cube and Stack
Cube. To obtain the object state required by our RL policy, we use the Segment Anything Model
(SAM) (Kirillov et al., 2023) and a depth camera to get the estimated pose of objects. Specifically, we
query SAM to segment each object in the scene. The segmentation map and the depth map together
give us an incomplete point cloud. We then estimate the pose of the object based on this point cloud.

    1
        https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/gpt. This work mainly uses gpt-4-0314.


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.4       I NTERACTIVE G ENERATION WITH HUMAN FEEDBACK

We conduct human feedback on a challenging task for single-round reward code generation, Stack
Cube, to investigate whether human feedback can improve or fix the reward code, enabling RL
algorithms to successfully train models in a given environment. This task involves reaching the cube,
grasping the cube, placing the cube on top of another cube, and releasing the cube while making
it static. We sample 3 generated codes from zero-shot and few-shot methods and perform this task
with two rounds of feedback. In addition, we also conduct experiments on one locomotion task Ant
Lie Down, where the initial training results do not satisfy the user’s preference. The general user
who provides the feedback can only see the rollout video and learning curve, without any code. The
authors provide feedback as per the described setup.
                                              L2R   Oracle       Zero-shot    Few-shot

                    Lift Cube
      1


   0.8


   0.6


   0.4


   0.2

                                       Step
      0
             500k       1M      1.5M
                    Pick Cube
      1


   0.8


   0.6


   0.4


   0.2

                                       Step
      0
              1M        2M      3M



Figure 2: Learning curves on M ANISKILL 2 under zero-shot and few-shot reward generation settings,
measured by task success rate. L2R means the baseline adapted from Yu et al. (2023); Oracle means
the expert-written reward function provided by the environment; zero-shot and few-shot (k=1) means
the reward function is generated by T EXT 2R EWARD w.o and w. retrieving expert-written examples
from other tasks. The solid line represents the mean success rate, while the shaded regions correspond
to the standard deviation, both calculated across five different random seeds.

                                                     Oracle       Zero-shot


Figure 3: Learning curves on M ETAWORLD under zero-shot reward generation setting, measured by
success rate. Following Figure 2, the solid line represents the mean success rate, while the shaded
regions correspond to the standard deviation, both calculated across five different random seeds.
Additional results can be found in the Appendix G.


                                                             5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         (a) Hopper Back Flip


                     (b) Ant Lie Down                            (c) Ant Wave Leg

Figure 4: Novel locomotion behaviors acquired through T EXT 2R EWARD under zero-shot reward
generation setting. These images are sampled by policy rollouts in Gym M U J O C O.


4     R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS

4.1   M AIN R ESULTS

This section shows the results of T EXT 2R EWARD for robotics manipulation and locomotion. Gener-
ated reward function samples can be found in the Appendix D.

T EXT 2R EWARD ≃ expert-designed rewards on manipulation tasks. Quantitative results from
the M ANISKILL 2 and M ETAWORLD environments are shown in Figures 2 and 3. In the figures,
L2R stands for reward function generated by the baseline prompt adapted from Yu et al. (2023);
Oracle means the expert-written dense reward function provided by the environment; zero-shot and
few-shot stands for the dense reward function generated by T EXT 2R EWARD without human feedback
under zero-shot and few-shot prompting paradigms, respectively. On 13 of the 17 tasks, the final
performance (i.e., success rate after convergence and convergence speed) of T EXT 2R EWARD achieves
comparable results to the human oracle. Surprisingly, on 4 of the 17 tasks, zero-shot and few-shot
T EXT 2R EWARD can even outperform human oracle, in terms of either the convergence speed (e.g.,
Open Cabinet Door in M ANISKILL 2, Handle Press in M ETAW ORLD) or the success rate (e.g., Pick
Cube in M ANISKILL 2, Drawer Open in M ETAW ORLD). It suggests that LLMs have the potential to
draft high-quality shaped dense reward functions without any human intervention.
As demonstrated in Figure 2, the L2R baseline can only be effectively applied to two tasks of
M ANI S KILL 2, where it attains results comparable to those of the zero-shot setting. Nevertheless, L2R
struggles with tasks involving objects that have complex surfaces and cannot be adequately described
by a singular point, such as an ergonomic chair. In these tasks, the environment utilizes point cloud
to denote the object’s surface, a representation that L2R fails to model. To more comprehensively
evaluate the necessity of shaped and staged dense rewards, we introduce an additional baseline in
Appendix E that circumvents the aforementioned limitation of the L2R formulation.
Furthermore, as illustrated in Figure 2, in 2 of the 6 tasks that are not fully solvable, the few-shot
paradigm markedly outperforms the zero-shot approach. This underscores the benefits of utilizing
few-shot examples from our skills library in enhancing the efficacy of RL training reward functions.

T EXT 2R EWARD can learn novel locomotion behaviors. Table 1 shows the success rate of all six
tasks trained with the reward generated under the zero-shot setting, evaluated by humans watching
the rollout videos. The results suggest that our method can generate dense reward functions that
generalize to novel locomotion tasks. Image samples from the Gym M UJOCO environment of three
selected tasks are shown in Figure 4. Corresponding full video results are available here.

Demonstrating T EXT 2R EWARD on a real robot. Figure 5 shows the key frames of real robot
manipulation on two tasks: Pick Cube and Stack Cube. Here, we use the same 7 DoF Franka Panda
robot arm as M ANI S KILL 2 simulation environment. Results suggest that the RL policy trained in the


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Success rate of locomotion tasks in Gym M U J O C O trained on reward functions generated in
zero-shot setting. Each task is tested on 100 rollouts, and task success is determined by the authors
who reach an agreement after reviewing the rollout videos. Generated codes are in Appendix D.2.

                                           Hopper                                   Ant
                                    Task        Success Rate             Task              Success Rate
                            Move Forward            100%             Move Forward                 94%
                             Front Flip              99%              Lie Down                    98%
                             Back Flip              100%              Wave Leg                    95%
      Pick Cube
      Stack Cube


Figure 5: Sampled images for real robot manipulation on Pick Cube (i.e., pick a cube and move it to
a predefined position) and Stack Cube (i.e., stack a cube onto another one).


simulator using dense reward function generated from T EXT 2R EWARD can be successfully deployed
to the real world. Full videos of robot execution are on our project page.

T EXT 2R EWARD can resolve ambiguity from human feedback. To demonstrate the ability of
T EXT 2R EWARD to address this problem, we show one case in which “control the Ant to lie down”
itself has ambiguity in terms of the orientation of the Ant, as shown in Figure 6. After observing the
training result of this instruction, the user can give the feedback in natural language, e.g., “the Ant’s
torso should be top down, not bottom up”. Then T EXT 2R EWARD will regenerate the reward code
and train a new policy, which successfully caters to the user’s intent.


                   Instruction: Control                                     Feedback: The Ant's torso should
                                                       Observation
                   the Ant to lie down.                                     be top down, not bottom up.


Figure 6: Interactive reward generation from human feedback. The original instruction is control the
Ant to lie down, which is ambiguous in the orientation of the Ant. Our interactive framework allows
the user to provide feedback based on the rollout observation.


T EXT 2R EWARD can improve RL training from human feedback. Given the sensitivity of RL
training, sometimes single-turn generation can not generate good enough reward functions to finish
the task. In these cases, T EXT 2R EWARD asks for human feedback on the failure mode and tries to
improve the dense reward. In Figure 7, we demonstrate this on the Stack Cube task, where zero-shot
and few-shot generation in a single turn fails to solve the task stably. For few-shot generation, we
observed that interactive code generation with human feedback can improve the success rate from
zero to one, as well as speed up the convergence speed of training. However, this improvement is
prone to the quality of the reward function generated in the beginning (i.e. iter0). For relatively


                                                               7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


low-quality reward functions (e.g. zero-shot generated codes), the improvement in success rate after
iterations of feedback is not as pronounced as for few-shot generated codes. This problem may be
solved in a sparse-to-dense reward function generation manner, which generates the stage reward first
and then generates reward terms interactively. We leave this paradigm for possible future work.

                                      Oracle       iter0       iter1    iter2

                                               Stack Cube-Interactive
       Zero-shot
       Few-shot


Figure 7: Training iteration vs. success rate on Stack Cube with interactive generation. Oracle is the
reward code manually tuned by experts; iter0 is generated by T EXT 2R EWARD without feedback;
iter1 and iter2 are generated after 1 or 2 feedback iterations; zero-shot and few-shot (k=1) stands
for how the iter0 code is generated. The solid lines represent the mean success rate, and the shaded
regions correspond to the standard deviation, with three samples.


4.2   Q UALITATIVE A NALYSIS

In this section, we summarize the differences between the generated reward functions (zero-shot,
few-shot) and the oracle reward functions. Due to space limitation, the reward functions we will refer
to are in Appendix D.

Few-shot outperforming zero-shot Few-shot settings generally surpass zero-shot in terms of
downstream performance. In the Lift Cube and Pick Cube tasks, few-shot generated code delineates
stages – approach, grasp, and lift – more clearly using conditional statements. In contrast, zero-shot
code stacks and sums different stage rewards in a linear manner, reducing effectiveness. This is also
demonstrated by the Push Chair task, which requires nuanced commonsense steps that zero-shot code
only partially captures. Since the stage reward format is shown in the few-shot examples, GPT-4 can
generalize the pattern to new tasks. Currently, this ability cannot be fully unfolded with zero-shot
even if we instruct it to do so, which may be improved by the next version of LLMs.

Zero-shot sometimes outperforming few-shot Our experiments also show that zero-shot learning
occasionally outperforms few-shot learning, as seen in tasks like Turn Faucet and Open Doors. By
checking the generated code, we found that the quality and relevance of the few-shot examples are
the key. For example, in the Open Door task, few-shot learning lags as it omits a key reward term –
the door’s positional change – thus hindering learning. Similarly, in the Turn Faucet task, zero-shot
rewards facilitate easier success by allowing one-sided gripper actions, which leads to effectiveness.

Few-shot sometimes outperforming Oracle There are scenarios where few-shot learning even
outperforms the oracle reward function crafted by experts. An analysis of the Open Door task reward
function shows that few-shot generated code omits the final stage of stabilizing the door, simplifying
the policy learning process improving the learning curve, and finishing tasks in a slightly different
manner. In the Pick Cube task, few-shot and oracle codes are structurally similar, but the weight
terms are different. This shows that LLMs cannot only improve reward structure and logic but also
tune the hyperparameters. Although this is not our focus here, it can be a promising direction.


                                                           8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5    R ELATED W ORK
Reward Shaping Reward shaping remains a persistent challenge in the domain of reinforcement
learning (RL). Traditionally, handcrafted reward functions are employed, yet crafting precise reward
functions is a time-consuming process that demands expertise. Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL)
emerges as a potential solution, where a non-linear reward model is recovered from expert trajectories
to facilitate RL learning (Ziebart et al., 2008; Wulfmeier et al., 2016; Finn et al., 2016). However,
this technique necessitates a large amount of high-quality trajectory data, which can be elusive for
complex and rare tasks. An alternative approach is preference learning, which develops a reward
model based on human preferences (Christiano et al., 2017; Ibarz et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2021; Park
et al., 2022; Zhu et al., 2023). In this method, humans distinguish preferences between pairs of actions,
upon which a reward model is constructed utilizing the preference data. Nonetheless, this strategy still
requires some human-annotated preference data which is expensive or even hard to collect in some
cases. Both of these prevalent approaches to reward shaping demand extensive high-quality data,
resulting in compromised generalizability and low efficiency. In contrast, T EXT 2R EWARD excels
with limited (or even zero) data input and can be easily generalized to new tasks in the environment.

Language Models in Reinforcement Learning Large Language Models (LLMs) have exhibited
remarkable reasoning and planning capabilities (Wei et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2022a). Recent works
have shown that the knowledge in LLMs can be helpful for RL and can transform the data-driven
policy network acquisition paradigm (Carta et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023). This trend sees LLM-
powered autonomous agents coming to the fore, with a growing body of approaches that use LLMs as
policy networks during the RL process, indicating a promising trajectory in this field (Yao et al., 2022;
Shinn et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2023; Yao et al., 2023; Hao et al.,
2023). Instead of directly using LLMs as the policy model or the reward model, T EXT 2R EWARD
generates shaped dense reward code to train RL policies, which has an advantage in terms of the
flexibility of agent model type and inference efficiency.

Language Models for Robotics Utilizing LLMs for embodied applications emerges as a popular
trend of research, and typical directions include planning and reasoning through language model
generation (Ahn et al., 2022; Zeng et al., 2022; Liang et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2022b; Singh et al.,
2023; Song et al., 2022). Recent works have harnessed the capabilities of LLMs to assist in the
learning of primitive tasks (Brohan et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2023; Brohan et al., 2023; Mu et al.,
2023), by finetuning LLMs on robotic trajectories to predict primitive actions while T EXT 2R EWARD
generates reward codes to learn smaller policy networks. A recent work, L2R (Yu et al., 2023),
combines reward generation and Model Predictive Control (MPC) to synthesize robotic actions.
Although such rewards work well for many tasks with a well-designed MPC, our experiments show
that RL training is challenging for unshaped rewards, especially on complex tasks. Different from
them, T EXT 2R EWARD adopts more flexible program structures such as if-else conditions and point
cloud queries to offer higher flexibility and work for tasks that unshaped dense rewards tend to fail.

6    C ONCLUSION
We proposed T EXT 2R EWARD, an interactive reward code generation framework that uses LLMs to
automate reward shaping for reinforcement learning. Our experiments showcased the effectiveness
of our approach, as the RL policies trained with our generated reward codes were able to match or
even surpass the performance of those trained with expert-designed codes in the majority of tasks.
We also showcased real-world applicability by deploying a policy trained in a simulator on a real
robot. By incorporating human feedback, our approach iteratively refines the generated reward codes,
addressing the challenge of language ambiguity and improving the success rates of learned policies.
This interactive learning process allows for better alignment with human needs and preferences,
leading to more robust and efficient reinforcement learning solutions.
In conclusion, T EXT 2R EWARD demonstrates the effectiveness of using natural language to transform
human intentions and LLMs knowledge into reward functions, then policy functions. We hope that our
work may serve as an inspiration for researchers across various disciplines, including but not limited
to reinforcement learning and code generation, to further investigate this promising intersection of
fields and contribute to the ongoing advancement of research in these areas.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea
 Finn, Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, et al. Do as i can, not as i say:
 Grounding language in robotic affordances. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691, 2022.

Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
  Wojciech Zaremba. Openai gym. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01540, 2016.

Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Joseph Dabis, Chelsea Finn,
  Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Jasmine Hsu, et al. Rt-1: Robotics
  transformer for real-world control at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06817, 2022.

Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Xi Chen, Krzysztof Choromanski,
  Tianli Ding, Danny Driess, Avinava Dubey, Chelsea Finn, et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action
  models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818, 2023.

Thomas Carta, Clément Romac, Thomas Wolf, Sylvain Lamprier, Olivier Sigaud, and Pierre-Yves
  Oudeyer. Grounding large language models in interactive environments with online reinforcement
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.02662, 2023.

Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
 Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating large
 language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021.

Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
  reinforcement learning from human preferences. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.

Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
  Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, et al. Training verifiers to solve
  math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.

Linxi Fan, Guanzhi Wang, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Yuncong Yang, Haoyi Zhu, Andrew Tang,
  De-An Huang, Yuke Zhu, and Anima Anandkumar. Minedojo: Building open-ended embodied
  agents with internet-scale knowledge. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  18343–18362, 2022.

Chelsea Finn, Sergey Levine, and Pieter Abbeel. Guided cost learning: Deep inverse optimal control
  via policy optimization, 2016.

Jiayuan Gu, Fanbo Xiang, Xuanlin Li, Zhan Ling, Xiqiang Liu, Tongzhou Mu, Yihe Tang, Stone Tao,
   Xinyue Wei, Yunchao Yao, et al. Maniskill2: A unified benchmark for generalizable manipulation
   skills. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04659, 2023.

Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, P. Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy maximum
  entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. ArXiv, abs/1801.01290, 2018.

Shibo Hao, Yi Gu, Haodi Ma, Joshua Jiahua Hong, Zhen Wang, Daisy Zhe Wang, and Zhiting Hu.
  Reasoning with language model is planning with world model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14992,
  2023.

Donald Joseph Hejna III and Dorsa Sadigh. Few-shot preference learning for human-in-the-loop rl.
  In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 2014–2025. PMLR, 2023.

Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang,
  Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt.     Measuring mathematical problem solving with
  the MATH dataset.    In Joaquin Vanschoren and Sai-Kit Yeung (eds.), Proceedings
  of the Neural Information Processing Systems Track on Datasets and Benchmarks
 1, NeurIPS Datasets and Benchmarks 2021, December 2021, virtual, 2021.       URL
  https://datasets-benchmarks-proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/
  hash/be83ab3ecd0db773eb2dc1b0a17836a1-Abstract-round2.html.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Taylor Howell, Nimrod Gileadi, Saran Tunyasuvunakool, Kevin Zakka, Tom Erez, and Yuval
  Tassa. Predictive Sampling: Real-time Behaviour Synthesis with MuJoCo. dec 2022. doi:
  10.48550/arXiv.2212.00541. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.00541.
Wenlong Huang, Pieter Abbeel, Deepak Pathak, and Igor Mordatch. Language models as zero-shot
 planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied agents. In International Conference on
 Machine Learning, pp. 9118–9147. PMLR, 2022a.
Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Harris Chan, Jacky Liang, Pete Florence, Andy Zeng, Jonathan
 Tompson, Igor Mordatch, Yevgen Chebotar, et al. Inner monologue: Embodied reasoning through
 planning with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05608, 2022b.
Wenlong Huang, Chen Wang, Ruohan Zhang, Yunzhu Li, Jiajun Wu, and Li Fei-Fei. Voxposer:
 Composable 3d value maps for robotic manipulation with language models. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2307.05973, 2023.
Borja Ibarz, Jan Leike, Tobias Pohlen, Geoffrey Irving, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Reward
  learning from human preferences and demonstrations in atari, 2018.
Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, et al. Segment anything. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.02643, 2023.
Hung Le, Yue Wang, Akhilesh Deepak Gotmare, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Chu Hong Hoi. Coderl:
  Mastering code generation through pretrained models and deep reinforcement learning. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:21314–21328, 2022.
Kimin Lee, Laura Smith, and P. Abbeel. Pebble: Feedback-efficient interactive reinforcement learning
  via relabeling experience and unsupervised pre-training. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, 2021.
Jacky Liang, Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Peng Xu, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Pete Florence, and
  Andy Zeng. Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied control. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2209.07753, 2022.
Bill Yuchen Lin, Yicheng Fu, Karina Yang, Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Faeze Brahman, Shiyu Huang,
  Chandra Bhagavatula, Yejin Choi, and Xiang Ren. Swiftsage: A generative agent with fast and
  slow thinking for complex interactive tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17390, 2023.
Yao Mu, Qinglong Zhang, Mengkang Hu, Wenhai Wang, Mingyu Ding, Jun Jin, Bin Wang, Jifeng
  Dai, Yu Qiao, and Ping Luo. EmbodiedGPT: Vision-language pre-training via embodied chain of
  thought, 2023.
Suraj Nair, Aravind Rajeswaran, Vikash Kumar, Chelsea Finn, and Abhi Gupta. R3m: A universal
  visual representation for robot manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning, 2022.
Andrew Y Ng, Daishi Harada, and Stuart Russell. Policy invariance under reward transformations:
 Theory and application to reward shaping. In ICML, volume 99, pp. 278–287. Citeseer, 1999.
Theo X Olausson, Jeevana Priya Inala, Chenglong Wang, Jianfeng Gao, and Armando Solar-Lezama.
  Demystifying gpt self-repair for code generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.09896, 2023.
Jongjin Park, Younggyo Seo, Jinwoo Shin, Honglak Lee, Pieter Abbeel, and Kimin Lee. Surf:
  Semi-supervised reward learning with data augmentation for feedback-efficient preference-based
  reinforcement learning, 2022.
Xavier Puig, Kevin Ra, Marko Boben, Jiaman Li, Tingwu Wang, Sanja Fidler, and Antonio Torralba.
  Virtualhome: Simulating household activities via programs. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8494–8502, 2018.
Baptiste Rozière, Jonas Gehring, Fabian Gloeckle, Sten Sootla, Itai Gat, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Yossi
  Adi, Jingyu Liu, Tal Remez, Jérémy Rapin, et al. Code llama: Open foundation models for code.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12950, 2023.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Thomas Hubert, Karen Simonyan, Laurent Sifre, Simon
  Schmitt, Arthur Guez, Edward Lockhart, Demis Hassabis, Thore Graepel, et al. Mastering atari,
  go, chess and shogi by planning with a learned model. Nature, 588(7839):604–609, 2020.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. ArXiv, abs/1707.06347, 2017.
Freda Shi, Daniel Fried, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Sida I Wang. Natural language
  to code translation with execution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.11454, 2022.
Tianlin Shi, Andrej Karpathy, Linxi Fan, Jonathan Hernandez, and Percy Liang. World of bits: An
  open-domain platform for web-based agents. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 3135–3144. PMLR, 2017.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Beck Labash, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and
  Shunyu Yao. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.11366, 2023.
Mohit Shridhar, Jesse Thomason, Daniel Gordon, Yonatan Bisk, Winson Han, Roozbeh Mottaghi,
 Luke Zettlemoyer, and Dieter Fox. Alfred: A benchmark for interpreting grounded instructions
 for everyday tasks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
 recognition, pp. 10740–10749, 2020a.
Mohit Shridhar, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Côté, Yonatan Bisk, Adam Trischler, and Matthew
 Hausknecht. Alfworld: Aligning text and embodied environments for interactive learning. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2010.03768, 2020b.
Ishika Singh, Valts Blukis, Arsalan Mousavian, Ankit Goyal, Danfei Xu, Jonathan Tremblay, Dieter
   Fox, Jesse Thomason, and Animesh Garg. Progprompt: Generating situated robot task plans using
   large language models. In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
  (ICRA), pp. 11523–11530. IEEE, 2023.
Chan Hee Song, Jiaman Wu, Clayton Washington, Brian M Sadler, Wei-Lun Chao, and Yu Su.
  Llm-planner: Few-shot grounded planning for embodied agents with large language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2212.04088, 2022.
Hongjin Su, Weijia Shi, Jungo Kasai, Yizhong Wang, Yushi Hu, Mari Ostendorf, Wen-tau Yih,
  Noah A. Smith, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Tao Yu. One embedder, any task: Instruction-finetuned
  text embeddings. 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.09741.
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. IEEE Transactions
  on Neural Networks, 16:285–286, 2005. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
  CorpusID:9166388.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
  Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open foundation
  and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and
 Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.16291, 2023.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
Yue Wu, Yewen Fan, Paul Pu Liang, Amos Azaria, Yuanzhi Li, and Tom M Mitchell. Read and
  reap the rewards: Learning to play atari with the help of instruction manuals. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.04449, 2023.
Markus Wulfmeier, Peter Ondruska, and Ingmar Posner. Maximum entropy deep inverse reinforce-
 ment learning, 2016.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Binfeng Xu, Zhiyuan Peng, Bowen Lei, Subhabrata Mukherjee, Yuchen Liu, and Dongkuan Xu.
  Rewoo: Decoupling reasoning from observations for efficient augmented language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.18323, 2023.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629,
  2022.
Weiran Yao, Shelby Heinecke, Juan Carlos Niebles, Zhiwei Liu, Yihao Feng, Le Xue, Rithesh Murthy,
 Zeyuan Chen, Jianguo Zhang, Devansh Arpit, et al. Retroformer: Retrospective large language
 agents with policy gradient optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.02151, 2023.
Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey
  Levine. Meta-world: A benchmark and evaluation for multi-task and meta reinforcement learning.
  In Conference on robot learning, pp. 1094–1100. PMLR, 2020.
Wenhao Yu, Nimrod Gileadi, Chuyuan Fu, Sean Kirmani, Kuang-Huei Lee, Montse Gonzalez Arenas,
 Hao-Tien Lewis Chiang, Tom Erez, Leonard Hasenclever, Jan Humplik, Brian Ichter, Ted Xiao,
 Peng Xu, Andy Zeng, Tingnan Zhang, Nicolas Manfred Otto Heess, Dorsa Sadigh, Jie Tan, Yuval
 Tassa, and F. Xia. Language to rewards for robotic skill synthesis. ArXiv, abs/2306.08647, 2023.
Andy Zeng, Maria Attarian, Brian Ichter, Krzysztof Choromanski, Adrian Wong, Stefan Welker,
  Federico Tombari, Aveek Purohit, Michael Ryoo, Vikas Sindhwani, et al. Socratic models:
  Composing zero-shot multimodal reasoning with language. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.00598,
  2022.
Victor Zhong, Austin W Hanjie, Sida Wang, Karthik Narasimhan, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Silg:
  The multi-domain symbolic interactive language grounding benchmark. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 34:21505–21519, 2021.
Shuyan Zhou, Uri Alon, Frank F Xu, Zhengbao Jiang, and Graham Neubig. Docprompting: Gen-
  erating code by retrieving the docs. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022.
Shuyan Zhou, Frank F Xu, Hao Zhu, Xuhui Zhou, Robert Lo, Abishek Sridhar, Xianyi Cheng,
  Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, Uri Alon, et al. Webarena: A realistic web environment for building
  autonomous agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13854, 2023.
Banghua Zhu, Jiantao Jiao, and Michael I. Jordan. Principled reinforcement learning with human
  feedback from pairwise or k-wise comparisons, 2023.
Brian D Ziebart, Andrew L Maas, J Andrew Bagnell, Anind K Dey, et al. Maximum entropy inverse
  reinforcement learning. In Aaai, volume 8, pp. 1433–1438. Chicago, IL, USA, 2008.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Appendices
A        H YPER - PARAMETER DETAILS
In this section, we provide the hyper-parameter details used for our reward function generation
and reinforcement learning backbones. For reward function generation, we base on GPT-4 2 In the
experiments of the main body, the temperature of sampling is set to 0.7 for each experiment. For rein-
forcement learning training, we use open-source implementations of SAC and PPO3 algorithm, and
list the hyper-parameters in Table 2 and Table 3 respectively. Their respective training environments
are indicated in parentheses.

                     Table 2: Hyper-parameter of SAC algorithm applied to each task.

                        Hyper-parameter              Value
                        Discount factor γ            0.99 (MetaWorld), 0.95 (ManiSkill2)
                        Target update frequency      2 (MetaWorld), 1 (ManiSkill2)
                        Learning rate                3e−4
                        Train frequency              1 (MetaWorld), 8 (ManiSkill2)
                        Soft update τ                5e−3
                        Gradient steps               1 (MetaWorld), 4 (ManiSkill2)
                        Learning starts              4000
                        Hidden units per layer       256
                        Batch Size                   512 (MetaWorld), 1024 (ManiSkill2)
                        # of layers                  3 (MetaWorld), 2 (ManiSkill2)
                        Initial temperature          0.1 (MetaWorld), 0.2 (ManiSkill2)
                        Rollout steps per episode    500 (MetaWorld), 200 (Maniskill2)


                     Table 3: Hyper-parameter of PPO algorithm applied to each task.

                         Hyper-parameter             Value
                         Discount factor γ           0.85 (ManiSkill2), 0.99 (MuJoco)
                         # of epochs per update      15 (ManiSkill2), 10 (MuJoco)
                         Learning rate               3e−4
                         # of environments           8
                         Batch size                  400 (ManiSkill2), 64 (MuJoco)
                         Hidden units per layer      256
                         Target KL divergence        0.05 (ManiSkill2), None (MuJoco)
                         # of layers                 2
                         # of steps per update       3200 (ManiSkill2), 2048 (MuJoco)
                         Rollout steps per episode   100 (ManiSkill2), 200 (MuJoco)

We utilize multiple g5.4xlarge instances (1 NVIDIA A10G, 16 vCPUs, and 64 GiB memory per
instance) from AWS for RL training. The time required for training a policy is approximately 0.5
hours per task for MetaWorld, and between 0.5 to 10 hours for ManiSkill2, varying with the task’s
difficulty. It’s worth noting that we use the default environments from MetaWorld and ManiSkill2
without any speed optimization. Further enhancements such as parallel computing can be made to
improve the training speed for validating reward functions generated. An early evaluation of the code
semantics before starting RL training or modifying the reward during each RL training could be a
promising direction to reduce costs.

B        TASK DETAILS
In this section, we provide a full list of tasks within each simulation environment, accompanied by
their corresponding language instructions. Across all tasks, we follow the default settings of their
    2
        https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/gpt. This work uses gpt-4-0314.
    3
        https://github.com/DLR-RM/stable-baselines3


                                                        14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


respective environments. Here, we will also briefly describe the observation space and action space
characterizing these environments. For a thorough and detailed understanding, we encourage the
readers to refer to the official manual associated with each environment.4

MetaWorld In M ETAW ORLD environment, we use a 7 DoF Sawyer robot arm with a fixed base
to complete tabletop tasks. For all tasks, the observation space is a combination of the 3D position
of the robot end-effector, a normalized measurement of gripper openness, the 3D position of the
manipulated object, the quaternion of the object, all of the previous measurements, and the goal
position. The environment adopts end-effector delta position control, which means the action space
consists of the change of the end effector’s 3D position, as well as the normalized torque the gripper
should apply. For all tasks, the initial and target positions of the manipulated object and the initial
joint positions of the robot arm are variable. The full tasks list and their corresponding instructions
are in Table 4.

ManiSkill2 M ANISKILL 2 environment uses a 7 DoF Franka Panda as the default robot arm. For
manipulation tasks (Lift Cube, Pick Cube, Turn Faucet and Stack Cube), we use a robot arm with a
fixed base. For mobile manipulation tasks (Open Cabinet Door and Open Cabinet Drawer), we use a
single robot arm with a Sciurus17 mobile base. For the mobile manipulation task Push Chair, we
use a dual-arm robot arm with a Sciurus17 mobile base. For all tasks, the observation space consists
of robot proprioception information (e.g. current joint positions, current joint velocities, robot base
position and quaternion in the world frame) and task-specific information (e.g. goal position, end-
effector position). We use end-effector delta pose control mode for this environment, which controls
the change of 3D position and rotation (represented as an axis-angle in the end-effector frame). For
all tasks, the initial and target positions of the manipulated object, the initial joint positions of the
robot arm and physical parameters (e.g. friction and damping coefficient) are variable. The full tasks
list and their corresponding instructions can be found in Table 5.

Gym MuJoCo Gym M U J O C O offers a series of simulation environments that contain Ant, Half
Cheetah and so, powered by M U J O C O physic engine and pre-defined XML files, each provided
with a written reward for a simple task. To evaluate the ability of T EXT 2R EWARD to learn novel
locomotion skills, we chose to use two robotic agents: Ant (a 3D quadruped robot) and Hopper (a 2D
unipedal robot). Their actions are represented by the torques applied at the hinge joints, while their
observations consist of positional values and velocities of different body parts. We provide the tasks
list and their corresponding instructions in Table 6.

Real Robot For the tasks Pick Cube and Stack Cube, we take the joint values of the robot arm,
the pose of the end-effector and cubes as input. For real-world robot control, we use end-effector
delta position control mode, which first predicts a delta 3D position for the gripper to move to, then
utilizes inverse kinematics to iteratively solve the target joint value. To obtain the object state required
by our RL policy, we used the Segment Anything Model (SAM) (Kirillov et al., 2023) and a depth
camera to get the estimated pose of objects. Specifically, we query SAM to segment each object in
the scene. The segmentation map and the depth map together give us an incomplete point cloud. We
then estimate the pose of the object based on this point cloud.

C    P ROMPT D ETAILS
Zero-shot prompt To ground LLMs into robotics simulation environments, we propose a novel
Pythonic prompt, which can be abstracted by the experts who developed the environment. This
class-like prompt is a more compact representation than simply listing all environment attributes
linearly, which can delete redundant information and save more tokens, and this Pythonic prompt can
also better bootstrap Python reward code generation. More specifically, our prompt leverages python
class, class attribute, python typing and comments to recursively define the environment. Here we
provide an example of the zero-shot prompt for M ANI S KILL 2 manipulation tasks:
You are an expert in robotics, reinforcement learning and code generation. We are going to use
a Franka Panda robot to complete given tasks. The action space of the robot is a normalized
    4
      Official document of M ANI S KILL 2 is at https://haosulab.github.io/ManiSkill2/, and of-
ficial document of Gym M U J O C O is at https://www.gymlibrary.dev/environments/mujoco/


                                                    15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               Table 4: Task list of M ETAW ORLD.

          Task               Instruction
          Drawer Open        Open a drawer by its handle.
          Drawer Close       Close a drawer by its handle.
          Window Open        Push and open a sliding window by its handle.
          Window Close       Push and close a sliding window by its handle.
          Button Press       Press a button in y coordination.
          Sweep Into         Sweep a puck from the initial position into a hole.
          Door Unlock        Unlock the door by rotating the lock counter-clockwise.
          Door Close         Close a door with a revolving joint by pushing the door’s handle.
          Handle Press       Press a handle down.
          Handle PressSide   Press a handle down sideways.


                                Table 5: Task list of M ANI S KILL 2.

   Task                  Instruction
   Lift Cube             Pick up cube A and lift it up by 0.2 meters.
   Pick Cube             Pick up cube A and move it to the 3D goal position.
   Turn Faucet           Turn on a faucet by rotating its handle. The task is finished when qpos
                         of faucet handle is larger than target qpos.
   Open Cabinet Door     A single-arm mobile robot needs to open a cabinet door. The task is
                         finished when qpos of cabinet door is larger than target qpos.
   Open Cabinet Drawer   A single-arm mobile robot needs to open a cabinet drawer. The task is
                         finished when qpos of cabinet drawer is larger than target qpos.
   Push Chair            A dual-arm mobile robot needs to push a swivel chair to a target
                         location on the ground and prevent it from falling over.
   Stack Cube            Pick up cube A and place it on cube B. The task is finished when cube A is
                         on top of cube B stably (i.e. cube A is static) and isn’t grasped by the gripper.



‘Box(-1, 1, (7,), float32)‘. Now I want you to help me write a reward function for reinforcement
learning. I’ll give you the attributes of the environment. You can use these class attributes
to write the reward function.

Typically, the reward function of a manipulation task is consisted of these following parts:
1. the distance between robot’s gripper and our target object
2. difference between current state of object and its goal state
3. regularization of the robot’s action
4. [optional] extra constraint of the target object, which is often implied by task instruction
5. [optional] extra constraint of the robot, which is often implied by task instruction
...

class BaseEnv(gym.Env):
    self.cubeA : RigidObject # cube A in the environment
    self.cubeB : RigidObject # cube B in the environment
    self.cube_half_size = 0.02 # in meters
    self.robot : PandaRobot # a Franka Panda robot

class PandaRobot:
    self.ee_pose : ObjectPose # 3D position and quaternion of robot’s end-effector
    self.lfinger : LinkObject # left finger of robot’s gripper
    self.rfinger : LinkObject # right finger of robot’s gripper
    self.qpos : np.ndarray[(7,)] # joint position of the robot
    self.qvel : np.ndarray[(7,)] # joint velocity of the robot
    self.gripper_openness : float # openness of robot gripper, normalized range in [0, 1]
    def check_grasp(self, obj : Union[RigidObject, LinkObject], max_angle=85) -> bool
        # indicate whether robot gripper successfully grasp an object

class ObjectPose:
    self.p : np.ndarray[(3,)] # 3D position of the rigid object
    self.q : np.ndarray[(4,)] # quaternion of the rigid object
    def inv(self,) -> ObjectPose # return a ‘ObjectPose‘ class instance, which is the inverse
                                 # of the original pose
    def to_transformation_matrix(self,) -> np.ndarray[(4,4)]
        # return a [4, 4] numpy array, which is the transform matrix

class RigidObject:
    self.pose : ObjectPose # 3D position and quaternion of the rigid object



                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               Table 6: Task list of Gym M U J O C O.

        Task                     Instruction
        Hopper Move Forward      Control the Hopper to move in the forward direction.
        Hopper Front Flip        Control the Hopper to front flip in the forward direction.
        Hopper Back Flip         Control the Hopper to back flip.
        Ant Move Forward         Control the Ant to move in the forward direction.
        Ant Wave Leg             Control the Ant to stay in place while waving its right front leg.
        Ant Lie Down             Control the Ant to lie down.


    self.velocity : np.ndarray[(3,)] # linear velocity of the rigid object
    self.angular_velocity : np.ndarray[(3,)] # angular velocity of the rigid object
    def check_static(self,) -> bool # indicate whether this rigid object is static or not

class LinkObject:
    self.pose : ObjectPose # 3D position and quaternion of the link object
    self.velocity : np.ndarray[(3,)] # linear velocity of the link object
    self.angular_velocity : np.ndarray[(3,)] # angular velocity of the link object
    self.qpos : float # position of the link object joint
    self.qvel : float # velocity of the link object joint
    self.target_qpos:float # target position of the link object joint
    def get_local_pcd(self,) -> np.ndarray[(M,3)] # get the point cloud of the link object surface
                                                  # in the local frame
    def get_world_pcd(self,) -> np.ndarray[(M,3)] # get the point cloud of the link object surface
                                                  # in the world frame

class ArticulateObject:
    self.pose : ObjectPose # 3D position and quaternion of the articulated object
    self.velocity : np.ndarray[(3,)] # linear velocity of the articulated object
    self.angular_velocity : np.ndarray[(3,)] # angular velocity of the articulated object
    self.qpos : np.ndarray[(K,)] # position of the articulated object joint
    self.qvel : np.ndarray[(K,)] # velocity of the articulated object joint
    def get_pcd(self,) -> np.ndarray[(M,3)] # point cloud of the articulated object surface
                                            # in the world frame

Additional knowledge:
1. A staged reward could make the training more stable, you can write them in a nested
   if-else statement.
2. ‘ObjectPose‘ class support multiply operator ‘*‘, for example: ‘ee_pose_wrt_cubeA =
   self.cubeA.pose.inv() * self.robot.ee_pose‘.
3. You can use ‘transforms3d.quaternions‘ package to do quaternion calculation, for example:
   ‘qinverse(quat: np.ndarray[(4,)])‘ for inverse of quaternion, ‘qmult(quat1: np.ndarray[(4,)],
   quat2: np.ndarray[(4,)])‘ for multiply of quaternion, ‘quat2axangle(quat: np.ndarray[(4,)])‘
   for quaternion to angle.

I want you to fulfill the following task: {instruction}
1. please think step by step and tell me what does this task mean;
2. then write a function that formats as ‘def compute_dense_reward(self, action) -> float‘ and
   returns the ‘reward : float‘ only.
3. When write code, you can also add some comments as your thoughts.

Few-shot example prompt In order to retrieve previously acquired skills and generate better reward
codes, it is necessary to provide LLMs with few-shot examples. These examples take the format
of instruction and reward code pairs, which are then filled into the prompt template. Here is the
few-shot example prompt template used for M ANI S KILL 2 tasks:
An example:
Tasks to be fulfilled: {instruction}
Corresponding reward function:
‘‘‘python
{reward_code}
‘‘‘

Interactive feedback prompt Due to the inherent information bottleneck of natural language, the
users’ language instructions may be ambiguous, and their preferences may not be conveyed. On
the other hand, single-turn reward code generation may not work for some complex tasks. So, in
these cases, multi-turn generation with human feedback can be beneficial. One possible prompt is
a combination of the previous round generated code, a description of the training results (learning
curve, rollout videos, etc.) and the feedback for improvement. This is the prompt template:
Generated code shown as below:
‘‘‘python



                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


{generated_code}
‘‘‘

Feed this reward code into the environment, and use the RL algorithm to train the policy.
After training, I can see from the robot that:
{description}

To make the code more accurate and train better robot, the feedback for improvement is:
{feedback}

Re-imagine which steps are missed or wrong.
Show me the improved code as below:



D      S AMPLES OF G ENERATED R EWARD FUNCTION

D.1     Z ERO / FEW- SHOT / ORACLE M ANIPULATION R ESULTS

In this section, to help better understand the generation ability and results of T EXT 2R EWARD and the
difference between generated and oracle reward functions, we provide zero-shot generated, few-shot
generated and expert-written (provided by the simulation environment) reward functions of different
tasks on M ANI S KILL 2.
Sample of zero-shot generated reward function on M ANI S KILL 2 Lift Cube task:
import numpy as np
from scipy.spatial import distance

def compute_dense_reward(self, action) -> float:
    # Define reward weights
    weight_dist = 0.4
    weight_lift = 0.4
    weight_grasp = 0.2

      # Initialize reward
      reward = 0.0

      # Stage 1: Approach the cube
      ee_pos = self.robot.ee_pose.p
      cube_pos = self.cubeA.pose.p
      dist_to_cube = np.linalg.norm(ee_pos - cube_pos)
      reward_dist = -weight_dist * dist_to_cube

      # Stage 2: Grasp the cube
      grasp_success = self.robot.check_grasp(self.cubeA, max_angle=30)
      reward_grasp = weight_grasp * grasp_success

      # Stage 3: Lift the cube
      lift_amount = cube_pos[2] - self.goal_height
      reward_lift = -weight_lift * np.abs(lift_amount)

      # Total reward
      reward = reward_dist + reward_grasp + reward_lift

      # Stage 4: Maintain the cube at the goal height
      if self.cubeA.pose.p[2] >= self.goal_height:
          reward += 0.1 * (self.cubeA.pose.p[2] - self.goal_height)

      # Regularize the robot’s action
      # We don’t want robot to take very big action, so we add a negative reward here
      reward -= 0.01 * np.linalg.norm(action)

      return reward

Sample of few-shot generated reward function on M ANI S KILL 2 Lift Cube task:
import numpy as np

def compute_dense_reward(self, action):
    reward = 0.0

      # check if cubeA is lifted 0.2 meter
      is_obj_lifted = self.cubeA.pose.p[2] >= self.cube_half_size + self.goal_height
      # check if the robot is static
      is_robot_static = np.max(np.abs(self.robot.qvel)) <= 0.2

      # if both conditions are met, the task is successful



                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    success = is_obj_lifted and is_robot_static

    if success:
        reward += 5
        return reward

    # calculate the distance between robot’s end-effector and cubeA
    tcp_to_obj_pos = self.cubeA.pose.p - self.robot.ee_pose.p
    tcp_to_obj_dist = np.linalg.norm(tcp_to_obj_pos)
    # calculate the reaching reward, which encourages the robot to approach cubeA
    reaching_reward = 1 - np.tanh(5 * tcp_to_obj_dist)
    reward += reaching_reward

    # check if the robot has successfully grasped cubeA
    is_grasped = self.robot.check_grasp(self.cubeA, max_angle=30)
    # if grasped, add reward
    reward += 1 if is_grasped else 0.0

    if is_grasped:
        # calculate the distance between cubeA and the target height
        obj_to_goal_dist = np.abs(self.goal_height - (self.cubeA.pose.p[2] - self.cube_half_size))
        # calculate the lifting reward, which encourages the robot to lift cubeA up
        lift_reward = 1 - np.tanh(5 * obj_to_goal_dist)
        reward += lift_reward

    return reward

Oracle (expert-written) reward function on M ANI S KILL 2 Lift Cube task:
def compute_dense_reward(self, action):
    reward = 0.0

    is_obj_placed = self.cubeA.pose.p[2] >= self.goal_height + self.cube_half_size
    is_robot_static = np.max(np.abs(self.robot.qvel)) <= 0.2

    success = is_obj_placed and is_robot_static

    if success:
        reward += 2.25
        return reward

    # reaching reward
    gripper_pos = self.robot.ee_pose.p
    obj_pos = self.cubeA.pose.p
    dist = np.linalg.norm(gripper_pos - obj_pos)
    reaching_reward = 1 - np.tanh(5 * dist)
    reward += reaching_reward

    is_grasped = self.robot.check_grasp(self.cubeA, max_angle=30)

    # grasp reward
    if is_grasped:
        reward += 0.25

    # lifting reward
    if is_grasped:
        lifting_reward = self.cubeA.pose.p[2] - self.cube_half_size
        lifting_reward = min(lifting_reward / self.goal_height, 1.0)
        reward += lifting_reward

    return reward

Sample of zero-shot generated reward function on M ANI S KILL 2 Pick Cube task:
import numpy as np

def compute_dense_reward(self, action):
    # Normalize action
    action = np.clip(action, -1, 1)

    # Calculate distance between gripper and cube
    gripper_pos = self.robot.ee_pose.p
    cube_pos = self.cubeA.pose.p
    dist_gripper_cube = np.linalg.norm(gripper_pos - cube_pos)

    # Calculate distance between cube and goal
    goal_pos = self.goal_position
    dist_cube_goal = np.linalg.norm(goal_pos - cube_pos)

    # Check if the robot is grasping the cube



                                                19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    grasping_cube = self.robot.check_grasp(self.cubeA)

    # Define reward components
    reward_dist_gripper_cube = -1.0 * dist_gripper_cube
    reward_dist_cube_goal = -1.0 * dist_cube_goal
    reward_grasping_cube = 1.0 if grasping_cube else -1.0

    # Define weights for reward components
    weight_dist_gripper_cube = 0.3
    weight_dist_cube_goal = 0.5
    weight_grasping_cube = 0.2

    # Calculate total reward
    reward = weight_dist_gripper_cube * reward_dist_gripper_cube \
            + weight_dist_cube_goal * reward_dist_cube_goal \
            + weight_grasping_cube * reward_grasping_cube

    # Regularization on action
    reward -= 0.01 * (action ** 2).sum()

    return reward

Sample of few-shot generated reward function on M ANI S KILL 2 Pick Cube task:
import numpy as np

def compute_dense_reward(self, action):
    reward = 0.0

    # Check if the cube is placed at the goal position and the robot is static
    cube_at_goal = np.linalg.norm(self.cubeA.pose.p - self.goal_position) <= self.cube_half_size
    is_robot_static = np.max(np.abs(self.robot.qvel)) <= 0.2

    # If the cube is placed at the goal and the robot is static, return a high reward
    if cube_at_goal and is_robot_static:
        reward += 2.25
        return reward

    # reaching reward, encourages the robot to reach the cube
    gripper_pos = self.robot.ee_pose.p
    obj_pos = self.cubeA.pose.p
    dist_to_obj = np.linalg.norm(gripper_pos - obj_pos)
    reaching_reward = 1 - np.tanh(5 * dist_to_obj)
    reward += reaching_reward

    # grasp reward, encourages the robot to grasp the cube
    is_grasped = self.robot.check_grasp(self.cubeA, max_angle=30)
    if is_grasped:
        reward += 0.25

    # placement reward, encourages the robot to place the cube at the goal
    if is_grasped:
        dist_to_goal = np.linalg.norm(self.cubeA.pose.p - self.goal_position)
        placement_reward = 1 - np.tanh(5 * dist_to_goal)
        reward += placement_reward

    # regularization term on robot’s action
    action_reg = -np.sum(np.square(action)) / len(action)
    reward += 0.1 * action_reg

    return reward

Oracle (expert-written) reward function of M ANI S KILL 2 Pick Cube task:
import numpy as np

def compute_dense_reward(self, action):
    reward = 0.0

    is_obj_placed = np.linalg.norm(self.goal_position - self.cubeA.pose.p) <= 0.025
    is_robot_static = np.max(np.abs(self.robot.qvel)) <= 0.2

    success = is_obj_placed and is_robot_static

    if success:
        reward += 5
        return reward

    tcp_to_obj_pos = self.cubeA.pose.p - self.robot.ee_pose.p
    tcp_to_obj_dist = np.linalg.norm(tcp_to_obj_pos)



                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    reaching_reward = 1 - np.tanh(5 * tcp_to_obj_dist)
    reward += reaching_reward

    is_grasped = self.robot.check_grasp(self.cubeA, max_angle=30)
    reward += 1 if is_grasped else 0.0

    if is_grasped:
        obj_to_goal_dist = np.linalg.norm(self.goal_position - self.cubeA.pose.p)
        place_reward = 1 - np.tanh(5 * obj_to_goal_dist)
        reward += place_reward

    return reward

Sample of zero-shot generated reward function on M ANI S KILL 2 Turn Faucet task:
import numpy as np
from scipy.spatial.distance import cdist

def compute_dense_reward(self, action):
    # Here I define the reward and penalty weights for different aspects of the task
    handle_reach_weight = 0.1
    grasp_handle_weight = 0.2
    rotation_weight = 0.7
    action_penalty_weight = 0.01

    # Here I define the grasp success reward
    grasp_success_reward = 0.1

    # Here I compute the distance between the robot’s end effector and the faucet handle
    handle_pcd = self.faucet.handle.get_world_pcd()
    lfinger_cords = np.array([self.robot.lfinger.pose.p, ])
    rfinger_cords = np.array([self.robot.rfinger.pose.p, ])
    dist_lfinger_handle = cdist(lfinger_cords, handle_pcd).min(-1)[0]
    dist_rfinger_handle = cdist(rfinger_cords, handle_pcd).min(-1)[0]
    dist_handle_reach = max(dist_lfinger_handle, dist_rfinger_handle)
    handle_reach_reward = - handle_reach_weight * dist_handle_reach

    # Here I check if the robot has successfully grasped the faucet handle
    grasp_handle = self.robot.check_grasp(self.faucet.handle)
    grasp_handle_reward = grasp_handle_weight * grasp_handle if grasp_handle else 0

    # Here I calculate the rotation reward based on the difference between the current and
    # target joint position
    rotation_diff = max(0, self.faucet.handle.target_qpos - self.faucet.handle.qpos)
    rotation_reward = - rotation_weight * rotation_diff

    # Here I calculate the penalty for the robot’s action
    action_penalty = - action_penalty_weight*np.linalg.norm(action)

    # The total reward is the sum of all the individual rewards and penalties
    reward = handle_reach_reward + grasp_handle_reward + rotation_reward + action_penalty

    if grasp_handle and rotation_diff == 0:
        reward += grasp_success_reward

    return reward

Sample of few-shot generated reward function on M ANI S KILL 2 Turn Faucet task:
import numpy as np
from scipy.spatial.distance import cdist

def compute_dense_reward(self, action):
    reward = 0.0

    # check if the handle is turned on
    is_handle_turned_on = self.faucet.handle.qpos >= self.faucet.handle.target_qpos
    # check if the robot is static
    is_robot_static = np.max(np.abs(self.robot.qvel)) <= 0.2

    success = is_handle_turned_on and is_robot_static

    if success:
        reward += 5
        return reward

    # calculate the reward for reaching the handle
    tcp_to_handle_pos = self.faucet.handle.pose.p - self.robot.ee_pose.p
    tcp_to_handle_dist = np.linalg.norm(tcp_to_handle_pos)
    reaching_reward = 1 - np.tanh(5 * tcp_to_handle_dist)



                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    reward += reaching_reward

    # calculate the reward for successfully grasping the handle
    is_grasped = self.robot.check_grasp(self.faucet.handle, max_angle=30)
    reward += 1 if is_grasped else 0.0

    if is_grasped:
        # reward for the robot turning the handle
        handle_to_target_dist = self.faucet.handle.target_qpos - self.faucet.handle.qpos
        turning_reward = 1 - np.tanh(5 * handle_to_target_dist)
        reward += turning_reward

    # penalize actions that could potentially damage the robot
    action_penalty = np.sum(np.square(action))
    reward -= action_penalty * 0.1

    return reward

Oracle (expert-written) generated reward function on M ANI S KILL 2 Turn Faucet task:
def compute_dense_reward(self, action):
    reward = 0.0

    angle_diff = self.faucet.handle.target_qpos - self.faucet.handle.qpos
    success = angle_diff < 0

    if success:
        return 10.0

    """Compute the distance between the tap and robot fingers."""
    pcd = self.faucet.handle.get_world_pcd()
    pcd1 = self.robot.lfinger.get_world_pcd()
    pcd2 = self.robot.rfinger.get_world_pcd()

    distance1 = cdist(pcd, pcd1)
    distance2 = cdist(pcd, pcd2)

    distance = min(distance1.min(), distance2.min())

    reward += 1 - np.tanh(distance * 5.0)

    turn_reward_1 = 3 * (1 - np.tanh(max(angle_diff, 0) * 2.0))
    reward += turn_reward_1

    delta_angle = angle_diff - self.last_angle_diff
    if angle_diff > 0:
        turn_reward_2 = -np.tanh(delta_angle * 2)
    else:
        turn_reward_2 = np.tanh(delta_angle * 2)
    turn_reward_2 *= 5
    reward += turn_reward_2

    self.last_angle_diff = angle_diff

    return reward

Sample of zero-shot generated reward function on M ANI S KILL 2 Open Cabinet Door task:
def compute_dense_reward(self, action):
    # Define weights for different parts of the reward
    w_distance = 0.4
    w_goal = 0.4
    w_action = 0.2

    # Calculate distance between robot’s gripper and the cabinet handle
    handle_pcd = self.cabinet.handle.get_world_pcd()
    ee_cords = self.robot.get_ee_coords().reshape(-1, 3)
    distance = cdist(ee_cords, handle_pcd).min()
    distance_reward = -w_distance * distance # Negative reward since we want to minimize the distance

    # Calculate the difference between current state of cabinet drawer and its goal state
    # Positive reward since we want to maximize the qpos
    goal_diff = self.cabinet.handle.qpos - self.cabinet.handle.target_qpos
    goal_reward = w_goal * goal_diff

    # Add regularization of robot’s action, penalize large actions
    action_reward = -w_action * np.linalg.norm(action)

    # Check if the target drawer is static, if so, give a large positive reward
    if self.cabinet.handle.check_static():



                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        static_reward = 1.0
    else:
        static_reward = 0.0

    # Combine different parts of the reward
    reward = distance_reward + goal_reward + action_reward + static_reward

    return reward

Sample of few-shot generated reward function on M ANI S KILL 2 Open Cabinet Door task:
from scipy.spatial import distance as sdist

def compute_dense_reward(self, action: np.ndarray) -> float:
    reward = 0

    # Compute distance from end-effector to cabinet door handle
    ee_coords = self.robot.get_ee_coords() # [2, 3]
    handle_pcd = self.cabinet.handle.get_world_pcd() # [N, 3]

    # EE approach handle
    dist_ee_to_handle = sdist.cdist(ee_coords, handle_pcd) # [2, N]
    dist_ee_to_handle = dist_ee_to_handle.min(1) # [2]
    dist_ee_to_handle = dist_ee_to_handle.mean()
    log_dist_ee_to_handle = np.log(dist_ee_to_handle + 1e-5)
    reward += -dist_ee_to_handle - np.clip(log_dist_ee_to_handle, -10, 0)

    # Penalize action
    # Assume action is relative and normalized.
    action_norm = np.linalg.norm(action)
    reward -= action_norm * 1e-6

    # Cabinet door position
    cabinet_door_pos = self.cabinet.handle.qpos
    target_door_pos = self.cabinet.handle.target_qpos

    # Stage reward
    stage_reward = -10
    if cabinet_door_pos > target_door_pos:
        # Cabinet door is opened
        stage_reward += 5
    else:
        # Encourage the robot to continue moving the cabinet door
        stage_reward += (cabinet_door_pos - target_door_pos) * 2

    reward = reward + stage_reward
    return reward

Oracle (expert-written) generated reward function on M ANI S KILL 2 Open Cabinet Door task:
def compute_dense_reward(self, action):
    reward = 0.0

    # -------------------------------------------------------------------------- #
    # The end-effector should be close to the target pose
    # -------------------------------------------------------------------------- #
    handle_pose = self.cabinet.handle.pose
    ee_pose = self.robot.ee_pose

    # Position
    ee_coords = self.robot.get_ee_coords() # [2, 10, 3]
    handle_pcd = self.cabinet.handle.get_world_pcd()

    disp_ee_to_handle = sdist.cdist(ee_coords.reshape(-1, 3), handle_pcd)
    dist_ee_to_handle = disp_ee_to_handle.reshape(2, -1).min(-1) # [2]
    reward_ee_to_handle = -dist_ee_to_handle.mean() * 2
    reward += reward_ee_to_handle

    # Encourage grasping the handle
    ee_center_at_world = ee_coords.mean(0) # [10, 3]
    ee_center_at_handle = transform_points(
        handle_pose.inv().to_transformation_matrix(), ee_center_at_world
    )

    dist_ee_center_to_handle = self.cabinet.handle.local_sdf(ee_center_at_handle)

    dist_ee_center_to_handle = dist_ee_center_to_handle.max()
    reward_ee_center_to_handle = (
        clip_and_normalize(dist_ee_center_to_handle, -0.01, 4e-3) - 1
    )



                                               23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    reward += reward_ee_center_to_handle

    # Rotation
    target_grasp_poses = self.cabinet.handle.target_grasp_poses
    target_grasp_poses = [handle_pose * x for x in target_grasp_poses]
    angles_ee_to_grasp_poses = [angle_distance(ee_pose, x) for x in target_grasp_poses]
    ee_rot_reward = -min(angles_ee_to_grasp_poses) / np.pi * 3
    reward += ee_rot_reward

    # -------------------------------------------------------------------------- #
    # Stage reward
    # -------------------------------------------------------------------------- #
    coeff_qvel = 1.5 # joint velocity
    coeff_qpos = 0.5 # joint position distance
    stage_reward = -5 - (coeff_qvel + coeff_qpos)

    link_qpos = self.cabinet.handle.qpos
    link_qvel = self.cabinet.handle.qvel
    link_vel_norm = np.linalg.norm(self.cabinet.handle.velocity)
    link_ang_vel_norm = np.linalg.norm(self.cabinet.handle.angular_velocity)

    ee_close_to_handle = (dist_ee_to_handle.max() <= 0.01 and dist_ee_center_to_handle > 0)
    if ee_close_to_handle:
        stage_reward += 0.5

        # Distance between current and target joint positions
        reward_qpos = (clip_and_normalize(link_qpos, 0, self.cabinet.handle.target_qpos) * coeff_qpos)
        reward += reward_qpos

        if link_qpos < self.cabinet.handle.target_qpos:
            # Encourage positive joint velocity to increase joint position
            reward_qvel = clip_and_normalize(link_qvel, -0.1, 0.5) * coeff_qvel
            reward += reward_qvel
        else:
            # Add coeff_qvel for smooth transition of stagess
            stage_reward += 2 + coeff_qvel
            reward_static = -(link_vel_norm + link_ang_vel_norm * 0.5)
            reward += reward_static

            if link_vel_norm <= 0.1 and link_ang_vel_norm <= 1:
                stage_reward += 1

    reward += stage_reward
    return reward

Sample of zero-shot generated reward function on M ANI S KILL 2 Open Cabinet Drawer task:

import numpy as np
from scipy.spatial.distance import cdist

def compute_dense_reward(self, action):
    # Define weights for different parts of the reward
    w_distance = 0.4
    w_goal = 0.4
    w_action = 0.2

    # Calculate distance between robot’s gripper and the cabinet handle
    handle_pcd = self.cabinet.handle.get_world_pcd()
    ee_cords = self.robot.get_ee_coords().reshape(-1, 3)
    distance = cdist(ee_cords, handle_pcd).min()
    distance_reward = -w_distance * distance # Negative reward since we want to minimize the distance

    # Calculate the difference between current state of cabinet drawer and its goal state
    # Positive reward since we want to maximize the qpos
    goal_diff = self.cabinet.handle.qpos - self.cabinet.handle.target_qpos
    goal_reward = w_goal * goal_diff

    # Add regularization of robot’s action, penalize large actions
    action_reward = -w_action * np.linalg.norm(action)

    # Check if the target drawer is static, if so, give a large positive reward
    if self.cabinet.handle.check_static():
        static_reward = 1.0
    else:
        static_reward = 0.0

    # Combine different parts of the reward
    reward = distance_reward + goal_reward + action_reward + static_reward

    return reward



                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sample of few-shot generated reward function on M ANI S KILL 2 Open Cabinet Drawer task:
from scipy.spatial import distance as sdist
import numpy as np

def compute_dense_reward(self, action: np.ndarray):
    reward = 0

    # Compute distance between end-effector and cabinet handle surface
    ee_coords = np.array(self.robot.get_ee_coords()) # [2, 10, 3]
    handle_pcd = self.cabinet.handle.get_world_pcd() # [N, 3]

    # EE approach handle
    dist_ees_to_handle = sdist.cdist(ee_coords.reshape(-1, 3), handle_pcd)   # [20, N]
    dist_ees_to_handle = dist_ees_to_handle.min(0) # [N]
    dist_ee_to_handle = dist_ees_to_handle.mean()
    log_dist_ee_to_handle = np.log(dist_ee_to_handle + 1e-5)
    reward += -dist_ee_to_handle - np.clip(log_dist_ee_to_handle, -10, 0)

    # Penalize action
    # Assume action is relative and normalized.
    action_norm = np.linalg.norm(action)
    reward -= action_norm * 1e-6

    # Encourage qpos change
    qpos_change = self.cabinet.handle.qpos - self.cabinet.handle.target_qpos
    reward += qpos_change * 0.1

    # Penalize the velocity of cabinet and handle
    handle_vel_norm = np.linalg.norm(self.cabinet.handle.velocity)
    reward -= handle_vel_norm * 0.01
    cabinet_vel_norm = np.linalg.norm(self.cabinet.velocity)
    reward -= cabinet_vel_norm * 0.01

    # Stage reward
    stage_reward = -10
    if dist_ee_to_handle < 0.1:
        # EE is close to handle
        stage_reward += 2
        if self.cabinet.handle.qpos >= self.cabinet.handle.target_qpos:
            # The drawer is open
            stage_reward += 8
    reward += stage_reward

    return reward

Oracle (expert-written) generated reward function on M ANI S KILL 2 Open Cabinet Drawer task:
def compute_dense_reward(self, action):
    reward = 0.0

    # -------------------------------------------------------------------------- #
    # The end-effector should be close to the target pose
    # -------------------------------------------------------------------------- #
    handle_pose = self.cabinet.handle.pose
    ee_pose = self.robot.ee_pose

    # Position
    ee_coords = self.robot.get_ee_coords() # [2, 10, 3]
    handle_pcd = self.cabinet.handle.get_world_pcd()

    disp_ee_to_handle = sdist.cdist(ee_coords.reshape(-1, 3), handle_pcd)
    dist_ee_to_handle = disp_ee_to_handle.reshape(2, -1).min(-1) # [2]
    reward_ee_to_handle = -dist_ee_to_handle.mean() * 2
    reward += reward_ee_to_handle

    # Encourage grasping the handle
    ee_center_at_world = ee_coords.mean(0) # [10, 3]
    ee_center_at_handle = transform_points(
        handle_pose.inv().to_transformation_matrix(), ee_center_at_world
    )

    dist_ee_center_to_handle = self.cabinet.handle.local_sdf(ee_center_at_handle)

    dist_ee_center_to_handle = dist_ee_center_to_handle.max()
    reward_ee_center_to_handle = (
        clip_and_normalize(dist_ee_center_to_handle, -0.01, 4e-3) - 1
    )
    reward += reward_ee_center_to_handle


                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    # Rotation
    target_grasp_poses = self.cabinet.handle.target_grasp_poses
    target_grasp_poses = [handle_pose * x for x in target_grasp_poses]
    angles_ee_to_grasp_poses = [angle_distance(ee_pose, x) for x in target_grasp_poses]
    ee_rot_reward = -min(angles_ee_to_grasp_poses) / np.pi * 3
    reward += ee_rot_reward

    # -------------------------------------------------------------------------- #
    # Stage reward
    # -------------------------------------------------------------------------- #
    coeff_qvel = 1.5 # joint velocity
    coeff_qpos = 0.5 # joint position distance
    stage_reward = -5 - (coeff_qvel + coeff_qpos)

    link_qpos = self.cabinet.handle.qpos
    link_qvel = self.cabinet.handle.qvel
    link_vel_norm = np.linalg.norm(self.cabinet.handle.velocity)
    link_ang_vel_norm = np.linalg.norm(self.cabinet.handle.angular_velocity)

    ee_close_to_handle = (dist_ee_to_handle.max() <= 0.01 and dist_ee_center_to_handle > 0)
    if ee_close_to_handle:
        stage_reward += 0.5

        # Distance between current and target joint positions
        reward_qpos = (clip_and_normalize(link_qpos, 0, self.cabinet.handle.target_qpos) * coeff_qpos)
        reward += reward_qpos

        if link_qpos < self.cabinet.handle.target_qpos:
            # Encourage positive joint velocity to increase joint position
            reward_qvel = clip_and_normalize(link_qvel, -0.1, 0.5) * coeff_qvel
            reward += reward_qvel
        else:
            # Add coeff_qvel for smooth transition of stagess
            stage_reward += 2 + coeff_qvel
            reward_static = -(link_vel_norm + link_ang_vel_norm * 0.5)
            reward += reward_static

            if link_vel_norm <= 0.1 and link_ang_vel_norm <= 1:
                stage_reward += 1

    reward += stage_reward
    return reward

Sample of zero-shot generated reward function on M ANI S KILL 2 Push Chair task:
import numpy as np
from scipy.spatial.distance import cdist

def compute_dense_reward(self, action) -> float:
    # Stage 1: Encourage the robot to move towards the chair
    # Get the distance between the robot’s gripper and the chair
    gripper_coords = self.robot.get_ee_coords()
    chair_pcd = self.chair.get_pcd()
    dist_to_chair = cdist(gripper_coords, chair_pcd).min(-1).mean()

    # Get the difference between the chair’s current and target position
    chair_to_target_dist = np.linalg.norm(self.chair.pose.p[:2] - self.target_xy)

    # The smaller the distance, the larger the reward
    reward_dist = -dist_to_chair
    # The closer the chair is to the target, the larger the reward
    reward_target = -chair_to_target_dist

    # Stage 2: Encourage the robot to push the chair towards the target location
    # Get the velocity of the chair
    chair_vel = self.chair.velocity[:2]
    # The faster the chair moves towards the target, the larger the reward
    reward_vel = np.dot(chair_vel, (self.target_xy - self.chair.pose.p[:2])) /
            (np.linalg.norm(chair_vel) * chair_to_target_dist)

    # Stage 3: Prevent the chair from falling over
    # Calculate the tilt angle of the chair
    z_axis_chair = self.chair.pose.to_transformation_matrix()[:3, 2]
    chair_tilt = np.arccos(z_axis_chair[2])
    # The smaller the tilt, the larger the reward
    reward_tilt = -chair_tilt

    # Regularization of the robot’s action
    reward_reg = -np.square(action).sum()

    # Weights for each stage



                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    w_dist = 0.2
    w_target = 0.2
    w_vel = 0.3
    w_tilt = 0.2
    w_reg = 0.1

    # Final reward
    reward = w_dist * reward_dist + w_target * reward_target + w_vel * reward_vel +
            w_tilt * reward_tilt + w_reg * reward_reg

    return reward

Sample of few-shot generated reward function on M ANI S KILL 2 Push Chair task:
import numpy as np
import scipy.spatial.distance as sdist

def compute_dense_reward(self, action):
    reward = -20.0

    actor = self.chair
    ee_coords = np.array(self.robot.get_ee_coords())
    ee_mids = np.array([ee_coords[:2].mean(0), ee_coords[2:].mean(0)])
    chair_pcd = self.chair.get_pcd()

    # EE approach chair
    dist_ees_to_chair = sdist.cdist(ee_coords, chair_pcd) # [4, N]
    dist_ees_to_chair = dist_ees_to_chair.min(1) # [4]
    dist_ee_to_chair = dist_ees_to_chair.mean()
    log_dist_ee_to_chair = np.log(dist_ee_to_chair + 1e-5)
    reward += - dist_ee_to_chair - np.clip(log_dist_ee_to_chair, -10, 0)

    # Penalize action
    action_norm = np.linalg.norm(action)
    reward -= action_norm * 1e-6

    # Keep chair standing
    z_axis_world = np.array([0, 0, 1])
    z_axis_chair = self.chair.pose.to_transformation_matrix()[:3, 2]
    chair_tilt = np.arccos(z_axis_chair[2])
    log_chair_tilt = np.log(chair_tilt + 1e-5)
    reward += -chair_tilt * 0.2

    # Chair velocity
    chair_vel = actor.velocity
    chair_vel_norm = np.linalg.norm(chair_vel)
    disp_chair_to_target = self.chair.pose.p[:2] - self.target_xy
    chair_vel_dir = sdist.cosine(chair_vel[:2], disp_chair_to_target)
    chair_ang_vel_norm = np.linalg.norm(actor.angular_velocity)

    # Stage reward
    stage_reward = 0

    dist_chair_to_target = np.linalg.norm(self.chair.pose.p[:2] - self.target_xy)

    if dist_ee_to_chair < 0.2:
        stage_reward += 2
        if dist_chair_to_target <= 0.3:
            stage_reward += 2
            reward += (np.exp(-chair_vel_norm * 10) * 2)
            if chair_vel_norm <= 0.1 and chair_ang_vel_norm <= 0.2:
                stage_reward += 2
                if chair_tilt <= 0.1 * np.pi:
                    stage_reward += 2
        else:
            reward_vel = (chair_vel_dir - 1) * chair_vel_norm
            reward += np.clip(1 - np.exp(-reward_vel), -1, np.inf)*2 - dist_chair_to_target*2

    if chair_tilt > 0.4 * np.pi:
        stage_reward -= 2

    reward = reward + stage_reward
    return reward

Oracle (expert-written) generated reward function on M ANI S KILL 2 Push Chair task:
def compute_dense_reward(self, action: np.ndarray):
    reward = 0

    # Compute distance between end-effectors and chair surface



                                               27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      ee_coords = np.array(self.robot.get_ee_coords())   # [4, 3]
      chair_pcd = self.chair.get_world_pcd() # [N, 3]

      # EE approach chair
      dist_ees_to_chair = sdist.cdist(ee_coords, chair_pcd) # [4, N]
      dist_ees_to_chair = dist_ees_to_chair.min(1) # [4]
      dist_ee_to_chair = dist_ees_to_chair.mean()
      log_dist_ee_to_chair = np.log(dist_ee_to_chair + 1e-5)
      reward += -dist_ee_to_chair - np.clip(log_dist_ee_to_chair, -10, 0)

      # Keep chair standing
      # z-axis of chair should be upward
      z_axis_chair = self.chair.pose.to_transformation_matrix()[:3, 2]
      chair_tilt = np.arccos(z_axis_chair[2])
      reward += -chair_tilt * 0.2

      # Penalize action
      # Assume action is relative and normalized.
      action_norm = np.linalg.norm(action)
      reward -= action_norm * 1e-6

      # Chair velocity
      chair_vel = self.chair.velocity[:2]
      chair_vel_norm = np.linalg.norm(chair_vel)
      disp_chair_to_target = self.chair.pose.p[:2] - self.target_xy
      cos_chair_vel_to_target = sdist.cosine(disp_chair_to_target, chair_vel)
      chair_ang_vel_norm = np.linalg.norm(self.chair.angular_velocity)

      # Stage reward
      stage_reward = -10
      disp_chair_to_target = self.chair.pose.p[:2] - self.target_xy
      dist_chair_to_target = np.linalg.norm(disp_chair_to_target)

      if chair_tilt < 0.2 * np.pi:
          # Chair is standing
          if dist_ee_to_chair < 0.1:
              # EE is close to chair
              stage_reward += 2
              if dist_chair_to_target <= 0.15:
                  # Chair is close to target
                  stage_reward += 2
                  # Try to keep chair static
                  reward += np.exp(-chair_vel_norm * 10) * 2
                  if chair_vel_norm <= 0.1 and chair_ang_vel_norm <= 0.2:
                      stage_reward += 2
              else:
                  # Try to increase velocity along direction to the target
                  # Compute directional velocity
                  x = (1 - cos_chair_vel_to_target) * chair_vel_norm
                  reward += max(-1, 1 - np.exp(x)) * 2 - dist_chair_to_target * 2
      else:
          stage_reward = -5

      reward = reward + stage_reward
      return reward


D.2     N OVEL L OCOMOTION R ESULTS
Sample of zero-shot generated reward function on M U J O C O Hopper Front Flip task:
def compute_dense_reward(self, action) -> float:

      # Reward for forward movement
      reward_x_velocity = self.hopper.top.velocity_x * 1.0

      # Reward for maintaining a low body height to prepare for flip
      reward_low_height = -abs(self.hopper.top.position_z - 0.5) * 0.5

      # Reward for fast positive angular velocity for top joint
      reward_top_joint_velocity = self.hopper.top_joint.angular_velocity * 1.0 if \
                                  self.hopper.top_joint.angular_velocity > 0 else 0.0

      # Reward for fast negative angular velocity for leg and foot joints
      reward_leg_foot_velocity = -self.hopper.leg_joint.angular_velocity * 0.5 if \
                                  self.hopper.leg_joint.angular_velocity < 0 else 0.0
      reward_leg_foot_velocity += -self.hopper.foot_joint.angular_velocity * 0.5 if \
                                   self.hopper.foot_joint.angular_velocity < 0 else 0.0

      # Penalty for not completing a flip (i.e., top_joint angle is not 360 degree or 2*pi radian)



                                                28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    penalty_incomplete_flip = -abs(self.hopper.top_joint.angle - 2*math.pi) * 0.1

    # Summing up the rewards and penalties
    reward = reward_x_velocity + reward_low_height + reward_top_joint_velocity + \
             reward_leg_foot_velocity + penalty_incomplete_flip

    return reward

Sample of zero-shot generated reward function on M U J O C O Hopper Back Flip task:
def compute_dense_reward(self, action) -> float:
    # Reward for rotating around the foot joint, which means a flip is happening
    reward_flip = abs(self.hopper.foot_joint.angular_velocity)

    # Penalty for touching the ground with something other than the foot
    touching_ground_penalty = 0
    if self.hopper.top.position_z < 1.25 or self.hopper.thigh_joint.angle < 0 or \
                                            self.hopper.leg_joint.angle < 0:
        touching_ground_penalty = -100

    # Penalty for not maintaining a reasonable speed
    speed_penalty = 0
    if abs(self.hopper.top.velocity_x)<0.1 or abs(self.hopper.foot_joint.angular_velocity)<0.1:
        speed_penalty = -50

    # Reward for moving in the x-coordinate direction
    reward_x = self.hopper.top.velocity_x
    if reward_x < 0:
        reward_x *= 10

    # Total reward
    reward = reward_flip + touching_ground_penalty + speed_penalty + reward_x

    return reward

Sample of zero-shot generated reward function on M U J O C O Ant Lie Down task:
def compute_dense_reward(self, action) -> float:
    # Define the weight constants
    W_pos = 1.0 # weight for the torso’s z-coordinate position
    W_vel = 0.1 # weight for the torso’s velocity
    W_act = 0.01 # weight for the action (torques applied)

    # Calculate position reward (the closer the torso’s z position is to 0, the higher the reward)
    pos_reward = -W_pos * self.ant.torso.position_z

    # Calculate the velocity penalty (the slower the torso’s velocity, the higher the reward)
    vel_penalty = -W_vel * (self.ant.torso.velocity_x**2 + \
                  self.ant.torso.velocity_y**2 + self.ant.torso.velocity_z**2)

    # Calculate the action penalty (the smaller the action values, the higher the reward)
    action_penalty = -W_act * np.sum(np.array(action)**2)

    # Combine the rewards and penalties to compute the final reward
    reward = pos_reward + vel_penalty + action_penalty

    return reward

Sample of zero-shot generated reward function on M U J O C O Ant Wave Leg task:
def compute_dense_reward(self, action) -> float:
    # Define the initial reward
    reward = 0.0

    # Keeping the ant in place
    # We penalize any significant movement in x, y, and z position
    reward -= abs(self.ant.torso.velocity_x) * 0.1
    reward -= abs(self.ant.torso.velocity_y) * 0.1
    reward -= abs(self.ant.torso.position_z - 0.75) * 1.0

    # Keeping the ant’s torso from rotating
    # We penalize any significant angular velocity
    reward -= abs(self.ant.torso.angular_velocity_x) * 0.1
    reward -= abs(self.ant.torso.angular_velocity_y) * 0.1
    reward -= abs(self.ant.torso.angular_velocity_z) * 0.1

    # Waving the right front leg
    # We give positive reward for movement in the front right leg
    reward += abs(self.ant.front_right_leg_joint.angular_velocity) * 0.2
    reward += abs(self.ant.front_right_ankle_joint.angular_velocity) * 0.2



                                               29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      # Keeping other legs stationary
      # We penalize movement in the other legs
      for leg_joint, ankle_joint in [
          (self.ant.front_left_leg_joint, self.ant.front_left_ankle_joint),
          (self.ant.back_left_leg_joint, self.ant.back_left_ankle_joint),
          (self.ant.back_right_leg_joint, self.ant.back_right_ankle_joint)]:

         reward -= abs(leg_joint.angular_velocity) * 0.1
         reward -= abs(ankle_joint.angular_velocity) * 0.1

      return reward


D.3     I NTERACTIVE RESULTS

For the interactive generation results on M ANI S KILL 2 Stack Cube task, we provide the traces of
the whole round which contains the initial generated reward function, the human feedback and the
revised reward function in git diff format.
Instruction: Pick up cube A and place it on cube B. The task is finished when cube A is on top of cube
B stably (i.e. cube A is static) and isn’t grasped by the gripper.
Initial generated reward function:
import numpy as np

def compute_dense_reward(self, action):
    reward = 0.0

      # Check if cube A is on top of cube B and whether it is stable
      is_obj_on_target = np.linalg.norm(self.cubeA.pose.p - (self.cubeB.pose.p + \
                         np.array([0, 0, self.cube_half_size*2]))) <= 0.025
      is_obj_static = self.cubeA.check_static()
      is_grasped = self.robot.check_grasp(self.cubeA)

      success = is_obj_on_target and is_obj_static and not is_grasped

      if success:
          reward += 5
          return reward

      # Compute distance from the robot’s end-effector to cube A
      tcp_to_obj_pos = self.cubeA.pose.p - self.robot.ee_pose.p
      tcp_to_obj_dist = np.linalg.norm(tcp_to_obj_pos)
      reaching_reward = 1 - np.tanh(5 * tcp_to_obj_dist)
      reward += reaching_reward

      # Check if the robot has grasped cube A
      reward += 1 if is_grasped else 0.0

      if is_grasped:
          # Compute distance from cube A to the top of cube B
          obj_to_goal_pos = self.cubeB.pose.p + np.array([0, 0, self.cube_half_size*2]) - \
                            self.cubeA.pose.p
          obj_to_goal_dist = np.linalg.norm(obj_to_goal_pos)
          place_reward = 1 - np.tanh(5 * obj_to_goal_dist)
          reward += place_reward

      return reward


Human description: Now the robot only picks up cube A, stacks it onto cube B, but does not release
cube A afterwards.
Human feedback for improvement: The robot should release cube A after stacking it onto cube B.
Revised reward function (Interaction 1):
import numpy as np

def compute_dense_reward(self, action):
    reward = 0.0

      # Check if cube A is on top of cube B and whether it is stable
      is_obj_on_target = np.linalg.norm(self.cubeA.pose.p - (self.cubeB.pose.p + \
                          np.array([0, 0, self.cube_half_size*2]))) <= 0.025
      is_obj_static = self.cubeA.check_static()
      is_grasped = self.robot.check_grasp(self.cubeA)



                                                 30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


-   success = is_obj_on_target and is_obj_static and not is_grasped
+   success = is_obj_on_target and is_obj_static

    if success:
        reward += 5
-       return reward
+       if not is_grasped:
+           reward += 5
+           return reward

    # Compute distance from the robot’s end-effector to cube A
    tcp_to_obj_pos = self.cubeA.pose.p - self.robot.ee_pose.p
    tcp_to_obj_dist = np.linalg.norm(tcp_to_obj_pos)
    reaching_reward = 1 - np.tanh(5 * tcp_to_obj_dist)
    reward += reaching_reward

    # Check if the robot has grasped cube A
    reward += 1 if is_grasped else 0.0

    if is_grasped:
        # Compute distance from cube A to the top of cube B
        obj_to_goal_pos = self.cubeB.pose.p + np.array([0, 0, self.cube_half_size*2]) - \
                                              self.cubeA.pose.p
        obj_to_goal_dist = np.linalg.norm(obj_to_goal_pos)
        place_reward = 1 - np.tanh(5 * obj_to_goal_dist)
        reward += place_reward

+       if is_obj_on_target:
+            # Encourage the robot to release the grasp when cube A is on top of cube B
+            reward += 3 if not is_grasped else -3

    return reward


Human description: Now the robot sometimes completes the task successfully, but sometimes fails.
Human feedback for improvement: Please write denser reward to complete the task more stably.
Revised reward function (Interaction 2):
import numpy as np

def compute_dense_reward(self, action):
    reward = 0.0

    # Check if cube A is on top of cube B and whether it is stable
    is_obj_on_target = np.linalg.norm(self.cubeA.pose.p - (self.cubeB.pose.p + \
                       np.array([0, 0, self.cube_half_size*2]))) <= 0.025
    is_obj_static = self.cubeA.check_static()
    is_grasped = self.robot.check_grasp(self.cubeA)
+   gripper_openness = self.robot.gripper_openness

    success = is_obj_on_target and is_obj_static

    if success:
        reward += 5
        if not is_grasped:
            reward += 5
            return reward

    # Compute distance from the robot’s end-effector to cube A
    tcp_to_obj_pos = self.cubeA.pose.p - self.robot.ee_pose.p
    tcp_to_obj_dist = np.linalg.norm(tcp_to_obj_pos)
    reaching_reward = 1 - np.tanh(5 * tcp_to_obj_dist)
    reward += reaching_reward

    # Check if the robot has grasped cube A
    reward += 1 if is_grasped else 0.0

    if is_grasped:
        # Compute distance from cube A to the top of cube B
        obj_to_goal_pos = self.cubeB.pose.p + np.array([0, 0, self.cube_half_size*2]) - \
                          self.cubeA.pose.p
        obj_to_goal_dist = np.linalg.norm(obj_to_goal_pos)



                                               31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            place_reward = 1 - np.tanh(5 * obj_to_goal_dist)
            reward += place_reward

-           if is_obj_on_target:
-                # Encourage the robot to release the grasp when cube A is on top of cube B
-                reward += 3 if not is_grasped else -3
+           if is_obj_on_target and is_obj_static:
+               # Encourage robot to release grasp when cube A is on top of cube B and stable
+               release_reward = 3 if not is_grasped and gripper_openness > 0.5 else -3
+               reward += release_reward
+           else:
+               # Encourage the robot to keep the grasp if it’s not on target
+               holding_reward = 1 if is_grasped else -1
+               reward += holding_reward
+       else:
+           if not is_obj_on_target:
+               # Encourage the robot to move closer to the target when not grasping
+               tcp_to_target_pos = self.cubeB.pose.p + np.array([0, 0, self.cube_half_size*2])
+                                                         - self.robot.ee_pose.p
+               tcp_to_target_dist = np.linalg.norm(tcp_to_target_pos)
+               target_reward = 1 - np.tanh(5 * tcp_to_target_dist)
+               reward += target_reward

        return reward


E       A DDITIONAL A NALYSIS OF E FFECTIVENESS OVER P REVIOUS W ORK

As detailed in Section 4.1 of our work, modifications to the baseline method of Yu et al. (2023) (L2R)
enable adaptation to only two tasks of the M ANI S KILL 2 environment, while L2R is not suited for
tasks that involve complexly surfaced objects, which cannot be adequately described by a singular
point. To further comprehensively evaluate the significance of the shaped dense reward structure,
particularly a staged reward necessitating Python’s if-else statements, we introduce an additional
baseline. This baseline adapts the oracle expert-written reward codes to mirror the L2R’s format
(the sum of a set of individual terms) by removing all if-else statements and only keeping functional
reward terms, while disregarding the original L2R’s inability to utilize point clouds for distance
calculations.
As illustrated in Figure 8, Oracle-L2R attains comparable outcomes to the zero-shot setting for three
relatively straightforward and short-horizon tasks: Lift Cube, Pick Cube, and Turn Faucet. However,
for the remaining three tasks, which are comparatively more difficult, the modified Oracle-L2R fails
to address the challenges, underscoring the necessity of shaped and staged dense rewards.


F       E XPERIMENTS ON O PEN - SOURCE L ANGUAGE M ODELS

We conduct experiments using open-source Large Language Models (LLMs) as our foundational
model to ensure reproducibility and accessibility. Specifically, we employ the instruction-tuned with
human feedback version of Llama-2 (Touvron et al., 2023)5 and Code-Llama (Rozière et al., 2023)6
as representative strongest open-source models, establishing them as the baseline.
Experiments are conducted on MetaWorld tasks within a zero-shot setting, adhering to the methodol-
ogy described in the main body of our work. The resulting learning curves of the policies trained
using code generated from these two open-source models, in conjunction with GPT-4, are illustrated
in Figure 9.
    5
        https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-2-7b-chat-hf
    6
        https://huggingface.co/codellama/CodeLlama-34b-Instruct-hf


                                                     32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                        Oracle-L2R   Zero-shot   Few-shot


Figure 8: Learning curves on M ANISKILL 2 compared to oracle Yu et al. (2023) settings, measured
by task success rate. Oracle-L2R means that we modify the expert-written reward function provided
by the environment into the format of Yu et al. (2023), which is only a sum of different reward
terms, without if-else statements and other possible components of Python; zero-shot and few-shot
stands for the reward function is generated by T EXT 2R EWARD w.o and w. retrieving examples from
expert-written rewards functions examples for prompting.


The learning curves illustrate the evolution of policy performance on MetaWorld tasks under a zero-
shot reward generation setting. It is evident that GPT-4 consistently outperforms the other models
across most tasks, achieving higher success rates and displaying more stable learning progressions.
The Code-Llama model exhibits moderate success, with notable variability in tasks such as ‘Window
Close’ and ‘Door Unlock’. Llama-2, while lagging behind in tasks like ‘Drawer Open’ and ‘Door
Close’, shows promise in ‘Button Press’ with a learning curve that approaches GPT-4’s performance.
The shaded regions indicate standard deviations, suggesting that GPT-4’s policy training is not only
more successful on average but also more reliable across different random seeds. These results
underscore the sophistication of GPT-4’s code generation in producing effective reward functions for
policy learning in a zero-shot setting, and the effectiveness of proof-of-the-concept exploration in this
direction using it.
It is noteworthy that, despite many models approaching the performance of ChatGPT and GPT-
4 on existing benchmarks (Cobbe et al., 2021; Hendrycks et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021), there
remains a significant gap in the reward function generation task, suggesting that this problem could
potentially serve as one of the benchmark tests for large language models and that the benchmark has
considerable room for improvement. Enhancements could simultaneously benefit both the natural
language processing and reinforcement learning communities.


G     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

Due to page limitations, we include in this section additional learning curves on M ETAW ORLD bench-
mark (Figure 10), as well as additional image samples from the M ANI S KILL 2 and M ETAW ORLD
environments (Figure 11 and Figure 12). Figure 11b shows a failure case on the dual-arm mobile
manipulation task Push Chair. Here Oracle means the expert-written reward function provided by the
environment; zero-shot and few-shot stands for the reward function is generated by T EXT 2R EWARD
w. and w.o. retrieving examples from expert-written rewards functions examples for prompting.

G.1    E RROR A NALYSIS ON G ENERATED F UNCTION

We conduct an error analysis on the generated reward functions. We manually go over 100 reward
function examples each generated by the zero-shot and few-shot prompting on 10 different tasks of
M ANI S KILL 2, where each task has 10 different reward codes. These reward functions are generated


                                                     33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         GPT-4                      Code-Llama              Llama-2


                                    Handle Press Side                              Window Open
                      1                                                1


                     0.8                                              0.8


                     0.6                                              0.6


                     0.4                                              0.4


                     0.2                                              0.2

                                                               Step                                      Step
                      0                                                0
                             200k      400k     600k    800k                200k    400k   600k   800k


Figure 9: Learning curves on M ETAWORLD under zero-shot reward generation setting, measured
by success rate, using the reward functions generated by different language models. The solid line
represents the mean success rate, while the shaded regions correspond to the standard deviation, both
calculated across five different random seeds.


specifically for our error analysis and with no execution feedback to LLMs. We classify them into 4
error types: Class attributes misuse; Attributes hallucination (referring to attributes that do not exist);
Syntax/shape error; Wrong package. Table 7 shows that the overall error rate is around 10%. Within
these error samples, 30% of the errors are caused by the code syntax or shape mismatch, the rest are
introduced during grounding from background knowledge context to choose the existing yet right
one, indicating there is still space to improve on understanding how to choose the right function and
attributes for T EXT 2R EWARD direction, especially for code generation community.

H    L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE W ORK
Our work demonstrates the effectiveness of generating dense reward functions for RL. We focus on
the code-based reward format, which gives us high interpretability. However, the symbolic space
may not cover all aspects of the reward. Furthermore, our method also assumes that the perception


                                                               34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                 Oracle         Zero-shot


Figure 10: Additional learning curves on M ETAWORLD, measured by success rate. The solid line
represents the mean success rate, while the shaded regions correspond to the standard deviation, both
calculated across five different random seeds.

           Table 7: Error distribution across 100 generated reward code on M ANISKILL 2.

    Type                      Description                                    Zero-shot    Few-shot
    Class attribute misuse    Use other classes’ attribute wrongly               6%           4%
    Attribute hallucination   Invent nonexistent attribute                       3%           2%
    Syntax/shape error        Incorrect program grammar or shape mismatch        3%           3%
    Wrong package             Import incorrect package function                  1%           1%
    Correct                   Execute correctly without error                   87%          90%


is already done with other off-the-shelf components. Future works may consider the combination
of code-based and neural network-based reward design that combines both symbolic reasoning
and perception. Utilizing the knowledge derived from LLMs in creating such models showcases
promising prospects and could be advantageous in several scenarios (Wulfmeier et al., 2016; Finn
et al., 2016; Christiano et al., 2017; Lee et al., 2021).
Although our main method is simple but effective, it still has room for improvement by designing
methods to generate better reward functions, possibly leading to higher success rates and the ability
to tackle more complex tasks.
At present, our test cases primarily concentrate on robotics tasks, specifically manipulation and loco-
motion, to illustrate this approach. In the future, this research may find broader applications in various
reinforcement learning related domains, including gaming (Brockman et al., 2016; Schrittwieser
et al., 2020; Zhong et al., 2021; Fan et al., 2022), web navigation (Shi et al., 2017; Zhou et al., 2023),
household management (Puig et al., 2018; Shridhar et al., 2020a;b).


                                                   35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 (a) Zero-shot: Open Cabinet Door


                                    (b) Zero-shot: Push Chair


                                     (c) Few-shot: Push Chair

Figure 11: Additional image samples from M ANI S KILL 2. (a) shows a successful case of zero-shot
T EXT 2R EWARD for the mobile manipulation task OpenCabinetDoor. (b) shows a failure case of
zero-shot generation for the dual-arm mobile manipulation task PushChair. (c) shows that few-shot
generation can stably solve the PushChair task even though zero-shot can not.


                                                36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                   (a) Zero-shot: Button Press


                                  (b) Zero-shot: Drawer Open


                                  (c) Zero-shot: Window Open

Figure 12: Additional image samples from M ETAW ORLD. All three rollouts show that zero-shot
T EXT 2R EWARD can stably solve these tasks.


                                               37
