Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


W EAKLY S UPERVISED F INE - GRAINED S CENE G RAPH
G ENERATION VIA L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODEL
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                 A BSTRACT
            Weakly-Supervised Scene Graph Generation (WSSGG) research has recently
            emerged as an alternative to the fully-supervised approach that heavily relies on
            costly annotations. In this regard, studies on WSSGG have utilized image cap-
            tions to obtain unlocalized triplets while primarily focusing on grounding the un-
            localized triplets over image regions. However, they have overlooked the two
            issues involved in the triplet formation process from the captions: 1) Semantic
            over-simplification issue arises when extracting triplets from captions, where fine-
            grained predicates in captions are undesirably converted into coarse-grained pred-
            icates, resulting in a long-tailed predicate distribution, and 2) Low-density scene
            graph issue arises when aligning the triplets in the caption with entity/predicate
            classes of interest, where many triplets are discarded and not used in training,
            leading to insufficient supervision. To tackle the two issues, we propose a new ap-
            proach, i.e., Large Language Model for weakly-supervised SGG (LLM4SGG),
            where we mitigate the two issues by leveraging the LLM’s in-depth understand-
            ing of language and reasoning ability during the extraction of triplets from cap-
            tions and alignment of entity/predicate classes with target data. To further engage
            the LLM in these processes, we adopt the idea of Chain-of-Thought and the in-
            context few-shot learning strategy. To validate the effectiveness of LLM4SGG,
            we conduct extensive experiments on Visual Genome and GQA datasets, show-
            ing significant improvements in both Recall@K and mean Recall@K compared
            to the state-of-the-art WSSGG methods. A further appeal is that LLM4SGG is
            data-efficient, enabling effective model training with a small amount of training
            images. Our code is available on https://anonymous.4open.science/r/LLM4SGG-
            83DD

1 I NTRODUCTION
Scene Graph Generation (SGG) is a fundamental task in computer vision, aiming at extracting struc-
tured visual knowledge from images (Shi et al., 2019; Teney et al., 2017; Li et al., 2020; Wang et al.,
2020; Yang et al., 2019; Zhong et al., 2020). Most existing SGG methods are fully-supervised, i.e.,
they heavily rely on the ground-truth annotations that involve the class information of entities and
predicates as well as the bounding box of entities (Zellers et al., 2018; Yoon et al., 2023; Li et al.,
2021b). However, since creating extensively annotated scene graph datasets is costly, the heavy re-
liance on these annotations imposes practical limitations on the model training (Zhang et al., 2023).
To mitigate the high cost associated with manual annotations, weakly-supervised scene graph gen-
eration (WSSGG) approaches have recently emerged, aiming at training an SGG model without any
annotated scene graph dataset. Specifically, the main idea of recent WSSGG methods is to leverage
image captions along with associated images, as they can be easily collected from the Web (Li et al.,
2022b; Zhang et al., 2023; Ye & Kovashka, 2021; Zhong et al., 2021).
The training process of WSSGG model using image captions requires four steps as illustrated in
Figure 1(a). Step 1: Preparing an image and its caption. Step 2: Parsing the image caption,
i.e., triplets formed as ⟨subject, predicate, object⟩ are extracted from the image caption through an
off-the-shelf parser (Wu et al., 2019; Schuster et al., 2015). Step 3: Aligning the triplets in the
caption with entity/predicate classes of interest, i.e., entity (subject, object) and predicate classes
in the extracted triplets obtained in Step 2 are aligned with the entity and predicate classes in the
target data1 , respectively. This alignment is based on their synonym/hypernym/hyponym contained
in an external knowledge base (KB), e.g., WordNet (Miller, 1995). Step 4: Grounding unlocalized
   1
       We use Visual Genome (Krishna et al., 2017) as the target data.


                                                        1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                        Unlocalized Triplet
                                                                                         Step 3                              Step 4                                                                                           cat                           cat
                                                                       person                     Align      person                                   Localized Triplet
                                                                                                                                             person                animal                                                                     Step 3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        lying on
                                                                                                                                 Grounding
                                                     Step 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    on                         on


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Align
                                                          Parser           sitting on                            sitting on
                                                                                                   KB
                                                                        pony                pony → animal    animal                                   sitting on                                                        computer                           laptop
                                                                                            Ours                                                                                                                                                           Ours
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Step 2
                                                                   Paraphrased Caption                                                                                                                                   Parser                             cat
                                                                                             LLM                                                        SGG Training                Step 1
                   Step 1                                                                                   person
                                                                                                                                                                                        Image with its caption                                                lying on
                       Image with its caption                              LLM       Step 2 Step 3              sitting on                             Conventional Approach
                                                                                                                                                                               Adult cat lying on laptop computer              LLM                         laptop
        A person in a uniform is sitting on a pony                                                          animal
                                                                                                                                                       Ours (LLM)
                                                        (a) Pipeline of Weakly-Supervised SGG                                                                                                 (c) Semantic Oversimplification
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        elephant                          elephant
       Frequency


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   carrying
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Step 3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              carrying
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Align
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              log                          None
                                                                                                                              Frequency 0 in Parser+KB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ours
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Step 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Parser                           elephant
                                                                                                                                                                                    Step 1
                                                                                                                                                                                         Image with its caption                                               carrying
                                                                                                                                                                               An elephant is carrying a wooden               LLM                         branch
                                                                                                                                                                               log under its trunk
                                                                     (b) Predicate Distribution                                                                                                 (d) Low-Density Scene Graph
Figure 1: (a) The pipeline of weakly-supervised SGG. (b) The predicate distribution of unlocalized
triplets (Parser+KB vs. Ours). In Parser+KB, the distribution becomes heavily long-tailed, and 12
out of 50 predicates are non-existent. (c) Semantic over-simplification caused by a rule-based parser
in Step 2. (d) Low-density scene graph caused by the static structured of KB in Step 3.

entities in the extracted triplets, i.e., unlocalized entities (subjects and objects) are matched with
relevant image regions generated by a pre-trained object detector, e.g., Faster R-CNN (Ren et al.,
2015). The localized entities and predicates in the extracted triplets then serve as pseudo-labels for
training an SGG model.
Existing WSSGG approaches mainly focus on Step 4 (Li et al., 2022b; Ye & Kovashka, 2021; Shi
et al., 2021; Zhong et al., 2021). For example, in Figure 1(a), their efforts have been focused on
grounding the entity person in an unlocalized triplet with an image region that captures the sitting
behavior. More precisely, LSWS (Ye & Kovashka, 2021) exploits the contextual object information
to accurately ground the unlocalized entities, leveraging the linguistic structure embedded within
the triplets. Another line of research (Li et al., 2022b) employs a pre-trained vision-language model
(Li et al., 2021a) to reflect the semantic interactions among entities within the image caption.
However, we argue that existing WSSGG approaches overlook the importance of the triplet forma-
tion process conducted in Step 2 and Step 3. We identify the two major issues described below,
i.e., semantic over-simplication and low-density scene graph, which incur incomplete unlocalized
triplets after Step 2 and 3. These incomplete tripletes are mostly uninformative predicates with a
limited number, and negatively impact the training of an SGG model even when entities are cor-
rectly grounded in Step 4. To demonstrate the impact of incomplete unlocalized triplets, we follow
the conventional process to extract unlocalized triplets (i.e., Step 1-3), and conduct an examination
of triplets obtained from COCO caption dataset, which are generated through Scene Parser (Wu
et al., 2019) in Step 2 and WordNet (Miller, 1995) in Step 3. As a result, we identify the following
two issues:
• Semantic Over-simplification: We find that the standard scene graph parser (Wu et al., 2019)
  operating on heuristic rule-based principles commonly used in Step 2 leads to a semantic
  over-simplification of predicates in extracted triplets. In other words, fine-grained predicates
  are undesirably converted into coarse-grained predicates, which we refer to as semantic over-
  simplification. For example, in Figure 1(c), an informative predicate lying on (i.e., fine-grained
  predicate) in the image caption is converted into a less informative predicate on (i.e., coarse-
  grained predicate), because the rule-based parser fails to capture the predicate lying on at once,
  and its heuristic rules fall short of accommodating the diverse range of caption’s structure. As a
  result, the predicate distribution becomes heavily long-tailed, in which coarse-grained predicates
  (e.g., with, on, in) greatly outnumber fine-grained predicates (e.g., parked on, covered in) (Fig-
  ure 1(b)). To make the matter worse, numerous fine-grained predicates eventually end up in a
  frequency of 0, even though they are originally present in the captions. Specifically, 12 out of 50
  predicates are non-existent, which means that these 12 predicates can never be predicted, since the
  model is not trained on these predicates at all.
• Low-Density Scene Graph: We find that the KB-based triplet alignment in Step 3 leads to
  low-density scene graphs, i.e., the number of remaining triplets after Step 3 is small. We at-
  tribute the low-density scene graphs primarily to the utilization of KB in Step 3. Specifically, a
  triplet is discarded if any of the three components (i.e., subject, predicate, object) or their syn-
  onym/hypernym/hyponym within the triplet fail to align with the entity or predicate classes in the
  target data. For example, in Figure 1(d), the triplet ⟨elephant, carrying, log⟩ is discarded because


                                                                                                                                             2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  log does not exist in Visual Genome dataset nor its synonym/hypernym, even if elephant and car-
  rying do exist. In Table 1, we report the number of triplets and images in Visual Genome dataset,
  which is a common benchmark dataset used in fully-supervised SGG approaches, and COCO cap-
  tion dataset, which is a common benchmark dataset used in weakly-supervised SGG approaches.
  We observe that on average Visual Genome dataset contains 7.1 triplets (i.e., 405K/57K) per im-
  age (See Table 1(a)), while COCO dataset contains only 2.4 triplets (i.e., 154K/64K) per image
  (See Table 1(b)). This indicates that existing WSSGG approaches suffer from the lack of suffi-
  cient supervision per image, leading to poor generalization and performance degradation (Ye &
  Kovashka, 2021; Zareian et al., 2020). In summary, relying on the static structured knowledge
  of KB is insufficient to cover the semantic relationships among a wide a range of words, which
  incurs the low-density scene graph after Step 3.

To alleviate the semantic over-simplification and the Table 1: Comparison of scene graph den-
low-density scene graph issues, we propose a new ap- sity.
proach, namely Large Language Model for weakly-                  Dataset       How to annotate # Triplet # Image
supervised SGG (LLM4SGG) that adopts a pre-                                Fully-Supervised approach
trained Large Language Model (LLM), which has              (a) Visual Genome       Manual          405K    57K
shown remarkable transferability to various down-                         Weakly-Supervised approach
stream tasks in NLP such as symbolic reasoning,            (b) COCO Caption       Parser+KB        154K    64K
arithmetic, and common-sense reasoning (Touvron            (c) COCO Caption          LLM           344K    64K
et al., 2023; Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al.,
2022). Inspired by the idea of Chain-of-Thought2 (CoT) (Wei et al., 2022b), which arrives at an
answer in a stepwise manner, we separate the triplet formation process into two chains, each of
which replaces the rule-based parser in Step 2 (i.e., Chain-1) and the KB in Step 3 (i.e., Chain-
2). More precisely, we design a prompt for extracting triplets from a caption, and ask the LLM to
extract triplets formed as <subject, predicate, object> (Chain-1). We expect that the predicates ex-
tracted based on a comprehensive understanding of the caption’s context via LLM are semantically
rich, thereby alleviating the semantic over-simplification issue. Besides, to alleviate the low-density
scene graph issue, we additionally incorporate a paraphrased version of the original caption. To this
end, we further design a prompt for paraphrasing the original caption and extracting more triplets
from the paraphrased caption. However, entities and predicates in the triplets obtained after Chain-1
are not yet aligned with the target data. Hence, we design a another prompt to align them with en-
tity/predicate classes of interest, and ask the LLM to align them with semantically relevant lexeme
included in a predefined lexicon, which is the set of vocabularies that are present in the target data
(Chain-2). To further engage the LLM in the reasoning process of Chain-1 and Chain-2, we employ
the in-context few-shot learning that incorporates a few input-output examples within the prompt,
enabling the LLM to perform the task without the need for fine-tuning.
To validate the effectiveness of LLM4SGG, we apply it to state-of-the-art WSSGG methods (Zhang
et al., 2023; Zhong et al., 2021). Through extensive experiments, we show that LLM4SGG sig-
nificantly enhances the performance of existing WSSGG methods in terms of mean Recall@K and
Recall@K performance on Visual Genome and GQA datasets by alleviating the semantic over-
simplification and the low-density scene graph (See Table 1(c) where the number of triplets in-
creased to 334K). A further appeal of LLM4SGG is that it is data-efficient, i.e., it outperforms
state-of-the-art baselines even with a small amount of training images, verifying the effectiveness
of LLM4SGG.
In summary, we make the following contributions:

 • We identify two major issues overlooked by existing WSSGG studies, i.e., semantic over-
   simplification and low-density scene graph.
 • We leverage an LLM along with the CoT strategy and the in-context few-shot learning tech-
   nique to extract informative triplets without the need for fine-tuning the LLM. To the best of our
   knowledge, we are the first to leverage an LLM for the SGG task.
 • LLM4SGG outperforms the state-of-the-art WSSGG methods, especially in terms of mR@K,
   demonstrating its efficacy in addressing the long-tail problem in WSSGG for the first time.

   2
     We use the CoT strategy as a means to arrive at an answer in a stepwise manner, which differs from the
Chain-of-Thought prompting.


                                                       3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2     R ELATED WORK
Weakly-Supervised Scene Graph Generation (WSSGG). The WSSGG task aims to train an SGG
model without relying on an annotated scene graph dataset. To achieve this, most WSSGG stud-
ies (Zhong et al., 2021; Ye & Kovashka, 2021; Li et al., 2022b; Zhang et al., 2023) utilize image
captions and ground unlocalized triplets with image regions. Specifically, VSPNet (Zareian et al.,
2020) proposes the iterative graph alignment algorithm to reflect the high-order relations between
unlocalized triplets and image regions. SGNLS (Zhong et al., 2021) uses a pre-trained object detec-
tor (Ren et al., 2015) to ground the entities in unlocalized triplets, which share the same classes with
the output of object detectors. In addition to the information derived from the object detector, Li
et al. (2022b) employs a pre-trained vision-language model (Li et al., 2021a) to capture the semantic
interactions among objects. VS3 (Zhang et al., 2023) uses a grounding-based object detector (Li
et al., 2022a), which calculates the similarity between the entity text in unlocalized triplet and im-
age region, thereby grounding the unlocalized triplets. However, these methods overlook the triplet
formation process that leads to the semantic over-simplification (Step 2) and the low-density scene
graph (Step 3). In this regard, existing methods result in a sub-optimal performance even when
unlocalized triplets are correctly grounded in Step 4.
Large Language Model (LLM). LLMs have demonstrated remarkable transferability to various
downstream tasks such as symbolic reasoning, arithmetic, and common-sense reasoning (Brown
et al., 2020; Touvron et al., 2023; Chowdhery et al., 2022). Specifically, GPT-3 (175B) (Brown
et al., 2020) stands as a cornerstone to break the line of numerous language tasks. Inspired by
GPT-3, PaLM (540B) (Chowdhery et al., 2022), LLaMA (65B) (Touvron et al., 2023), OPT (175B)
(Zhang et al., 2022b), and LaMDA (137B) (Thoppilan et al., 2022) have been subsequently intro-
duced. More recently, advanced GPT models (e.g., GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023b), ChatGPT (OpenAI,
2023a)) fine-tuned with human feedback have gained prominence and widely applied for diverse
applications, e.g., planner of tools (Lu et al., 2023; Gao et al., 2023), mobile task automation (Wen
et al., 2023). In this work, we employ the power of LLM (i.e., ChatGPT) to alleviate the two issues,
i.e., semantic over-simplification and low-density scene graph, in the context of the WSSGG task.
In-Context Few-shot Learning. In-context few-shot learning incorporates a few input-output ex-
amples related to a target task, conditioning the LLM on the context of examples. Specifically,
GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) pioneered the concept of in-context learning to facilitate an LLM as a
versatile model on diverse tasks. This breakthrough has proliferated a plethora of research to lever-
age the in-context few-shot learning for various tasks (Yao et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2023; Mishra et al.,
2021; Zhang et al., 2022c). More precisely, Chameleon (Lu et al., 2023) integrates a few examples
to enhance its understanding of tool planning task. Mishra et al. (2021) utilizes positive and negative
examples related to questions for question generation tasks. ReAct (Yao et al., 2022) incorporates
examples of reasoning with action for solving decision-making tasks. Inspired by recent in-context
few-shot learning approaches, we provide a few examples to LLMs to help 1) understand the process
of triplet extraction from a caption (i.e., Step 2), and 2) align the entity/predicate classes with the
target data (i.e., Step 3) in the context of the WSSGG task.

3     M ETHOD
In this section, we describe LLM4SGG in detail. We would like to emphasize that LLM4SGG
mainly focuses on the triplet formation process conducted in Step 2 (parsing) and Step 3 (aligning),
while existing WSSGG approaches mainly focus on Step 4 (grounding). We start by presenting the
problem formulation of WSSGG (Section 3.1), followed by the prompt configuration (Section 3.2).
Next, we introduce how LLMs are adopted to address the two issues of conventional WSSGG ap-
proaches when parsing the image caption (Section 3.3) and aligning the triplets in captions with
entity/predicate classes of interest (Section 3.4). Finally, we ground the unlocalized triplets by asso-
ciating them with bounding boxes (i.e., image regions) and train the SGG model using the localized
triplets (Section 3.5). The overall pipeline of LLM4SGG is shown in Figure 2.

3.1   P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
                                                                                       Nf
In the fully supervised SGG task, we aim to detect a scene graph Gf = {si , pi , oi }i=1  that consists
of triplets given an image I, where Nf is the number of triplets in the image. si and oi denote the
ith subject and the object, respectively, whose bounding boxes are si,b , oi,b , and entity classes are
si,c , oi,c ∈ Ce , where Ce is the set of predefined entity classes in the target data. pi denotes the
predicate between si and oi , and its class is pi,c ∈ Cp , where Cp is the set of predefined predicate


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                             Step 2-1
                                                                     Extract triplets from                                     Unlocalized Triplet                        Step 4                                            Localized Triplet
                                                                       original caption


                                                                                                                                                                             Grounding
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          standing on              holding
                                                                                                                                     rock
                                                              Model Input
                                                                                                                                                                                                           rock
                                                           Q. Given the sentence “A surfer on rock holding                                 standing on                                                                                    person               surfboard
                                                           wooden surfboard,” extract meaningful triplets.

                                                                                                                                    person
               Step 1                                                             LLM                                                                                                                                           Task Description
                      Image with its caption                                                                                                                                                     From the given sentence, the task is to extract meaningful triplets
                                                             Model Output                                                                     holding                                            formed as <subject, predicate, object>.
         A surfer on rock holding wooden surfboard                                                                                                                                                                            In-context Examples
                                                           A. <surfer, on, rock>, <surfer, holding, surfboard>
                                                                                                                                 surfboard                                                       Q. Given the sentence {Example 1}, extract meaningful triplets.
                                                                                                                                                                                                 A. {Example Output]


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       …
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Q. Given the sentence {Example K}, extract meaningful triplets.
                                                                                                                                                                                                 A. {Example Output]
           Step 2-2                                                                                              person      standing on
                   Extract triplets from                                                                                                                                                                                         Actual Question
                   paraphrased caption                                                                                                                                                           Q. Given the sentence “A surfer on rock holding wooden surfboard,” extract
                                                                  Misaligned Triplet                             surfer        stands on                                                         meaningful triplets.
            Model Input                                                                                           Step 3
                                                                                                                   Step 3                                                                                                       Task Description
         Q. Given the sentence “A surfer on rock holding
                                                                        rock                                              Align
                                                                                                                           Alignentity/predicate
                                                                                                                                 entity/predicateclasses
                                                                                                                                                  classes                                From the given sentence, the task is to extract meaningful triplets formed as
         wooden surfboard,” paraphrase the sentence                                                                                                                                      <subject, predicate, object>.
         and extract meaningful triplets.                                                                                                                                                Please follow the following two steps.
                                                                             stands on                                         Model Input                                               Step 1: Paraphrase the sentence.
                                                                                                                                                                                         Step 2: From the paraphrased sentence, extract meaningful triplets.
                                LLM                                                                                       Q. Given the lexeme “surfer / stands on,”
                                                                        surfer                                            find the most semantically relevant lexeme
                                                                                                                          in the predefined entity / predicate lexicon.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              In-context Examples
           Model Output                                                                                                                                                                  Q. Given the sentence {Example 1}, extract meaningful triplets.
                                                                                                                                                                                         A. Step 1: The sentence can be paraphrased as: {Example Output}
         A. Paraphrased sentence:                                              holding                                                                                                      Step 2: Meaningful triplets extracted from the paraphrased sentence are: {Example Output]
                                                                                                                                               LLM


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       …
            A surfer stands on a rock while holding
            wooden surfboard                                                                                                                                                             Q. Given the sentence {Example K}, extract meaningful triplets.
            Extracted triplets:                                     surfboard                                               Model Output                                                 A. Step 1: The sentence can be paraphrased as: {Example Output}
            <surfer, stands on, rock>,                                                                                                                                                      Step 2: Meaningful triplets extracted from the paraphrased sentence are: {Example Output]
            <surfer, holding, surfboard>                                                                                  A. person / standing on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Actual Question
                                                                      Misaligned entity/predicate                                                                                        Q. Given the sentence “A surfer on rock holding wooden surfboard,” extract meaningful triplets.

                 Prompt for paraphrased caption                       Aligned entity/predicate                                  Prompt for original caption                                   < Prompt Input for Step 2-1 (Top) and Step 2-2 (Bottom) >


Figure 2: The pipeline of LLM4SGG. Given an image with its caption, we use an LLM to extract
triplets from the original caption (Step 2-1) and the paraphrased caption (Step 2-2). Then, we align
the entity/predicate classes within the extracted triplets with semantically similar lexeme in the target
data via an LLM (Step 3), obtaining the unlocalized triplets. Lastly, we ground the unlocalized
triplets over image regions (Step 4) followed by the training of an SGG model.
classes in the target data. By using the ground truth scene graphs as supervision, fully supervised
SGG approaches train an SGG model Tθ : I → Gf , which maps an image to a scene graph.
In the weakly supervised SGG task, we aim to generate a scene graph when the ground truth scene
graph is not given, i.e., there are no bounding boxes and entity/predicate class information. Instead,
existing WSSGG approaches (Zhang et al., 2023; Zhong et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022b; Ye & Ko-
vashka, 2021; Shi et al., 2021) use image captions along with associated images to produce scene
graphs, i.e., localized triplets. More precisely, they extract a set of triplets Gw = {si , pi , oi }N w
                                                                                                     i=1
from the image captions, where Nw is the number of triplets extracted from the captions. How-
ever, while the extracted triplets contain the class information (i.e., si,c , oi,c and pi,c ), they are
unlocalized, since bounding boxes si,b and oi,b are not included in the caption. Therefore, it is
essential to perform the grounding step to associate the unlocalized triplets with bounding boxes.
Once we have obtained the localized triplets, we can apply the conventional SGG training scheme,
i.e., Tθ : I → Gf .
In this paper, our focus is to address the semantic over-simplification and low-density scene graph
issues regarding the unlocalized triplets Gw , which has been overlooked in existing WSSGG stud-
ies. Specifically, we aim to produce an enhanced Gw by refining the process of scene graph dataset
construction via an LLM. This refinement includes the triplet extraction step from the caption (Step
2) and the alignment of entity/predicate classes (Step 3), leveraging the LLM’s comprehensive un-
derstanding of language and reasoning ability.

3.2   P ROMPT C ONFIGURATION
In fact, it is not a trivial task for an LLM to immediately generate triplets from a caption whose
entities and predicates are aligned with entity/predicate classes of interest, as such a task is a novel
task for the LLM. Inspired by the idea of the Chain-of-thought (CoT) (Wei et al., 2022b), which
arrives at an answer in a stepwise manner, we separate the triplet formation process into the following
two chains: Chain-1 – Extracting triplets from captions. Chain-2 – Aligning entities and predicates
with the entity/predicate classes of interest. To carefully design each chain, we define the LLM
function, i.e., LLM (·), with the following prompt input:
                         Output = LLM (Task description, In-context examples, Actual question),                                                                                                                                                                                            (1)
                                       |                         {z                         }
                                                                                                                                                      Prompt input
where LLM (·) is the decoder of the LLM, generating the Output given the prompt input. The
prompt input consists of three components in a sequence: 1) task description, i.e., the delineation
of the task that we intend to perform, 2) in-context examples, i.e., sample questions and answers
related to the task at hand, 3) actual question, i.e., an inquiry from which we intend to derive the an-
swer. Note that in-context examples is closely related to the in-context few-shot learning (Wei et al.,
2022b; Brown et al., 2020; Wei et al., 2022a), which is shown to enhance the LLM’s understanding
of the task. Note that the above configuration of the prompt input is applied to the triplet extraction
(Chain-1) (Section 3.3) and the alignment of entity/predicate classes (Chain-2) (Section 3.4).


                                                                                                                                         5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.3 C HAIN -1. T RIPLET E XTRACTION VIA LLM (S TEP 2 IN F IGURE 2)
Based on the LLM’s comprehensive understanding of the context of an image caption, we aim to
extract triplets from the caption. As discussed in Section 1, we use not only the original caption but
also a paraphrased caption generated by the LLM to address the low-density scene graph issue.
Extracting triplets from a paraphrased caption (Step 2-2). To extract triplets from a paraphrased
caption, we inform the LLM about the task at hand by presenting the following prompt: F ROM THE
GIVEN SENTENCE , THE TASK IS TO EXTRACT MEANINGFUL TRIPLETS FORMED AS ⟨ SUBJECT ,
PREDICATE , OBJECT ⟩ (i.e., Task description in Equation 1). We then instruct the LLM to follow
the two steps, i.e., paraphrasing step and triplet extraction step. To help the LLM understand the pro-
cess of performing the two steps, we present few examples to the LLM that describe how to answer
the questions (i.e., In-context examples in Equation 13 ), which involves a manual construction of
questions and corresponding answers to the paraphrasing and the triplet extraction steps. That is, for
given a caption, we show the LLM how we expect a paraphrased caption and the extracted triplets
would look like (e.g., Given “Four clocks sitting on a floor next to a woman’s feet,” we show the
LLM that a paraphrased sentence would be “Four clocks are placed on the floor beside a woman’s
feet,” and extracted triplets would be ⟨clocks, placed on, floor⟩ and ⟨clocks, beside, feet⟩). Lastly,
we show the caption of our interest to the LLM, and let the LLM extract triplets from the caption
(i.e., Actual question in Equation 1). Please refer to Figure 2 right (bottom) for an example of the
prompt input used in Step 2-2.
Extracting triplets from the original caption (Step 2-1). As extracting triplets from the original
caption does not involve the caption paraphrasing step, we exclude it from the prompt used in Step
2-2. Please refer to Figure 2 right (top) for an example of the prompt input used in Step 2-1.
In summary, we obtain triplets from both the original and paraphrased captions after Step 2-1 and
Step 2-2, respectively, which in turn alleviates the semantic over-simplification issue of predicates
and the low-density scene graph issue.

3.4 C HAIN -2. A LIGNMENT OF C LASSES IN T RIPLETS VIA LLM (S TEP 3 IN F IGURE 2)
The entities (i.e., subject and object) and predicates within the triplets obtained from Step 2 described
in Section 3.3 are not yet aligned with the target data. Based on the semantic reasoning ability of
the LLM, we aim to align them with the semantically relevant lexeme in the target data.
Aligning entities in the triplets with entity classes of interest. We instruct the LLM with the
following prompt: G IVEN THE LEXEME { ENTITY }, FIND SEMANTICALLY RELEVANT LEXEME IN
THE PREDEFINED ENTITY LEXICON , where the predefined entity lexicon is Ce (i.e., Task descrip-
tion in Equation 1). Similar to Section 3.3, we present a few examples to the LLM that describe how
to answer the questions (i.e., In-context examples in Equation 1). For example, we provide the
LLM with a few examples regarding hierarchical relationships such as pigeon being semantically
relevant to bird, and singular-plural relationships such as surfboards being semantically relevant to
surfboard. Lastly, we show the entity of our interest to the LLM (i.e., Actual question in Equa-
tion 1), which enables the LLM to generate an answer by finding the most semantically relevant
entity in Ce . Please refer to Table 7 in Appendix A.1 for an example of the prompt input.
Aligning predicates in the triplets with predicate classes of interest. Likewise, we instruct the
LLM with the following prompt: G IVEN THE LEXEME { PREDICATE }, FIND SEMANTICALLY REL -
EVANT LEXEME IN THE PREDEFINED PREDICATE LEXICON , where the predefined predicate lex-
icon is Cp (i.e., Task description in Equation 1). We also present a few examples to the LLM
that describe how to answer the questions (i.e., In-context examples in Equation 1). For example,
we provide the LLM with a few examples regarding tense relationships such as the lies on being
semantically relevant to lying on, and positional relationship such as next to being semantically
relevant to near. Lastly, we show the predicate of our interest to the LLM (i.e., Actual question in
Equation 1). Please refer to Table 8 in Appendix A.1 for an example of the prompt input.
After performing Step 2 (Section 3.3) and Step 3 (Section 3.4), we obtain intermediate unlocalized
triplets Ĝw = {si , pi , oi }N̂
                              i=1 , where si,c , oi,c ∈ {Ce ∪ None} and pi,c ∈ {Cp ∪ None}. It is worth
                                 w

noting that if there is no semantically relevant lexeme, we request the LLM to generate None as the
answer, due to the fact that the entity/predicate classes in the target data may not cover a wide range
of entities/predicates. Similar to the conventional approach, we discard a triplet if any of its three
   3
       We use captions in COCO caption dataset for examples.


                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


components (i.e., subject, predicate and object) is None. Lastly, we obtain the final unlocalized
triplets Gw = {si , pi , oi }N
                             i=1 (Nw ≤N̂w ), where si,c , oi,c ∈ Ce and pi,c ∈ Cp .
                               w


3.5 M ODEL T RAINING
Given the final unlocalized triplets Gw , we ground them over relevant image regions to get lo-
calized triplets, meaning that we obtain si,b and oi,b . To this end, we employ two state-of-the-art
grounding methods, i.e., SGNLS (Zhong et al., 2021) and VS3 (Zhang et al., 2023). Please refer to
Appendix A.2 for more detail about how each method performs grounding. After grounding Gw ,
we obtain localized triplets and use them as pseudo-labels for training a supervised SGG model.
Please refer to Appendix A.3 for more detail about the model training.

4   E XPERIMENT
Datasets. To train an SGG model without an annotated scene graph dataset, we use the COCO
caption dataset (Chen et al., 2015), which is commonly used for WSSGG studies (Zhang et al.,
2023; Li et al., 2022b; Zhong et al., 2021; Ye & Kovashka, 2021). For fair comparisons, we use the
same set of 64K images that have been utilized in previous WSSGG studies (Li et al., 2022b; Zhong
et al., 2021). Each image is associated with five captions. To evaluate the trained SGG model,
we employ the widely used Visual Genome (VG) dataset (Krishna et al., 2017) and GQA dataset
(Hudson & Manning, 2019). The VG dataset contains the ground-truth localized triplet information
annotated by humans. We follow the standard split of VG (Xu et al., 2017), which consist of 150
entity classes and 50 predicate classes. For the GQA dataset used in the SGG task, we follow the
same pre-processing step of a previous SGG study (Dong et al., 2022), which involves selecting top-
200 frequent entity classes and top-100 frequent predicate classes. In both datasets, 30% of the total
images are used for evaluation. Please refer to Appendix C.1 for more details regarding the datasets.
Evaluation metrics. Recent fully-supervised SGG studies (Yoon et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2022a;
Biswas & Ji, 2023) have emphasized improving the accuracy of predictions for fine-grained predi-
cates rather than coarse-grained predicates, since the former construct richer scene graphs. As a re-
sult, they commonly use mean Recall@K (mR@K) that computes the average of Recall@K (R@K)
across all predicates. In line with the recent emphasis on fine-grained predicates, we incorporate
both mR@K and R@K in our evaluation, whereas previous WSSGG studies (Zhang et al., 2023; Li
et al., 2022b; Ye & Kovashka, 2021) mainly rely on the R@K metric alone. Moreover, we report
F@K, which is the harmonic average of R@K and mR@K to jointly consider R@K and mR@K,
following previous SGG studies (Khandelwal & Sigal, 2022; Zhang et al., 2022a). Regarding the
evaluation task, we follow previous WSSGG studies and adopt the Scene Graph Detection (SGDet)
task, where both the ground-truth bounding box and the entity class information are not provided.
Please refer to Appendix C.2 for more detail regarding the task.
Baselines. Please refer to Appendix C.3 for details regarding the baselines.
Implementation Details. In the grounding process in SGNLS (Zhong et al., 2021), we used Faster
R-CNN (Ren et al., 2015) as the object detector, which is pre-trained on Open Images (Kuznetsova
et al., 2020). In the grounding process in VS3 , we used GLIP (Li et al., 2022a) as the object detector
with the Swin-L backbone (Liu et al., 2021). Regarding an LLM, we use gpt-3.5-turbo in ChatGPT
(OpenAI, 2023a). Note that to further alleviate the long-tailed predicate distribution after Step 3
in our framework, we select the most fine-grained predicate when there are multiple predicates be-
tween the same subject-object pair, where the fine-grainedness is determined based on the predicate
distribution within the entire set of unlocalized triplets. For more insights regarding the impact of
the predicate selection, please refer to Appendix D.2.

4.1 Q UANTITATIVE R ESULT ON VG
Table 2 shows the performance of baseline models                                                     3
                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                                   Recall@100
                                                          Frequency


and those when LLM4SGG is applied. We have
the following observations: 1) Applying LLM4SGG
to SGNLS and VS3 improves the performance in                                            Frequency 0 in Parser+KB


terms of R@K and mR@K, which demonstrates
the effectiveness of the triplet formation through
                                                                         Predicate
LLM4SGG. Notably, LLM4SGG significantly im-
proves mR@K, implying that LLM4SGG effec- Figure 3: Per class performance (Bar: num.
tively alleviates the long-tailed problem in WSSGG. predicate instances, Line: Recall@100).


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Performance comparisons on the SGDet task. The best performance among WSSGG
models is in bold. The red numbers indicate the absolute performance improvement after apply-
ing LLM4SGG. Rwt denotes using the reweighting strategy (Zhang et al., 2022a).
                Method                 R@50          R@100          mR@50         mR@100         F@50          F@100
  Motif (CVPR’18) - Fully-supervised   31.89          36.36          6.38          7.57       10.63 / 12.53     12.53
  LSWS (CVPR’21)                        3.29          3.69           3.27          3.66           3.28          3.67
  SGNLS (ICCV’21)                       3.80          4.46           2.51          2.78           3.02          3.43
  SGNLS (ICCV’21)+LLM4SGG               5.09+ 1.29    5.97+ 1.51     4.08+ 1.57    4.49+ 1.71     4.53+ 1.51    5.13+ 1.70
  Li et al (MM’22)                      6.40          7.33           1.73          1.98           2.72          3.12
  VS3 (CVPR’23)                         6.60          8.01           2.88          3.25           4.01          4.62
  VS3 (CVPR’23)+LLM4SGG                 8.91+ 2.31    10.43+ 2.42    7.11+ 4.23    8.18+ 4.93     7.91+ 3.90    9.17+ 4.55
  VS3 (CVPR’23)+Rwt                     4.25          5.04           5.17          5.99           4.67          5.47
  VS3 (CVPR’23)+Rwt+LLM4SGG             5.10+ 0.85    6.34+ 1.30     8.42+ 3.25    9.90+ 3.91     6.35+ 1.69    7.73+ 2.26


This can be clearly seen in Figure 3, which shows the performance gain on fine-grained predicates.
2) VS3 +Rwt+LLM4SGG further improves mR@K of VS3 +Rwt. We attribute this to the fact that
the conventional approach generates a limited number of fine-grained predicates, which makes the
reweighting strategy less effective within VS3 . Especially, non-existent predicates can never be pre-
dicted even when the reweighting strategy is applied. On the other hand, LLM4SGG increases the
number of instances that belong to fine-grained predicates, which is advantageous for the reweight-
ing strategy. For the per class performance comparison over the reweighting stregty, please refer to
Appendix D.1. 3) The performance gain obtained from applying LLM4SGG is greater on VS3 (i.e.,
VS3 +LLM4SGG) than on SGNLS (i.e., SGNLS+LLM4SGG). The major reason lies in the differ-
ence in how SGNLS and VS3 make use of the pool of 344K unlocalized triplets obtained through
LLM4SGG. Specifically, in the grounding process of SGNLS, we observe that 100K out of 344K
unlocalized triplets (i.e., 29%) fail to be grounded, and thus not used for training. On the other hand,
VS3 successfully grounds all 344K unlocalized triplets and fully utilize them for training, allowing it
to fully enjoy the effectiveness of LLM4SGG. This indicates that LLM4SGG makes synergy when
paired with a grounding method that is capable of fully utilizing the unlocalized triplets. For more
details regarding the impact of grounding methods, please refer to Appendix B.

4.2   A BLATION S TUDIES
In Table 3, we conduct ablation studies on Table 3: Ablation studies. (PC: Using Paraphrased
VG dataset to understand the effectiveness of Caption in addition to the original caption / LP:
each component of LLM4SGG, where VS3 LLM-based Parsing / LA: LLM-based Alignment)
is used as the grounding method. Note that
row (a) is equivalent to vanilla VS3 . We have Row PC LP LA # Triplet R@50 / 100 mR@50 / 100 F@50 / 100
                                                    (a)              154K    6.60 / 8.01 2.88 / 3.25 4.01 / 4.62
the following observations. 1) Effect of using      (b)  ✓           243K   9.46 / 11.22 3.43 / 3.92 5.03 / 5.81
the paraphrased caption: Including the para-        (c)
                                                    (d)
                                                         ✓
                                                         ✓
                                                             ✓
                                                                 ✓
                                                                     256K
                                                                     327K
                                                                             8.42 / 9.85
                                                                           11.76 / 13.38
                                                                                         5.99 / 6.95
                                                                                         3.50 / 4.05
                                                                                                     7.00 / 8.15
                                                                                                     5.39 / 6.22
phrased caption in addition to the original cap-    (e)  ✓   ✓   ✓   344K   8.91 / 10.43 7.11 / 8.18 7.91 / 9.17

tion (row (b)) increases the number of triplets
(154K→243K), resulting in an improved overall performance. This demonstrates that the para-
phrased caption alleviates the low-density scene graph issue. 2) Effect of LLM-based parsing:
The LLM-based parsing (row (c)) for extracting triplets improves mR@K of row (b). This indicates
that the LLM-based parsing increases the number of instances that belong to fine-grained predicates,
which in turn alleviates the semantic over-simplification issue. 3) Effect of LLM-based alignment:
The LLM-based alignment (row (d)) of entities/predicates in the extracted triplets increases the num-
ber of triplets from 243K to 327K (row (b) vs (d)), which indicates that the low-density scene graph
issue is alleviated. Consequently, R@K and mR@K of row (d) are greater than those of row (b).
4) The fully-fledged approach (row (e)) generally improves R@K and mR@K, showing the best
performance in terms of F@K. It is important to highlight that when using the LLM-based pars-
ing, the performance of mR@K significantly increases with a moderate decrease in R@K. This
trade-off is attributed to the fact that R@K generally improves when the coarse-grained predicates
are dominant (Zhang et al., 2022a). In contrast, our approach, which addresses the semantic over-
simplification issue, decreases the number instances that belong to coarse-grained predicates while
simultaneously increasing those that belong to fine-grained predicates (Figure 1(b)), which in turn
results in a substantial improvement in mR@K. We would like to emphasize that the performance
in terms of mR@K is crucial in the context of SGG research (Yoon et al., 2023; Biswas & Ji, 2023;
Dong et al., 2022), as fine-grained predicates offer richer information.


                                                            8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     3                                3                                3
                     3                                3                                3


    Figure 4: Performance over various numbers of images used for training VS3 +LLM4SGG.
4.3 A NALYSIS OF DATA -E FFICIENCY
To assess the effectiveness of LLM4SGG under the lack of available training data, we conduct
experiments given a limited number of images. Specifically, among 64K images used for training
VS3 and VS3 +LLM4SGG in Table 2, we randomly sample 1K (1.5%), 5K (7.8%), and 10K
(15.6%) images with replacement, and train VS3 +LLM4SGG for five times. Figure 4 shows the
average performance over various numbers of images used for training VS3 +LLM4SGG along
with the variance (in blue area). We observe that when using only 1K images, the performance is
slightly inferior to the baseline that used 64K for training (i.e., VS3 ). However, as we increase the
number of images used for training to 5K images, we observe a significant improvement in both
R@K and mR@K compared with the baseline. This demonstrates that LLM4SGG is data-efficient,
as it outperforms the baseline even with only 7.8% of the total images used for training the baseline.
Moreover, when further increasing the number of images to 10K, we observe further performance
improvements, and when it reaches 64K, which is the same as the number of images used for
training the baseline, the performance is the best. In summary, LLM4SGG enables data-efficient
model training even with a limited amount of available images for training, thanks to alleviating the
semantic over-simplification and low-density scene graph issues.

4.4 Q UANTITATIVE R ESULT ON GQA
In Table 4, we additionally conducted experi-         Table 4: Performance comparison on GQA.
ments on GQA dataset (Hudson & Manning,
                                                     Method                   R@50 / 100 mR@50 / 100 F@50 / 100
2019). Please refer to Appendix E.1 for more de-
                                                     Motif (Fully-supervised) 28.90 / 33.10 6.40 / 7.70 10.48 / 12.49
tailed descriptions on the training and evaluation
                                                     VS3                        5.90 / 6.97 1.60 / 1.81  2.52 / 2.87
processes on GQA dataset. The GQA dataset            VS3 +LLM4SGG              8.88 / 10.38 5.33 / 6.51  6.66 / 8.00
contains twice as many predicates as the Visual
Genome dataset and includes complicated predicates (e.g., sitting next to, standing in front of). As
a result, when obtaining unlocalized triplets using the conventional WSSGG approach, we observe
that 44 out of 100 predicates have a frequency of 0, and the predicate distribution is extremely long-
tailed. Consequently, the baseline (i.e., VS3 ) exhibits significantly lower performance, especially
in terms of mR@K. On the other hand, our approach shows substantial performance improvements
not only in R@K but also in mR@K, thanks to the mitigation of semantic over-simplification and
low-density scene graph issues. Please refer to Appendix E.2 for the predicate distribution and per-
formance comparison for each class in GQA dataset. Additionally, please refer to Appendix E.3 for
qualitative analyses on GQA dataset.

5 C ONCLUSION & F UTURE WORK
In this work, we focus on the triplet formation process in WSSGG, whose importance is overlooked
by previous studies. To alleviate the semantic over-simplification and low-density scene graph is-
sues inherent in the triplet formation process, we propose a new approach, i.e., LLM4SGG, which
leverages a pre-trained LLM during the extraction of triplets from the captions, and alignment of
entity/predicate classes with those in the target data. It is important to note that construction of these
triplets is not required every time to train the SGG model; instead, it is a one-time pre-processing
step. In this regard, we contribute to generating enhanced triplets compared to the conventional ap-
proach. As a result, we outperform baselines in terms of R@K, mR@K and F@K on Visual Genome
and GQA datasets. For future work, an LLM can be used to ground the unlocalized triplets in Step
4. Recently, vision-language representation learning has been developed for transforming visual
features into textual features to facilitate the use of visual features as input to an LLM (Li et al.,
2023a; Zhu et al., 2023). In this regard, given the visual features of bounding boxes as input, we
could ask the LLM to identify relevant bounding boxes based on the textual information of entities
within unlocalized triplets using the comprehensive understanding of the context of triplets.


                                                          9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E THICS S TATEMENT
Regarding the adherence of ICLR Code of Ethics, to the best of our knowledge, we have no violated
ethical issues throughout this paper. All datasets and pre-trained models used for experiments are
publicly available.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
Our experiments incorporate the utilization of an LLM, i.e., ChatGPT. To further im-
prove reproducibility of experiment results, we set temperature to its minimum value of
0 in ChatGPT, which controls the variance of text generation. Additionally, we provide
full prompts used for triplet extraction process in Appendix A.1, and the source code in
https://anonymous.4open.science/r/LLM4SGG-83DD along with the accessible datasets, pre-
processed triplets constructed by LLM4SGG, and our pre-trained model.

R EFERENCES
Bashirul Azam Biswas and Qiang Ji. Probabilistic debiasing of scene graphs. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10429–10438, 2023.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.

Xinlei Chen, Hao Fang, Tsung-Yi Lin, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Saurabh Gupta, Piotr Dollár, and
  C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco captions: Data collection and evaluation server. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1504.00325, 2015.

Yen-Chun Chen, Linjie Li, Licheng Yu, Ahmed El Kholy, Faisal Ahmed, Zhe Gan, Yu Cheng, and
  Jingjing Liu. Uniter: Universal image-text representation learning. In European conference on
  computer vision, pp. 104–120. Springer, 2020.

Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.

Xiyang Dai, Yinpeng Chen, Bin Xiao, Dongdong Chen, Mengchen Liu, Lu Yuan, and Lei Zhang.
  Dynamic head: Unifying object detection heads with attentions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 7373–7382, 2021.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.

Xingning Dong, Tian Gan, Xuemeng Song, Jianlong Wu, Yuan Cheng, and Liqiang Nie. Stacked
  hybrid-attention and group collaborative learning for unbiased scene graph generation. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 19427–
  19436, 2022.

Difei Gao, Lei Ji, Luowei Zhou, Kevin Qinghong Lin, Joya Chen, Zihan Fan, and Mike Zheng
  Shou. Assistgpt: A general multi-modal assistant that can plan, execute, inspect, and learn. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2306.08640, 2023.

Tao He, Lianli Gao, Jingkuan Song, and Yuan-Fang Li. Towards open-vocabulary scene graph
  generation with prompt-based finetuning. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 56–
  73. Springer, 2022.

Drew A Hudson and Christopher D Manning. Gqa: A new dataset for real-world visual reasoning
  and compositional question answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 6700–6709, 2019.

Siddhesh Khandelwal and Leonid Sigal. Iterative scene graph generation. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 35:24295–24308, 2022.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ranjay Krishna, Yuke Zhu, Oliver Groth, Justin Johnson, Kenji Hata, Joshua Kravitz, Stephanie
  Chen, Yannis Kalantidis, Li-Jia Li, David A Shamma, et al. Visual genome: Connecting lan-
  guage and vision using crowdsourced dense image annotations. International journal of computer
  vision, 123:32–73, 2017.
Alina Kuznetsova, Hassan Rom, Neil Alldrin, Jasper Uijlings, Ivan Krasin, Jordi Pont-Tuset, Sha-
  hab Kamali, Stefan Popov, Matteo Malloci, Alexander Kolesnikov, et al. The open images dataset
  v4: Unified image classification, object detection, and visual relationship detection at scale. In-
  ternational Journal of Computer Vision, 128(7):1956–1981, 2020.
Junnan Li, Ramprasaath Selvaraju, Akhilesh Gotmare, Shafiq Joty, Caiming Xiong, and Steven
  Chu Hong Hoi. Align before fuse: Vision and language representation learning with momentum
  distillation. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:9694–9705, 2021a.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-
  image pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2301.12597, 2023a.
Lin Li, Guikun Chen, Jun Xiao, Yi Yang, Chunping Wang, and Long Chen. Compositional feature
  augmentation for unbiased scene graph generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.06712, 2023b.
Liunian Harold Li, Pengchuan Zhang, Haotian Zhang, Jianwei Yang, Chunyuan Li, Yiwu Zhong, Li-
  juan Wang, Lu Yuan, Lei Zhang, Jenq-Neng Hwang, et al. Grounded language-image pre-training.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  10965–10975, 2022a.
Rongjie Li, Songyang Zhang, Bo Wan, and Xuming He. Bipartite graph network with adaptive mes-
  sage passing for unbiased scene graph generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 11109–11119, 2021b.
Xingchen Li, Long Chen, Wenbo Ma, Yi Yang, and Jun Xiao. Integrating object-aware and
  interaction-aware knowledge for weakly supervised scene graph generation. In Proceedings of
  the 30th ACM International Conference on Multimedia, pp. 4204–4213, 2022b.
Yongzhi Li, Duo Zhang, and Yadong Mu. Visual-semantic matching by exploring high-order atten-
  tion and distraction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 12786–12795, 2020.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Priya Goyal, Ross Girshick, Kaiming He, and Piotr Dollár. Focal loss for dense
  object detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp.
  2980–2988, 2017.
Ze Liu, Yutong Lin, Yue Cao, Han Hu, Yixuan Wei, Zheng Zhang, Stephen Lin, and Baining Guo.
  Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 10012–10022, 2021.
Pan Lu, Baolin Peng, Hao Cheng, Michel Galley, Kai-Wei Chang, Ying Nian Wu, Song-Chun Zhu,
  and Jianfeng Gao. Chameleon: Plug-and-play compositional reasoning with large language mod-
  els. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.09842, 2023.
George A Miller. Wordnet: a lexical database for english. Communications of the ACM, 38(11):
  39–41, 1995.
Swaroop Mishra, Daniel Khashabi, Chitta Baral, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Cross-task generalization
  via natural language crowdsourcing instructions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08773, 2021.
OpenAI. Chatgpt. https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt, 2023a.
OpenAI. Gpt-4. Technical report, 2023b.
Shaoqing Ren, Kaiming He, Ross Girshick, and Jian Sun. Faster r-cnn: Towards real-time object
  detection with region proposal networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 28,
  2015.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sebastian Schuster, Ranjay Krishna, Angel Chang, Li Fei-Fei, and Christopher D Manning. Gen-
  erating semantically precise scene graphs from textual descriptions for improved image retrieval.
  In Proceedings of the fourth workshop on vision and language, pp. 70–80, 2015.
Jiaxin Shi, Hanwang Zhang, and Juanzi Li. Explainable and explicit visual reasoning over scene
   graphs. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 8376–8384, 2019.
Jing Shi, Yiwu Zhong, Ning Xu, Yin Li, and Chenliang Xu. A simple baseline for weakly-supervised
   scene graph generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
   Vision, pp. 16393–16402, 2021.
Mohammed Suhail, Abhay Mittal, Behjat Siddiquie, Chris Broaddus, Jayan Eledath, Gerard
 Medioni, and Leonid Sigal. Energy-based learning for scene graph generation. In Proceedings of
 the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 13936–13945, 2021.
Kaihua Tang, Yulei Niu, Jianqiang Huang, Jiaxin Shi, and Hanwang Zhang. Unbiased scene graph
  generation from biased training. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition, pp. 3716–3725, 2020.
Damien Teney, Lingqiao Liu, and Anton van Den Hengel. Graph-structured representations for
  visual question answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 1–9, 2017.
Romal Thoppilan, Daniel De Freitas, Jamie Hall, Noam Shazeer, Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Heng-Tze
  Cheng, Alicia Jin, Taylor Bos, Leslie Baker, Yu Du, et al. Lamda: Language models for dialog
  applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.08239, 2022.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Sijin Wang, Ruiping Wang, Ziwei Yao, Shiguang Shan, and Xilin Chen. Cross-modal scene graph
   matching for relationship-aware image-text retrieval. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF winter
   conference on applications of computer vision, pp. 1508–1517, 2020.
Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yo-
  gatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, et al. Emergent abilities of large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07682, 2022a.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022b.
Hao Wen, Yuanchun Li, Guohong Liu, Shanhui Zhao, Tao Yu, Toby Jia-Jun Li, Shiqi Jiang, Yun-
  hao Liu, Yaqin Zhang, and Yunxin Liu. Empowering llm to use smartphone for intelligent task
  automation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.15272, 2023.
Hao Wu, Jiayuan Mao, Yufeng Zhang, Yuning Jiang, Lei Li, Weiwei Sun, and Wei-Ying Ma. Unified
  visual-semantic embeddings: Bridging vision and language with structured meaning representa-
  tions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 6609–6618, 2019.
Danfei Xu, Yuke Zhu, Christopher B Choy, and Li Fei-Fei. Scene graph generation by iterative mes-
  sage passing. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 5410–5419, 2017.
Xu Yang, Kaihua Tang, Hanwang Zhang, and Jianfei Cai. Auto-encoding scene graphs for image
  captioning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-
  tion, pp. 10685–10694, 2019.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629,
  2022.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Keren Ye and Adriana Kovashka. Linguistic structures as weak supervision for visual scene graph
  generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
  nition, pp. 8289–8299, 2021.
Kanghoon Yoon, Kibum Kim, Jinyoung Moon, and Chanyoung Park. Unbiased heterogeneous
  scene graph generation with relation-aware message passing neural network. In Proceedings of
  the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 37, pp. 3285–3294, 2023.
Alireza Zareian, Svebor Karaman, and Shih-Fu Chang. Weakly supervised visual semantic parsing.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  3736–3745, 2020.
Rowan Zellers, Mark Yatskar, Sam Thomson, and Yejin Choi. Neural motifs: Scene graph parsing
  with global context. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 5831–5840, 2018.
Ao Zhang, Yuan Yao, Qianyu Chen, Wei Ji, Zhiyuan Liu, Maosong Sun, and Tat-Seng Chua. Fine-
  grained scene graph generation with data transfer. In European conference on computer vision,
  pp. 409–424. Springer, 2022a.
Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christo-
  pher Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, et al. Opt: Open pre-trained transformer
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01068, 2022b.
Yong Zhang, Yingwei Pan, Ting Yao, Rui Huang, Tao Mei, and Chang-Wen Chen. Learning to
  generate language-supervised and open-vocabulary scene graph using pre-trained visual-semantic
  space. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 2915–2924, 2023.
Zhuosheng Zhang, Aston Zhang, Mu Li, and Alex Smola. Automatic chain of thought prompting in
  large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03493, 2022c.
Yiwu Zhong, Liwei Wang, Jianshu Chen, Dong Yu, and Yin Li. Comprehensive image captioning
  via scene graph decomposition. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference,
  Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part XIV 16, pp. 211–229. Springer, 2020.
Yiwu Zhong, Jing Shi, Jianwei Yang, Chenliang Xu, and Yin Li. Learning to generate scene graph
  from natural language supervision. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision, pp. 1823–1834, 2021.
Deyao Zhu, Jun Chen, Xiaoqian Shen, Xiang Li, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. Minigpt-4: En-
  hancing vision-language understanding with advanced large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.10592, 2023.


                                              13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        Supplementary Material

A Details of Method                                                                              15
   A.1 Details of Prompt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   15
   A.2 Details of Grounding Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      15
   A.3 Details of Model Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   17

B Regarding the impact of grounding method on LLM4SGG                                            17

C Experiment Setup                                                                               18
   C.1 Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   18
   C.2 Evaluation Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   18
   C.3 Baselines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   18

D Experiment on VG                                                                               19
   D.1 Performance Comparison per class with Reweight method . . . . . . . . . . . . .           19
   D.2 Experiment for Predicate Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    20
   D.3 Experiment for Exploration of Training Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      20
   D.4 Experiment for New Prompt Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        20
   D.5 Case Studies on Extracting Fine-grained Predicates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      21
   D.6 Qualitative Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   22

E Experiment on GQA                                                                              22
   E.1 Training and Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   22
   E.2 Performance Comparison per class . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      23
   E.3 Qualitative Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   24


                                                14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A       D ETAILS OF M ETHOD
A.1       D ETAILS OF P ROMPT

We provide the complete prompts for extracting triplets from paraphrased captions (Table 5) and
from original captions (Table 6). Moreover, we provide those for aligning entity classes (Table 7),
and predicate classes (Table 8) with entity and predicate classes in the target data, respectively.
                             Table 5: Prompt for triplet extraction from paraphrased caption.
                                                                            Task Description
    From the given sentence, the task is to extract meaningful triplets formed as <subject, predicate, object>.
    To extract meaningful triplets from the sentence, please follow the following two steps.
    Step 1: Paraphrase the sentence.
    Step 2: From the paraphrased sentence obtained in the Step 1, extract meaningful triplets formed as <subject, predicate, object>.
    Note that the subject is the entity or noun that performs the action or is being described, and the object is the entity or noun that is
    affected by the action or is receiving the action. The predicate is a verb or adjective without auxiliary verb.
                                                                          In-context Examples
    Let’s take a few examples to understand how to extract meaningful triplets.
    Question: Given the sentence "a slice of bread is covered with a sour cream and guacamole," extract meaningful triplets.
    Answer: Step 1: The sentence can be paraphrased as:
    A piece of bread is topped with both sour cream and guacamole.
    Step 2: Meaningful triplets, where the subject and object are the simple noun, extracted from the paraphrased sentence are:
    <bread, topped with, sour cream>, <bread, topped with, guacamole>.
    The meaningful triplets are <bread, topped with, sour cream>, and <bread, topped with, guacamole>.
    Question: Given the sentence "A beautiful woman walking a dog on top of a beach," extract meaningful triplets.
    Answer: Step 1: The sentence can be paraphrased as:
    A lovely woman strolling with a dog on the beach.
    Step 2: Meaningful triplets, where the subject and object are the simple noun, extracted from the paraphrased sentence are:
    <woman, strolling with, dog>, <woman, on, beach>, <dog, on, beach>.
    The meaningful triplets are <woman, strolling with, dog>, <woman, on, beach>, and <dog, on, beach>.
    Question: Given the sentence "Four clock sitting on a floor next to a woman’s feet," extract meaningful triplets.
    Answer: Step 1: The sentence can be paraphrased as:
    Four clocks are placed on the floor beside a woman’s feet.
    Step 2: Meaningful triplets, where the subject and object are the simple noun, extracted from the paraphrased sentence are:
    <clocks, placed on, floor>, <clocks, beside, feet>.
    The meaningful triplets are <clocks, placed on, floor> and <clocks, beside, feet>.
    Question: Given the sentence "One person sits in a chair looking at her phone while another rests on the couch," extract meaningful triplets.
    Answer: Step 1: The sentence can be paraphrased as:
    A person is seated in a chair, using their phone, while someone else is relaxing on the couch.
    Step 2: Meaningful triplets, where the subject and object are the simple noun, extracted from the paraphrased sentence are:
    <person, seated in, chair>, <person, using, phone>, <person, relaxing on, couch>.
    The meaningful triplets are <person, seated in, chair>, <person, using, phone>, and <person, relaxing on, couch>.
    Question: Given the sentence "A lady and a child near a park bench with kites and ducks flying in the sky and on the ground," extract meaningful triplets.
    Answer: Step 1: The sentence can be paraphrased as:
    A woman and a child are close to a park bench, while kites soar through the sky and ducks move around on the ground.
    Step 2: Meaningful triplets, where the subject and object are the simple noun, extracted from the paraphrased sentence are:
    <woman, close to, park bench>, <child, close to, park bench>, <kites, soar through, sky>, <ducks, move around, ground>.
    The meaningful triplets are <woman, close to, park bench>, <child, close to, park bench>, <kites, soar through, sky>, and <ducks, move around, ground>.
    Question: Given the sentence "Two men sit on a bench near the sidewalk and one of them talks on a cell phone," extract meaningful triplets.
    Answer: Step 1: The sentence can be paraphrased as:
    Two guys are seated on a bench near the road, and one of them talks on a mobile phone.
    Step 2: Meaningful triplets, where the subject and object are the simple noun, extracted from the paraphrased sentence are:
    <guys, seated on, bench>, <bench, near, road>, <guy, talks on, phone>.
    The meaningful triplets are <guys, seated on, bench>, <bench, near, road>, and <guy, talks on, phone>.
                                                                             Actual Question
    Question: Given the sentence Input, extract meaningful triplets. Answer:



                                Table 6: Prompt for triplet extraction from original caption.
                                                                         Task Description
  From the given sentence, the task is to extract meaningful triplets formed as <subject, predicate, object>.
  Note that the subject is the entity or noun that performs the action or is being described, and the object is the entity or noun that is affected by the action
  or is receiving the action. The predicate is a verb or adjective without auxiliary verb, and is represented without the tense.
                                                                       In-context Examples
  Let’s take a few examples to understand how to extract meaningful triplets.
  Question: Given the sentence "a slice of bread is covered with a sour cream and guacamole," extract the meaningful triplets.
  Answer: Meaningful triplets are <bread, covered with, sour cream>, and <bread, covered with, guacamole>.
  Question: Given the sentence "A beautiful woman walking a dog on top of a beach," extract meaningful triplets.
  Answer: Meaningful triplets are <woman, walking with, dog>, <woman, on, beach>, and <dog, on, beach>.
  Question: Given the sentence "Four clock sitting on a floor next to a woman’s feet," extract the meaningful triplets.
  Answer: Meaningful triplets are <clock, sitting on, floor> and <clock, next to, feet>.
  Question: Given the sentence "One person sits in a chair looking at her phone while another rests on the couch," extract meaningful triplets.
  Answer: Meaningful triplets are <person, sits in, chair>, <person, looking at, phone>, and <person, rests on, couch>.
  Question: Given the sentence "A lady and a child near a park bench with kites and ducks flying in the sky and on the ground," extract meaningful triplets.
  Answer: Meaningful triplets are <lady, near, park bench>, <child, near, park bench>, <kites, flying in sky>, and <ducks, on, ground>.
  Question: Given the sentence "Two men sit on a bench near the sidewalk and one of them talks on a cell phone," extract meaningful triplets.
  Answer: Meaningful triplets are <men, sit on, bench>, <bench, near, sidewalk>, and <man, talks on, phone>.
                                                                         Actual Question
  Question: Given the sentence Input, extract meaningful triplets. Answer:


A.2       D ETAILS OF G ROUNDING M ETHODS

To ground unlocalized triplets, we employ two state-of-the-art grounding methods, i.e., SGNLS
(Zhong et al., 2021) and VS3 (Zhang et al., 2023). Herein, we provide a detailed explanation of each
grounding method.


                                                                               15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             Table 7: Prompt for alignment of entity class.
                                                                         Task Description
  The predefined entity lexicon containing 150 lexemes is numbered as follows: 1.airplane 2.animal 3.arm 4.bag 5.banana 6.basket 7.beach 8.bear 9.bed
  10.bench 11.bike 12.bird 13.board 14.boat 15.book 16.boot 17.bottle 18.bowl 19.box 20.boy 21.branch 22.building 23.bus 24.cabinet 25.cap 26.car
  27.cat 28.chair 29.child 30.clock 31.coat 32.counter 33.cow 34.cup 35.curtain 36.desk 37.dog 38.door 39.drawer 40.ear 41.elephant 42.engine 43.eye
  44.face 45.fence 46.finger 47.flag 48.flower 49.food 50.fork 51.fruit 52.giraffe 53.girl 54.glass 55.glove 56.guy 57.hair 58.hand 59.handle 60.hat 61.head
  62.helmet 63.hill 64.horse 65.house 66.jacket 67.jean 68.kid 69.kite 70.lady 71.lamp 72.laptop 73.leaf 74.leg 75.letter 76.light 77.logo 78.man 79.men
  80.motorcycle 81.mountain 82.mouth 83.neck 84.nose 85.number 86.orange 87.pant 88.paper 89.paw 90.people 91.person 92.phone 93.pillow 94.pizza
  95.plane 96.plant 97.plate 98.player 99.pole 100.post 101.pot 102.racket 103.railing 104.rock 105.roof 106.room 107.screen 108.seat 109.sheep 110.shelf
  111.shirt 112.shoe 113.short 114.sidewalk 115.sign 116.sink 117.skateboard 118.ski 119.skier 120.sneaker 121.snow 122.sock 123.stand 124.street
  125.surfboard 126.table 127.tail 128.tie 129.tile 130.tire 131.toilet 132.towel 133.tower 134.track 135.train 136.tree 137.truck 138.trunk 139.umbrella
  140.vase 141.vegetable 142.vehicle 143.wave 144.wheel 145.window 146.windshield 147.wing 148.wire 149.woman 150.zebra.
  Given the lexeme, the task is to find semantically relevant lexeme from the predefined entity lexicon.
  However, if there is no semantically relevant lexeme in the predefined entity lexicon, please answer 0.None.
                                                                      In-context Examples
  Let’s take a few examples.
  Question: Given the lexeme "water," find semantically relevant lexeme in the predefined entity lexicon. Answer: 0.None
  Question: Given the lexeme "bus," find semantically relevant lexeme in the predefined entity lexicon. Answer: 142.vehicle
  Question: Given the lexeme "steel," find semantically relevant lexeme in the predefined entity lexicon. Answer: 0.None
  Question: Given the lexeme "vanity," find semantically relevant lexeme in the predefined entity lexicon. redAnswer: 110.shelf
  Question: Given the lexeme "desktop," find semantically relevant lexeme in the predefined entity lexicon. Answer: 72.laptop
  Question: Given the lexeme "cobble," find semantically relevant lexeme in the predefined entity lexicon. Answer: 104.rock
  Question: Given the lexeme "poles," find semantically relevant lexeme in the predefined entity lexicon. Answer: 99.pole
  Question: Given the lexeme "wastebasket," find semantically relevant lexeme in the predefined entity lexicon. Answer: 6.basket
  Question: Given the lexeme "blue," find semantically relevant lexeme in the predefined entity lexicon. Answer: 0.None
  Question: Given the lexeme "motorcyclist," find semantically relevant lexeme in the predefined entity lexicon. Answer: 98.player
  Question: Given the lexeme "passenger," find semantically relevant lexeme in the predefined entity lexicon. Answer: 91.person
  Question: Given the lexeme "pigeon," find semantically relevant lexeme in the predefined entity lexicon. Answer: 12.bird
  Question: Given the lexeme "grass," find semantically relevant lexeme in the predefined entity lexicon. Answer: 96.plant
  Question: Given the lexeme "surfboards," find semantically relevant lexeme in the predefined entity lexicon. Answer: 125.surfboard
  Question: Given the lexeme "striped shirts," find semantically relevant lexeme in the predefined entity lexicon. Answer: 111.shirt
                                                                         Actual Question
  Question: Given the lexeme Input, find semantically relevant lexeme in the predefined entity lexicon. Answer:


                                          Table 8: Prompt for alignment of predicate class.
                                                                             Task Description
  The predefined predicate lexicon containing 50 lexemes is numbered as follows: 1.above 2.across 3.against 4.along 5.and 6.at 7.attached to 8.behind 9.belonging to
  10.between 11.carrying 12.covered in 13.covering 14.eating 15.flying in 16.for 17.from 18.growing on 19.hanging from 20.has 21.holding 22.in 23.in front of
  24.laying on 25.looking at 26.lying on 27.made of 28.mounted on 29.near 30.of 31.on 32.on back of 33.over 34.painted on 35.parked on 36.part of 37.playing 38.riding
  39.says 40.sitting on 41.standing on 42.to 43.under 44.using 45.walking in 46.walking on 47.watching 48.wearing 49.wears 50.with.
  Given the lexeme, the task is to find semantically relevant lexeme from the predefined predicate lexicon.
  However, if there is no semantically relevant lexeme in the predefined predicate lexicon, please answer 0.None.
                                                                           In-context Examples
  Let’s take a few examples.
  Question: Given the lexeme "next to," find semantically relevant lexeme in the predefined predicate lexicon. Answer: 29.near
  Question: Given the lexeme "are parked in," find semantically relevant lexeme in the predefined predicate lexicon. Answer: 35.parked on
  Question: Given the lexeme "waiting," find semantically relevant lexeme in the predefined predicate lexicon. Answer: 0.None
  Question: Given the lexeme "sitting," find semantically relevant lexeme in the predefined predicate lexicon. redAnswer: 40.sitting on
  Question: Given the lexeme "grazing," find semantically relevant lexeme in the predefined predicate lexicon. Answer: 14.eating
  Question: Given the lexeme "pointing to," find semantically relevant lexeme in the predefined predicate lexicon. Answer: 0.None
  Question: Given the lexeme "lies on," find semantically relevant lexeme in the predefined predicate lexicon. Answer: 24.lying on
  Question: Given the lexeme "sitting underneath," find semantically relevant lexeme in the predefined predicate lexicon. Answer: 43.under
  Question: Given the lexeme "placed next to," find semantically relevant lexeme in the predefined predicate lexicon. Answer: 29.near
  Question: Given the lexeme "looking down at," find semantically relevant lexeme in the predefined predicate lexicon. Answer: 25.looking at
  Question: Given the lexeme "containing," find semantically relevant lexeme in the predefined predicate lexicon. Answer: 0.has
  Question: Given the lexeme "perched on," find semantically relevant lexeme in the predefined predicate lexicon. Answer: 40.sitting on
  Question: Given the lexeme "driving," find semantically relevant lexeme in the predefined predicate lexicon. Answer: 0.None
  Question: Given the lexeme "hangs on," find semantically relevant lexeme in the predefined predicate lexicon. Answer: 19.hanging from
                                                                              Actual Question
  Question: Given the lexeme Input, find semantically relevant lexeme in the predefined predicate lexicon. Answer:


SGNLS. SGNLS employs a pre-trained Faster R-CNN (Ren et al., 2015) object detector trained on
Open Images (Kuznetsova et al., 2020) to ground unlocalized triplets. More precisely, it grounds the
subject and object within the unlocalized triplet with image regions that share the same class with
the subject/object. It is important to note that the set of 601 entity classes in Open Images does not
completely cover the 150 entity classes in Visual Genome (Krishna et al., 2017). In other words,
there are entity classes in Open Images that do not exist in Visual Genome. Therefore, a knowledge
base (i.e., WordNet (Miller, 1995)) is used to align as many of Open Images’ entity classes as
possible with Visual Genome’s entity classes. The aligned entity classes of Open Images are then
used to compare with the subjects and objects in the unlocalized triplet for grounding. The predicate
within the localized subject and object serves as a pseudo label for training the SGG model.
VS3 . VS3 employs a grounding-based object detector (i.e., GLIP (Li et al., 2022a)) to ground
unlocalized triplets. Specifically, GLIP disentangles the task of object localization, which involves
identifying the object’s bounding box, and object recognition, which entails recognizing the class as-
sociated with that bounding box. Unlike the simultaneous object detection and recognition through
Region Proposal Network (RPN) in Faster R-CNN, GLIP initially detects bounding boxes. Then,
given the text features corresponding to the entity classes in the target data, it calculates the simi-
larity between these text features (Devlin et al., 2018) and the visual features (Dai et al., 2021) of
bounding boxes. The grounding of the subject and object within an unlocalized triplet is achieved by
choosing the bounding boxes with the highest similarity scores. Once subject and object grounding
is achieved, the predicate serves as a pseudo-label for training the SGG model.


                                                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.3    D ETAILS OF M ODEL T RAINING


Here, we provide a detailed explanation for model training after obtaining localized triplets, i.e.,
Gw = {si , pi , oi }Ni=1 , where si,b and oi,b are obtained from grounding methods. We follow the
                       w


original training strategy for each method, i.e., SGNLS (Zhong et al., 2021) and VS3 (Zhang et al.,
2023).
SGNLS. SGNLS uses a Transformer-based Uniter model (Chen et al., 2020) on top of a pre-trained
Faster R-CNN (Ren et al., 2015) object detector to capture contextual information of neighboring
objects. Each contextualized representation of the subject and object is input into an entity classifier
to generate entity logits. The entity classifier and Uniter model are then trained using cross-entropy
loss, with supervision provided by entity labels (i.e., si,c and oi,c ), respectively. For the predicate,
its representation is obtained by feed-forwarding the contextualized representations of the subject
and object and is fed into the predicate classifier. Then, the predicate classifier and Untier model are
trained using cross-entropy loss with supervision on predicate class pi,c .
VS3 . VS3 builds an additional predicate classifier on top of a pre-trained GLIP (Li et al., 2022a)
object detector for predicate prediction. Specifically, the concatenation of visual features and spa-
tial information of si and oi is fed into MLP to obtain the predicate representation. Based on its
representation, the predicate classifier generates the predicate’s logit. The predicate classifier and
a cross-modal fusion module within GLIP are trained with supervision provided by predicate class
pi,c using cross-entropy loss. When training entities (subject and object), the approach is similar
to the class recognition task in GLIP. Specifically, it maximizes the dot product between the text
features of entity classes (i.e., si,c and oi,c ) and their visual features of bounding boxes using binary
focal loss (Lin et al., 2017).


B     R EGARDING THE IMPACT OF GROUNDING METHOD ON LLM4SGG


In Table 2 of main paper, we observe that applying LLM4SGG to VS3 (Zhang et al., 2023) (i.e.,
VS3 +LLM4SGG) results in greater performance improvement compared to applying it to SGNLS
(Zhong et al., 2021) (i.e., SGNLS+LLM4SGG). We provide a detailed explanation regarding the
impact of the grounding method on LLM4SGG.
As mentioned in Section A.2, SGNLS includes the process of aligning the 601 entity classes from
the Faster R-CNN (Ren et al., 2015) trained on Open Images (Kuznetsova et al., 2020) with the 150
entity classes in Visual Genome (Krishna et al., 2017). We find that 34 out of 150 entity classes in
Visual Genome are not aligned in the end. In other words, the 601 entity classes in Open Images do
not cover these 34 entity classes. As a result, unlocalized triplets containing these 34 entity classes
are discarded and not used for training since the image regions do not contain the corresponding 34
classes, and they fail to be grounded. In fact, 100K among the 344K unlocalized triplets obtained
through LLM4SGG are discarded, exacerbating the low-density scene graph issue. On the other
hand, VS3 fully utilizes all 344K triplets. As mentioned in Section A.2, VS3 computes the similarity
between text features (Devlin et al., 2018) of entities (subject and object) in the unlocalized triplet
and the visual feature (Dai et al., 2021) of each image region. Then, the image region with the
highest score is grounded with that entity. This indicates that the subject and object are always
successfully grounded with the image regions having the highest score. Therefore, all 344K triplets
are being grounded and used for training, effectively alleviating the low-density scene graph issue.
Taking a further step, in Section 3.4, we use LLM4SGG to align the 601 entity classes in Open
Images with 150 entity classes in Visual Genome. However, we observe that even if an LLM is
used for alignment, 30 entity classes are still not aligned because 30 entity classes have completely
different semantic meanings with the 601 entity classes in Open Images. For example, phone and
racket do not overlap with the semantic meaning with 601 entity classes in Open Images. This
suggests that the grounding method (i.e., SGNLS) with Faster R-CNN trained on Open Images
somewhat limits the effectiveness of LLM4SGG.


                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             Frequency
                                                 Predicate
             Frequency


                                                  Predicate
      Figure 5: Predicate distribution for Visual Genome (Top) and GQA (Bottom) in test data.

C     E XPERIMENT S ETUP
C.1    DATASET

Visual Genome dataset (Krishna et al., 2017) and GQA dataset (Hudson & Manning, 2019) are
widely used in the SGG task. Visual Genome dataset is a benchmark dataset used for evaulating the
fully-supervised approach (Yoon et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2022a; Li et al., 2021b; Khandelwal &
Sigal, 2022). For test data, each image has 13.8 objects and 6.9 predicates on average.
Recently, GQA dataset has also been used for evaluating the fully-supervised approach (Li et al.,
2023b; Dong et al., 2022; He et al., 2022; Suhail et al., 2021). For test data, each image contains 9.3
objects and 4.6 predicates on average.
The predicate distributions of Visual Genome and GQA are plotted in Figure 5.

C.2    E VALUATION P ROTOCOL

In the SGDet task, a predicted triplet is considered as correct if regions corresponding to the subject
and object overlap with the ground-truth boxes with an IoU>0.5, while also having the correct sub-
ject and object labels. In the procedure of incorporating the correct triplet into R@K and mR@K
performance, we initially compute the triplet score by multiplying the subject score, predicate score,
and object score for all subject-object pair in an image, followed by sorting them. If the correct
triplet falls within the top-K of the sorted triplets, it contributes to R@K and mR@K performance.

C.3    BASELINES

For comparison LLM4SGG with baselines, we incorporate the fully-supervised approach (Zellers
et al., 2018) and weakly-supervised approach (Ye & Kovashka, 2021; Zhong et al., 2021; Li et al.,
2022b; Zhang et al., 2023) (Ye & Kovashka, 2021).

       • Motif (Zellers et al., 2018) (Fully-supervised): Based on the analysis of repeated patterns
         (i.e., motif), this method employs Bi-LSTM to capture the motifs appearing across images.
       • LSWS (Ye & Kovashka, 2021): This method utilizes a Graph Neural Network (GNN) ap-
         plied to triplets extracted from captions to capture the linguistic structure present among
         triplets, with the aim of improving grounding unlocalized triplets. Furthermore, this
         method extends its capability by iteratively estimating scores between image regions and
         text entities.
       • SGNLS (Zhong et al., 2021): To ground the unlocalized triplets over image regions, it
         leverages information from a pre-trained object detector (i.e., Faster R-CNN (Ren et al.,


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        2015)). Specifically, when the class of a text entity matches a class within a bounding box,
        the text entity is grounded on that bounding box. Once localized triplets are acquired, a
        Transformer-based Uniter model (Chen et al., 2020) is trained based on the contextualized
        representation of entities under the supervision of localized triplets.
      • Li et al. (2022b): In the process of grounding unlocalized triplets, this method not only
        leverages a pre-trained object detector (Ren et al., 2015) for object-aware information
        but also leverages a pre-trained visual-language model (Li et al., 2021a) to incorporate
        interaction-aware information.
      • VS3 (Zhang et al., 2023): This method employs a pre-trained object detector (i.e., GLIP
        (Li et al., 2022a)) to accomplish more than grounding unlocalized triplets; it also aids in
        identifying novel entities within these triplets. In contrast to earlier WSSGG works that rely
        on a Faster R-CNN object detector for grounding, this method capitalizes on the grounding
        ability of the GLIP that disentangles the tasks of class recognition and localization, leading
        to a significant enhancement of grounding effectiveness.

D     E XPERIMENT ON VG

                                                                                                3
                                                                                                3


                                                                                                                         Recall@100
             Frequency


                                                                                         Frequency 0 in Parser+KB


                                                                  Predicate
Figure 6: Performance comparison per class when adopting the reweighting method. The red-
colored predicates denote the predicates with a frequency of 0 in the conventional approach while
LLM4SGG generates all of them with a frequency greater than 0. (Bar: num. predicate instances,
Line: Recall@100)

D.1   P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON PER CLASS WITH R EWEIGHT METHOD

In Figure 6, we show the performance per class of LLM4SGG adopted to VS3 (i.e.,
VS3 +LLM4SGG) and a baseline (i.e., VS3 ). We observe that the performance of VS3 + Rwt
on 22 fine-grained predicates, which start from the rightmost end of the x-axis wears to between,
drops to nearly zero, although we attempt to enhance the performance of fine-grained predicates
with the reweighting method. This is due to the fact that the conventional approach generates unlo-
calized triplets with a limited number of predicates, and 12 of them even have a frequency of 0. This
scarcity of predicates makes it challenging to improve the performance of fine-grained predicates
even with reweighting. In contrast, LLM4SGG addresses the semantic over-simplification inher-
ent in the extraction of triplets from captions, which increases the number of fine-grained predicate
instances. As a result, when the reweighting method is employed, it effectively boosts the perfor-
mance of fine-grained predicates. It is worth noting that for some predicates whose frequency is 0
in the conventional approach (i.e., attached to, lying on, made of, mounted on), LLM4SGG shows
performance improvements, verifying the effectiveness of LLM4SGG.



                                                        Semantic Ambiguity


                            <man, on, beach>      ( Selected )                   <man, on, beach>
                         <man, walking on, beach>                             <man, walking on, beach>        ( Selected )
                       (a)                                   (b)
            Figure 7: Example of illustrating semantic ambiguity between (a) and (b).

                                                                       19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.2    E XPERIMENT FOR P REDICATE S ELECTION

Regarding the implementation details, to further alle- Table 9: Experiment for predicate selection
viate the long-tailed predicate distribution after Step
3 in our framework, we select the most fine-grained Row Selection R@50 / 100 mR@50 / 100 F@50 / 100
                                                                                       3
predicate when there are multiple predicates be-                                VS +LLM4SGG
                                                             (a) Random          8.15 / 9.55 5.10 / 6.19 6.27 / 7.51
tween the same subject-object pair, where the fine-          (b) Coarse-grained 9.79 / 11.37 2.52 / 3.03 4.01 / 4.78
grainedness is determined based on the predicate dis-        (c) Fine-grained   8.91 / 10.43 7.11 / 8.18 7.91 / 9.17
                                                                                           3
                                                                                        VS
tribution within the entire set of unlocalized triplets.
                                                             (d) Random          6.60 / 8.01 2.88 / 3.25 4.01 / 4.62
In Table 9, we further conduct experiments under three       (e) Coarse-grained  6.99 / 8.20 2.66 / 2.99 3.85 / 4.38
                                                             (f) Fine-grained    6.18 / 7.43 3.82 / 4.27 4.72 / 5.42
different scenarios to understand the effect of predicate
selection: random predicate selection, coarse-grained predicate selection, and fine-grained predicate
selection. We have the following observations: 1) LLM4SGG with the random selection (row (a))
and the selection of coarse-grained (row (b)) and fine-grained predicates (row (c)) consistently out-
perform the baseline with the selection of each case (row (d),(e),(f)), respectively, which verifies the
effectiveness of LLM4SGG. 2) LLM4SGG with a selection of coarse-grained predicates (row (b))
severely deteriorates the mR@K performance while increasing the R@K performance compared to
the random selection (row (a)). While R@K performance is improved by increasing the instances of
coarse-grained predicates, the fine-grained predicates in an image are not effectively utilized when
combined with coarse-grained predicates, resulting in a decrease in the mR@K performance. In
contrast, selecting the fine-grained predicates (row (c)) significantly increases the performance of
mR@K. 3) LLM4SGG with a selection of the fine-grained predicates (row (c)) yields higher R@K
and mR@K compared to random selection (row (a)). Regarding the improvement of R@K per-
formance, we attribute it to the effect of alleviating the semantic ambiguity (Zhang et al., 2022a).
For example, Figure 7(a) and (b) illustrate the two cases where unlocalized triplets parsed from
several captions exhibit predicates on and walking on between the same subject man and object
beach. If we randomly select the predicates, the model may learn on in one image and walking
on in another image even though they are associated with the same subject and object, making the
SGG model confused due to the similar visual features with different predicates. For this reason,
selecting walking on for both images helps mitigate semantic ambiguity, resulting in enhancing the
performance.


D.3    E XPERIMENT FOR E XPLORATION OF T RAINING S PACE

In Table 10, we show the results of zero-shot Recall@K Table 10: Performance comparison
(zR@K), as introduced by (Tang et al., 2020), to explore for exploration of training space.
the training space of triplets extracted from captions. It is
important to note that the zR@K metric used in the fully-               Method           zR@50 zR@100
supervised approach evaluates how well the model predicts       Motif (Fully-supervised)  0.31   0.60
⟨subject, predicate, object⟩ triplet sets that have never been  VS 3
                                                                                          1.16   1.46
observed in the training data of Visual Genome dataset (Kr-     VS3 +LLM4SGG              2.20   3.02
ishna et al., 2017). Therefore, while triplets extracted from
the captions in COCO dataset may accidentally overlap with these zero-shot triplets, we employ this
metric to understand how much our proposed approach broadens the training space. When we com-
pare VS3 , which learns from triplets extracted from captions through the conventional approach, to
Motif, a fully-supervised approach trained on Visual Genome dataset, we observe that VS3 achieves
a higher zR@K, implying that captions contain a broader range of diverse compositional relation-
ships compared to the Visual Genome dataset. On the other hand, VS3 with LLM4SGG (i.e.,
VS3 +LLM4SGG) significantly improves the zR@K performance compared to VS3 . This suggests
that triplets generated through LLM4SGG are proficient at capturing the compositional relation-
ships found in captions, thereby expanding the training space of triplets. This expansion is achieved
by addressing the semantic over-simplification issue, leading to the creation of a more varied set of
predicates, and the low-density scene graph, resulting in a wider range of compositional triplets. We
argue that the use of the zR@K metric demonstrates the effectiveness of LLM4SGG in terms of
expanding the training space.


D.4    E XPERIMENT FOR N EW P ROMPT D ESIGN


                                                        20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                                                                   Table 11: Experiment for new prompt.
In Table 11, we conduct an experiment with a
new prompt design. In fact, the prompt for ex-                                                                       Method                   R@50 / 100 mR@50 /100 F@50 / 100
tracting triplets from captions in Section 3.3 and                                                        VS3                                  6.60 / 8.01              2.88 / 3.25                4.01 / 4.62
the alignment of entity/predicate classes with                                                            VS3 +LLM4SGGcomb 8.66 / 10.20                                 6.28 / 7.06                7.28 / 8.34
                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                          VS +LLM4SGG                         8.91 / 10.43              7.11 / 8.18                7.91 / 9.17
target data in Section 3.4 can be combined into
one. More precisely, we instruct the LLM to follow the four steps for triplet extraction from para-
phrased caption: Step 1) Paraphrase the caption, Step 2) Extract meaningful triplets from the para-
phrased caption obtained in Step 1, Step 3) Find semantically relevant lexeme in the predefined
entity lexicon for the subject and object from the triplets obtained in Step 2, where the entity lex-
icon is enumerated in Table 7. Step 4) Find semantically relevant lexeme in the predefined pred-
icate lexicon for the predicate from the triplets obtained in Step 3, where the predicate lexicon
is enumerated in Table 8. Following the four steps, we include stepwise results in the in-context
examples for in-context few-shot learning, and insert the caption from which we want to extract
triplets in the actual question. As shown in Table 11, LLM4SGG with the combined prompt (i.e.,
VS3 +LLM4SGGcomb ) outperforms the baseline, implying that even though prompt design can be
diverse, it consistently verifies the efficacy of the LLM-based triplet formation process. On the other
hand, VS3 +LLM4SGGcomb shows inferior performance compared to VS3 +LLM4SGG. This is due
to a practical reason incurred by the length limit in the prompt of GPT-3.5, which allows only up to
4096 tokens. Specifically, VS3 +LLM4SGGcomb integrates the instructions of all four steps in the
task description, including the definition of entity/predicate lexicons, and in-context examples fol-
lowing four steps within a single prompt, which leads to a longer length while the maximum length
is constrained. For this reason, we could only accommodate four in-context examples. In contrast,
VS3 +LLM4SGG divides the four steps into two chains (Section 3.3 and Section 3.4), allowing more
in-context examples in each chain. Specifically, VS3 +LLM4SGG contains six in-context examples
in Chain-1 (i.e., LLM4SGG         triplet         extraction) and fourteen in-context
                                           growing on
                                                                                                    LLM4SGG
                                                                                                           on back of
                                                                                                                            examples in Chain-2 (i.e.,                      LLM4SGG
                                                                                                                                                                                         alignment of
                                                                                                                                                                                     belonging to
                                banana                tree                                         man                     bike                                            glass                     person
entity/predicate classes). The increased number of in-context examples equips an LLM to                                                                                                                    adapt
                                                        →


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               →
                                                   ( growing in )                                                                                                                                                         ( belongs to )
                                       →


                                                                                                                                                         →


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   →
                                   ( bananas )                                                                                                       ( bicycle )                                                                                ( someone )

more effectivelyParser+KB          to the provided few-shot task (Wei                               Parser+KBet    al.,     2022b),          ultimately               enhancing
                                                                                                                                                                            Parser+KB             its    adapt-
ability for the task           banana of triplet
                                               in
                                                      treeextraction task and alignment                                    ofa triplet
                                                                                                        ( Failure of extracting entity/predicate
                                                                                                                                       )                            classes.     ( FailureIn
                                                                                                                                         A woman is pouring wine into someone’s glass
                                                                                                                                                                                                 summary,
                                                                                                                                                                                           of finding a predicate )

under the practical length limit of
  A sandy beach has bananas growing in a tree                      GPT-3.5,
                                                               A man                       we onobserve
                                                                     selling fruits and vegetables   back of bicycle that an approach that divides the original                                Paraphrase!
                                                                                                                                         A woman is pouring wine into a glass that belongs to someone
four steps into                 twoonchains is more effective(b)in
                        (a) growing                                                                extracting
                                                                                              on back   of                  triplets aligned with                         entity/predicate
                                                                                                                                                               (c) belonging        to                              of
interest than an approach that combines them into a single prompt.

D.5           C ASE S TUDIES ON E XTRACTING F INE - GRAINED P REDICATES

                                        LLM4SGG                                                                                  LLM4SGG                                                                         LLM4SGG
                                                    on back of                                                                            attached to                                                                        belonging to
                                        man                          bike                                                       phone                              laptop                                        glass                               person
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    →
                                                                                                                                                →


                                                                                                                                          ( connected to )                                                                     ( belongs to )
                                                                        →


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        →
                                                                    ( bicycle )                                                                                                                                                                     ( someone )

                                         Parser+KB                                                                                Parser+KB                                                                      Parser+KB
                                                                                                                                                to
                                                 ( Failure of capturing of on back of )                                         phone                              laptop                                                ( Failure of finding a predicate )
                                                                                                                                                                            A woman is pouring wine into someone’s glass
  A man selling fruits and vegetables on back of bicycle                                  A smart phone connected to a laptop sitting on a table                                                   Paraphrase!
                                                                                                                                                                            A woman is pouring wine into a glass that belongs to someone
                           (a) on back of                                                                         (b) attached to                                                                  (c) belonging to

Figure 8: Case studies on extracting fine-grained predicates with a frequency of 0 in the conven-
tional approach (i.e., Parser+KB). (a): LLM4SGG extracts the fine-grained predicate found in the
caption. (b): LLM4SGG extracts the fine-grained predicate while aligning it with a predicate in the
target data. (c): In LLM4SGG, paraphrasing the caption via LLM aids in identifying a fine-grained
predicate, imparting a more specific meaning to it.

In Figure 8, we present case studies on predicates in which the conventional approach (i.e.,
Parser+KB) eventually ends up in a frequency of 0, while LLM4SGG does not. In Figure 8(a),
despite the presence of the fine-grained predicate on back of in the caption, the conventional ap-
proach fails to extract it since the conventional approach relies on a heuristic rule-based parser (Wu
et al., 2019) that lacks the capability of understanding the context of caption and extracting the
predicate on back of at once. On the other hand, LLM4SGG successfully extracts the predicate
on back of through a comprehensive understanding of the caption’s context. In Figure 8(b), we
observe that the conventional approach, which suffers from semantic over-simplification, extracts
the coarse-grained predicate to instead of connected to, whereas LLM4SGG extracts the fined-
grained predicate connected to within the caption. Subsequently, by aligning connected to with
semantically relevant lexeme, attached to, in the target data through LLM’s semantic reasoning
ability, it eventually generates a fine-grained predicate attached to. This demonstrates the effec-


                                                                                                                        21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


tiveness of LLM-based triplet extraction in addition to LLM-based alignment, leading to capturing
the fine-grained predicates. Interestingly, in Figure 8(c), we observe that the paraphrasing step (Sec-
tion 3.3) in LLM4SGG aids in extracting fine-grained predicates. Specifically, paraphrasing the
caption conveys a more specific meaning, i.e., from someone’s glass to glass that belongs to some-
one, thus enabling the extraction of the fine-grained predicate belonging to, which the conventional
approach cannot achieve. Through these case studies, we demonstrate the effectiveness of extracting
the fine-grained predicates in LLM4SGG.

                                       3                                                        3                                                    3
                                     VS +LLM4SGG                                             VS +LLM4SGG                                           VS +LLM4SGG
                                           parked on                                                 mounted on                                           lying on
                                     bus               street                                clock                building                          cat              roof


                                           VS 3                                                      VS 3                                                 VS 3
                                                  on                                                        on                                               on
                                     bus               street                                clock                building                          cat              roof
      GT: bus - parked on - street                              GT: clock - mounted on - building                            GT: cat - on - roof
      (a) Predicate of Rare Frequency (parked on)                     (b) Predicate of Frequency 0 (mounted on)              (c) Predicate of Frequency 0 (lying on)



Figure 9: Qualitative results on Visual Genome dataset. (a) A predicate parked on rarely appears
in the conventional approach. (b), (c) Predicates mounted on and lying on never appear in the
conventional approach.


D.6        Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS

To further verify the effectiveness of LLM4SGG on Visual Genome dataset (Krishna et al., 2017),
in Figure 9 , we showcase qualitative results from the test data, comparing the baseline (i.e., VS3
(Zhang et al., 2023)) with LLM4SGG applied to VS3 (i.e., VS3 +LLM4SGG) . In Figure 9(a), we
observe that LLM4SGG accurately predicts a fine-grained predicate parked on between subject
bus and object street, which rarely appears in the training data using the conventional approach.
In contrast, the baseline (i.e., VS3 ) following the conventional approach predicts a coarse-grained
predicate on due to the semantic over-simplification, incurring the long-tailed predicate distribution.
Furthermore, in Figure 9(b), we observe that LLM4SGG makes a correct prediction on the predicate
whose frequency is 0 in the conventional approach (i.e., mounted on). On the other hand, the
baseline predicts a coarse-grained predicate on and never predicts mounted on since it has not
been observed during training. Interestingly, while in Figure 9(c) LLM4SGG made an incorrect
prediction by predicting lying on instead of on, we argue that lying on is a more realistic answer
that provides a richer context. However, as lying on is never observed while training the baseline
(i.e., VS3 ), it can never be predicted. Through the qualitative analysis, we again demonstrate the
effectiveness of alleviating the long-tailed problem in WSSGG.

E       E XPERIMENT ON GQA
E.1        T RAINING AND E VALUATION

Training. To train a SGG model for evaluation on the GQA dataset (Hudson & Manning, 2019),
LLM4SGG requires three modifications, encompassing the change of 1) predefined entity, 2) pred-
icate lexicon, and 3) in-context examples in Section 3.4, while maintaining the triplet extraction
process in Section 3.3. More precisely, in the predefined entity and predicate lexicons, we replace
the entity and predicate classes originally associated with Visual Genome dataset (Krishna et al.,
2017) with entity and predicate classes in the GQA dataset, respectively. For in-context examples,
we substitute the examples that are initially relevant to Visaul Genome dataset with examples re-
lated to GQA dataset. After obtaining unlocalized triplets composed of entity/predicate classes in
the GQA dataset, the process of grounding them remains unchanged from the grounding method
used in Visual Genome dataset. Please refer to the details of the grounding process in Section A.2.
Evaluation. To evaluate a trained model on the GQA dataset, only a single modification is needed
in the architecture of VS3 (Zhang et al., 2023). Specifically, we change the output entity class of
bounding boxes from the entity classes of the Visual Genome dataset to those of the GQA dataset.
For details of VS3 regarding the determination of entity classes for bounding boxes, the target data’s
entity classes are listed in text format, e.g., airplane. animal. arm. ... . Then, a text encoder (Devlin
et al., 2018) encodes the enumerated text list to obtain the text features for each entity. The similarity


                                                                                          22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                      3


           Recall@100
                                                                                      3


                                                                                      3
                  Recall@100
                                                                                      3


                                                Predicate
Figure 10: Performance comparison per class on GQA dataset. The red-colored predicates indicate
      Frequency


that the frequency of predicate instances generated by the conventional approach is 0, while there
are no predicates with a frequency of 0 in LLM4SGG.

                                                 Predicate
          Frequency


                                                Predicate


                                                 Predicate
Figure 11: Predicate distribution on GQA dataset. The red-colored predicates indicate that the
frequency of predicate instances generated by the conventional approach is 0, while there are no
predicates with a frequency of 0 in LLM4SGG.



between these text features of entity classes and visual features (Dai et al., 2021) of the bounding
boxes is computed. In perspective of the bounding box, the text entity with the highest similarity
is chosen as the class assigned to the bounding box. In the procedure of determining the entity
classes for bounding boxes, we simply list the entity classes from the GQA dataset instead of Visual
Genome’s entity classes. This ensures that entity classes assigned to the bounding boxes align with
the entity classes in the GQA dataset. Subsequently, we proceed with a standard evaluation protocol
used in Visual Genome dataset.


E.2          P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON PER CLASS

In Figure 10, we show a performance comparison per class on the GQA dataset (Hudson & Man-
ning, 2019). For baseline (i.e., VS3 (Zhang et al., 2023)), we observe that the performance for
most predicates, except for coarse-grained predicates, is nearly zero. It is attributed to the semantic
over-simplification inherent in the conventional approach, leading to a long-tailed predicate class
distribution as shown in Figure 11. The long-tailed problem is severely exacerbated in the GQA
dataset (Hudson & Manning, 2019) due to its inclusion of more complicated predicates (e.g., stand-
ing next to), as well as a greater variety of fine-grained predicates, such as talking on and driving
down, which are challenging to extract from captions using heuristic rule-based parser (Wu et al.,
2019). In fact, 44 out of 100 predicates have a frequency of 0, meaning that they are never predicted.
On the other hand, as shown in Figure 11, LLM4SGG effectively addresses the long-tailed problem
by alleviating the semantic over-simplification and low-density scene graph issues, increasing the
instances that belong to the fine-grained predicates instances so that there are no predicates with
a frequency of 0. As a result, LLM4SGG significantly enhances the performance of fine-grained
predicates, thereby improving the performance of mR@K. This demonstrates the effectiveness of
LLM4SGG with the more challenging GQA dataset.


                                                  23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                     3                                                                 3                                                        3
                                   VS +LLM4SGG                                                       VS +LLM4SGG                                            VS +LLM4SGG
                                            grazing in                                                         skiing on                                            standing in front of
                                   sheep                 field                                       person                mountain                         woman                          door


                                           VS 3                                                               VS 3                                                  VS 3
                                                  in                                                                 in                                                       in
                                   sheep                 field                                       person                mountain                         woman                          door
  GT: sheep - grazing in - field                                 GT: person - skiing on - mountain                              GT: woman - standing in front of - door

       (a) Predicate of Frequency 0 (grazing in)                         (b) Predicate of Frequency 0 (skiing on)                     (c) Predicate of Frequency 0 (standing in front of)

Figure 12: Qualitative results on GQA dataset. (a), (b), (c): predicates grazing in, skiing on, and
standing in front of never appear while training the baseline VS3 .


E.3       Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS

To further demonstrate the effectiveness of LLM4SGG on a more challenging dataset, GQA (Hud-
son & Manning, 2019), we present qualitative results comparing the baseline (i.e., VS3 ) with
LLM4SGG applied to VS3 (i.e., VS3 +LLM4SGG) in Figure 12. For Figure 12(a), (b), and (c),
we showcase examples from the test data, where predicates have a frequency of 0 in the training
data when triplets are generated using the conventional approach, i.e., grazing in, skiing on, and
standing in front of. In Figure 12(a) and (b), we observe that the baseline predicts the coarse-
grained predicate in, which is the second most frequent predicate, as shown in Figure 11. The
prediction of coarse-grained predicate is attributed to the semantic over-simplification issue of the
conventional approach, leading to a long-tailed problem. On the other hand, LLM4SGG correctly
predicts the fine-grained predicates grazing in and skiing on by effectively alleviating the seman-
tic over-simplification issue. In Figure 12(c), we encounter a complicated predicate, standing in
front of, between the subject woman and object door. Such predicates are intricate to extract from
captions unless they are comprehensively understood and extracted at once. LLM4SGG, however,
adeptly extracts the fine-grained predicate standing in front of by understanding the entire context
of the caption via LLM. LLM4SGG makes it possible to learn the predicate standing in front of,
resulting in a correct prediction. These qualitative results on the more challenging GQA dataset
further verify the effectiveness of LLM4SGG.


                                                                                            24
