Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A DAPTIVE C OMPRESSION OF THE L ATENT S PACE IN
VARIATIONAL AUTOENCODERS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

            Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) are powerful generative models that have been
            widely used in various fields, including image and text generation. However, one
            of the known challenges in using VAEs is the model’s sensitivity to its hyperpa-
            rameters, such as the latent space size. This paper presents a simple extension
            of VAEs for automatically determining the optimal latent space size during the
            training process by gradually decreasing the latent size through neuron removal
            and observing the model performance. The proposed method is compared to tra-
            ditional hyperparameter grid search and is shown to be significantly faster while
            still achieving the best optimal dimensionality on four image datasets. Further-
            more, we show that the final performance of our method is comparable to training
            on the optimal latent size from scratch, and might thus serve as a convenient sub-
            stitute.



1       I NTRODUCTION

Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling, 2014) are generative models that learn a
probabilistic mapping between the data and the latent space, which allows for the generation of
new, unseen data samples that are similar to the training data. Although VAEs have proven to be
highly effective in this task, they are known for their sensitivity toward individual hyperparameters
(Hu & Greene, 2018) and particularly the size (dimensionality) of the latent space. The selection
of optimal latent dimensionality in VAEs is a crucial step in achieving the desired trade-off between
reconstruction quality and clustering capability. Several works have studied and tried to mitigate this
problem (Higgins et al., 2016), (Kim & Mnih, 2018) (Shao et al., 2020), however, in most current
models, the optimal latent dimensionality is still chosen based on the specific task and data at hand.
Traditionally, determining the optimal latent space size has been done through a process of trial
and error or by manually tuning the hyperparameters through grid search and observing the model’s
performance. However, this process can be time-consuming (as there are several hyperparameters to
tune in parallel) and unreliable, making VAEs less practical for real-world applications (Way et al.,
2020),(Ahmed & Longo, 2022).
In this paper, we propose ALD-VAE (Adaptive Latent Dimensionality) - a novel, automated ap-
proach for determining the optimal latent space size in VAEs. Our approach involves gradually
decreasing the latent space size by removing neurons during the training process and observing the
reconstruction loss, Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) and cluster quality of the latent samples using
the Silhouette score.
We show that the ALD-VAE approximates the optimal number of dimensions and thus avoids the
need for manual tuning, plus reaches the same accuracy as if it was trained on the optimal latent di-
mensionality from scratch. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on four image datasets
ranging from toy-level (SPRITES, MNIST) to real-world noisy data (EuroSAT). With our proposed
method, VAEs can be made more practical for real-world applications and the need for manual tun-
ing can be eliminated. The corresponding code and more detailed results can be found in the GitHub
repository 1 .

    1
        GitHub URL (anonymized)


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Overview of our training procedure with shrinking latent space size. After each epoch, we
encode a batch of 500 random samples from the validation dataset and run K-means clustering. We
then calculate the Silhouette score based on the detected clusters. The Decision rule observes the
approximate slope of the Silhouette score, FID and the reconstruction loss over epochs. We prune
1-5 neurons after each 5 epochs from the encoder’s µ and σ layers and the decoder’s first layer until
the slopes meet our criteria (see Section 3.3.1), then the latent space size remains fixed.


2   R ELATED WORK

Hyperparameter tuning in VAEs has become a common subject of research in recent years as it
is usually a necessary step for obtaining optimal results on the chosen dataset (Locatello et al.,
2019), but the tuning process can also influence the results of comparison between various VAE
architectures (Hu & Greene, 2018).
Several studies provided a comparison of VAE performance under various latent space dimension-
alities explored through grid search. For example, Ahmed & Longo (2022) examine the optimal
latent space size for electroencephalographic (EEG) signals by comparing 25 different latent sizes,
Way et al. (2020) compare different latent space dimensionalities for gene expression data. Consid-
ering the high computational costs of training multiple models with different hyperparameters for
comparison, other works focused on hyperparameter tuning on the fly during a single training.
Mondal et al. (2020) propose a method to automatically estimate the optimal latent dimensionality
in adversarial auto-encoders by introducing an additional trainable mask layer that learns to hide
the least informative dimensions. However, this method requires adopting a separate optimizer for
the mask layer and relies on a discriminator network which is not present in VAEs. A different
approach is the two-stage VAE (Dai & Wipf, 2019b), where first a model with larger than optimal
latent dimensionality is trained and then another VAE is finetuned during the second stage to learn
the correct probability measure. Although close to our work, this approach does not focus on the
clustering capability in VAEs.
In this paper, we focus on an adaptive decrease of the latent space size in VAEs during a single
training which would be applicable to any VAE or its adaptation without requiring extra computa-
tional costs. We gradually find the optimal dimensionality based on the observation of the model’s
reconstructing and clustering capabilities in order to maximize the VAE’s performance.



3   A DAPTIVELY COMPRESSING LATENT SPACE

In this section, we first formulate the problem of latent space compression and the task we are
focusing on. Next, we describe the general VAE architecture. Finally, we define our proposed
ALD-VAE training algorithm for automatic estimation of the optimal latent dimensionality.


                                                 2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.1   P ROBLEM FORMULATION

Let D be a dataset consisting of datapoints x lying in an n-dimensional manifold X embedded in
Rd . Variational autoencoders (Kingma & Welling, 2014) then establish a probabilistic relationship
between X and a learned low-dimensional latent space Z. It is our goal to find the optimal latent
dimensionality nz within Z that matches the intrinsic dimensionality n of the data. In real-world
datasets, the intrinsic dimensionality n has been shown to be much smaller than the dimensionality
of Rd , i.e. n << d (Narayanan & Mitter, 2010), and using nz >> n might thus lead to redundant
dimensions and noisy outputs. One of the metrics that can show the qualitative performance of the
model is Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) (Heusel et al., 2017) and, as demonstrated by Dai & Wipf
(2019a), too low as well as too high nz is non-optimal (see the typical u-shape of FID for different
latent dimensionality e.g., in Fig.2).
One way to find the optimal nz would be thus by finding the minimum of FID. However, in many
cases, it is also desirable to cluster the data in the latent space based on the mutual similarity between
the data, e.g., for image datasets with multipleP    classes. Quality of the clusters in the latent space can
                                                       x
be evaluated using Silhouette score S = x1 ∗ i=1 s(i) calculated over x samples encoded by the
encoder network. For each sample i, si can be computed as:
                                                      bi − ai
                                              si =                                                        (1)
                                                     max(bi , ai )

where bi is the inter-cluster distance defined as the average distance to the closest cluster C of
datapoint i (except for the one it is part of):
                                                     1 X
                                        bi = min              d(i, j)
                                               k̸=i |Ck |
                                                          j∈C   k


and ai is the intra-cluster distance defined as the average distance to all other points within the same
cluster C:
                                                  1           X
                                       ai =                            d(i, j)
                                              |Ci | − 1
                                                          j∈Ci ,i̸=j


As shown in Fig. 2, the Silhouette score also changes with nz , but can be optimal in different
dimensionality than FID.
Our objective is thus to find such latent dimensionality nz , that minimizes the FID score and recon-
struction loss Lr (which is a part of the VAE objective loss function, see Sec. 3.2), while maximizing
the Silhouette score S:
                       nz = arg min F ID(nz ) ∧ arg min Lr (nz ) ∧ arg max S(nz ),                        (2)
                              nz ∈Z                   nz ∈Z                      nz ∈Z



3.2   VAE OBJECTIVE

As proposed by Kingma & Welling (2014), VAEs are trained end-to-end in an unsupervised manner:
first, the encoder maps the input data into a distribution over the latent space, typically by using
multiple layers of neural networks. Second, samples are drawn from the distribution and the decoder
maps them back to the original data space. The objective of the VAE is to maximize the evidence
lower bound (ELBO), which is equivalent to maximizing the likelihood of the data and regularizing
the approximate posterior to be close to the prior. The ELBO loss term is denoted as follows:
                             LELBO = Eq(z|x) log p(x|z) − KL(q(z|x)||p(z))                                (3)

where Eq(z|x) log p(x|z) is the expected log-likelihood of the data under the approximated poste-
rior distribution, KL(q(z|x)||p(z)) is the Kullback-Leibler divergence between the approximated
posterior distribution and the prior distribution over the latent variables.
The size of the latent space is equal to the dimensionality of the multivariate distribution learned by
the encoder. The parameters of the distribution (a vector of means, µ, and a vector of variances, σ)
are usually provided by the two fully connected output layers of the encoder network, each of them
having the dimensionality nz . Since the output size of the layer is conventionally decided at model
initialization, the latent space remains fixed during training.


                                                          3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: The values of the four observed metrics (FID for reconstructions, FID for generations,
Silhouette score and Reconstruction loss) during training when the latent space is gradually reduced
until Dim=2. The upper axis shows the dimensionality at the given epoch, the vertical red line shows
when would our ALD algorithm stop the compression. We show the results for four datasets.
3.3     P ROPOSED A LGORITHM

We strive to minimize the latent space dimensionality nz during the VAE training procedure to a
value that is optimal in terms of the model’s reconstruction accuracy and latent space regulariza-
tion/clustering capability, i.e. the Silhouette score (see Eq. 2). In this section, we first describe the
process of downsizing nz during training without the need of retraining from scratch, then we sum-
marize the stopping mechanisms used to determine whether the adapted dimensionality is an optimal
solution or not. For a high-level overview of the whole procedure, see Figure 1 or the pseudocode
in Algorithm 1.

3.3.1     L ATENT DIMENSIONALITY REDUCTION
As mentioned in Section 3.2, the latent space size nz is given by the output feature size of the two
fully-connected layers µ (learning the means of the multivariate distribution) and σ (learning the
variances) which process the encoder’s output.
The latent dimensionality reduction works as follows (see also Algorithm 1):

        1. Start by choosing a random, high-enough initial dimensionality nz .
        2. Train the VAE model for p epochs.
        3. Check the stopping criterion (see Eq. 4). If stopping criterion is not met, proceed to 4.,
           otherwise fix the current nz and continue training.
        4. Remove n neurons from each of the two last encoder layers of the VAE model and proceed
           to 2.

In each reduction process (step 4), we replace the last two fully-connected layers of the trained VAE
encoder with new ones, which have the original output feature dimension reduced by n. We then
copy the learned weights and biases from the old layer into the newly initialized layer and omit the
n values which are now redundant. We choose the weights and biases randomly, although a possible
additional metric might be used for selection such as the dimension-specific KL divergence. As the
latent vectors z have a reduced dimensionality after downsizing the encoder layers, we perform the
same operation on the first decoder network layer.


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We perform the latent space compression reactively during the training. In the beginning, we remove
n = 5 neurons (corresponds to the parameter latent decrease in Alg. 1) after each p = 5 epochs
(corresponds to the parameter patience p in Alg. 1), until the slope of the Silhouette score over the
last 10 epochs becomes positive (see Eq. 5 for the slope calculation). Afterwards, we slow down the
pruning by reducing n to 1 and prune only 1 neuron after each p = 5 epochs, so that we can slowly
approach the optimal value. This is done iteratively until the stopping mechanism decides that the
current dimensionality is optimal and nz remains fixed. Please note that although we choose the
initial n and p empirically, we also evaluated the algorithm with different initial values and the final
optimal dimensionality nz was similar, showing the robustness of the compression mechanism.

3.3.2   S TOPPING MECHANISM
As demonstrated in Fig. 2, the Silhouette score, as well as FID and the reconstruction loss react to the
latent space size throughout the training. We seek such latent space dimensionality nz , under which
we get the maximal Silhouette score (S) and minimal reconstruction loss (−Eq(z|x) log p(x|z)) as
well as FID (F ID). Since the Silhouette score has an optimum in different nz than reconstruction
loss and FID, an optimal balance between them has to be found.

Algorithm 1 Adaptively compressing latent space
 1: Input: data xtrain , xval , number of data classes k classes
 2: Parameters: init latent dims nz , latent decrease, patience p, floating window w
 3: s scores, recon losses, fid g, fid r ← empty list
 4: compressing ← 1
 5: for epoch in num epochs do
 6:    train loop(xtrain )
 7:    val loop(xval )
 8:    labels = KMeans.fit(z samples, k=k classes)
 9:    s score = silhouette score(z samples, labels=labels)
10:    recon loss = calculate nll(model, data=xval )
11:    F ID g, F ID r = calculate fid(model, data=xval )
12:    append s score to s scores
13:    append recon loss to recon losses
14:    append F ID g to fid g, F ID r to fid r
15:    if epoch mod p = 0 then
16:       e1 = polyfit slope(recon losses[-w:], deg=1)
17:       e2 = polyfit slope(s scores[-w:], deg=1)
18:       e3 = polyfit slope(fid r[-w:], deg=1)
19:       e4 = polyfit slope(fid g[-w:], deg=1)
20:       if e1 > 0 and e2 > 0 and e3 > 0 and e4 > 0 then
21:          // stop with optimal latent dimensionality n z
22:          compressing ← 0
23:       else if e2 >0 and latent decrease ¿ 1 then
24:          latent decrease ← 1
25:       end if
26:    end if
27:    if compressing = 1 then
28:       nz = nz - latent decrease
29:       model.update latent dim(new dim=nz )
30:    end if
31: end for

As stated in the previous subsection, we apply the decision mechanism for possible neuron pruning
after each p = 5 training epochs. At each evaluation epoch e, we calculate the slope of the Silhouette
score and reconstruction losses using a sliding window of 20 epochs. For each window, we calculate
the first-degree polynomial using the least squares polynomial fit to obtain the slope of the curve.
We use the slopes of the Silhouette score, reconstruction loss, FID for reconstructed images and FID
for generated images to determine the stopping epoch e after which we no longer reduce the latent
dimensionality. The stopping epoch es is thus defined as follows:
             es = min{e|(S ′ (e) > 0) ∧ (R′ (e) > 0) ∧ (F IDr′ (e) > 0) ∧ (F IDg′ (e) > 0)}          (4)


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where (S ′ , R′ , F IDr′ , F IDg′ ) are the first-degree polynomial scores p′ (for the given metric curve)
obtained through minimization of the squared error E:
                                   E = kj=0 |p(xj ) − yj |2
                                        P
                                                                                                       (5)
                                   p′ = arg minp kj=0 |p(xj ) − yj |2
                                                P

where k is the size of the sliding window (we choose k=20), x is the x-coordinate of each sample
point, y is the y-value of the given sample point for the given metric (Silhouette score, Reconstruc-
tion loss, and FID for reconstructed or generated images). In other words, we seek the first epoch for
which the slopes of the observed metrics calculated over the last k=20 epochs are all positive. This
means that FID and Reconstruction loss have already reached the optimal peak value and are starting
to increase (i.e., deteriorate), while the Silhouette score is improving. For a different overview of
our method, see Algorithm 1.
In the following section, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed ALD-VAE on four
standard vision datasets. We show that our adaptive algorithm can save a significant amount of
computational time as it achieves similar results as if we would use extensive grid search to find the
optimal latent space dimensionality.

4     E XPERIMENTS

To show the robustness and efficiency of our ALD-VAE approach, we compare its performance to
grid search for 4 image datasets of different complexity (SPRITES, MNIST, FashionMNIST, Eu-
roSAT, see Section 4.1) with known labels that enable evaluation of the clustering capability. For
each dataset, we evaluate the model’s performance on generative and reconstructive FID, Recon-
struction loss and Silhouette score. We train the following models:

      1. A new VAE model for different (fixed) latent dimensionalities (grid search).
      2. The proposed ALD-VAE model with gradually compressing latent space.

We train all experiments on 5 different seeds with the same VAE architecture. The number of epochs
as well as the used encoder and decoder networks are mentioned for each dataset. All encoder
networks also include the two additional fully-connected layers to produce the µ and σ vectors.

4.1   DATASETS DESCRIPTION AND VAE MODELS SPECIFICATION

The SPRITES dataset (Li & Mandt, 2018) contains colour images of animated characters (sprites).
Each input is a sequence of 8 images showing random game characters performing one of 9 actions.
For the encoder and decoder networks, we used a 3D convolutional layer adapted from VideoGPT
(Yan et al., 2021). We train all models for 300 epochs, the fixed models with latent sizes 12, 16, 24
and 32 and ALD-VAE with initial latent sizes nz = 100, 80, 64.
MNIST (Deng, 2012) is a widely used dataset comprising grayscale images with written digits. For
the encoder and decoder networks, we use 2 fully-connected layers with 400 hidden dimensions. We
train for 200 epochs with latent sizes 4, 8, 12, 16, 24 and 32 for the fixed dimensionality baseline
scenarios and initial latent sizes nz = 100, 80, 64 for our adaptive ALD-VAE scenario.
FashionMNIST (Xiao et al., 2017) contains 28x28 grayscale images of fashion articles from 10
different categories. For this dataset, we use the same encoder and decoder networks as for the
MNIST dataset, i.e. 2 fully-connected layers with 400 hidden dimensions. We trained the models
for 200 epochs and we compared the latent sizes 8, 16, 24, 32 and 64 in the fixed dimensionality
experiments and the initial latent sizes nz = 100, 80, 64 for ALD-VAE.
EuroSAT (Helber et al., 2019) contains 64x64 RGB satellite images showing pieces of land from 10
categories (e.g. forest, river, industrial etc.). For the encoder and decoder networks, we use 4x 2D
convolutional layers with 256 hidden dimensions and SiLU activation functions. Compared to the
other datasets, EuroSAT has a higher level of detail and variability in the images and is thus more
difficult to reconstruct and even cluster. We trained the models again for 200 epochs and compared
the latent sizes 16, 24, 32 and 64 in the fixed dimensionality experiments. The initial latent sizes for
ALD-VAE were nz = 100, 80, 64.


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Comparison of the four metrics when using a fixed latent dimensionality for the whole
training (blue curves) or our ALD-VAE latent space compression that converged to the same final
dimensionality (orange curves). We show FID for reconstructed and generated images (lower is
better), Silhouette score (higher is better) and Reconstruction loss (lower is better). Shown on four
different datasets.


5     R ESULTS

In this section, we show a comparison of the proposed ALD-VAE adaptive approach to the standard
grid search approach on four standard vision datasets. We also show the effect of various initializa-
tion conditions and seeds.



5.1   C OMPARISON WITH RANDOM SEARCH

First, we show in Fig. 2 the quality of the latent space dimensionality nz as detected online by
the proposed ALD-VAE algorithm. To show the quality of the online detection, we calculated the
corresponding scores (Silhouette score, FID, reconstruction losses) for the model as if it would
decrease nz until nz = 2, ignoring the stopping criterion, and visualise the point, where the ALD-
VAE actually decided to stop the reduction of the latent space dimensionality. As can be seen in
Fig.2, the ALD-VAE finds a balance between the four observed metrics. As expected, the algorithm
stops for all the datasets at the minimum (or directly after) of FID and Reconstruction loss, right
after Silhouette score started increasing.
Next, we compared the ALD-VAE algorithm with another model trained with a fixed dimensional-
ity that is the same as the final optimal nz found by ALD-VAE. The results for the four datasets are
shown in Fig. 3. On average, it took 50 epochs until the model converged to the optimal dimen-
sionality with the exception of FashionMNIST, which took 100 epochs to converge. As seen in the
plots, the training curves either converge to very similar values (e.g. for the EuroSAT dataset), or
there is a trade-off between some of the metrics - e.g., better Silhouette score for ALD-VAE in Fash-
ionMNIST, but worse final reconstruction loss. However, the differences are in all cases marginal
and the overall outcome is almost identical when training with ALD-VAE compared to the optimal
dimensionality fixed from the beginning. There is thus no drawback to using the significantly faster
ALD-VAE compared to hyperparameter grid search over multiple dimensionalities.

                                                 7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: Training our ALD-VAE with different initial conditions. ALD1 was trained with initial
latent dimensionality nz = 100, ALD2 was trained with initial nz = 80 and ALD3 was trained
with initial nz =64. We show the results for the MNIST (left) and FashionMNIST (right) datasets.
The Dim values in brackets for each ALD-VAE show the final converged nz .
5.2   VARIOUS INITIALIZATION CONDITIONS AND SEEDS

To see how robust our ALD-VAE is, we trained several models with various initialization conditions
and various seeds. First, to see how the initial nz influences the final optimal dimensionality, we
trained three models for each dataset. The first model had the initial nz = 100, the second model
had the initial nz = 80 and the third model had the initial nz =64. In Fig. 4, you can see results for
MNIST and FashionMNIST. Both figures show the final optimal nz for each model. As you can see,
the optimal dimensionalities only differ by 1-2 dimensions and the four observed metrics have very
similar values. The results were similar also for the EuroSAT and SPRITES datasets. Note that we
did not have to increase the number of training epochs for larger nz as the adaptive neuron pruning
can speed up the initial latent compression based on the decreasing Silhouette score (see Section
3.3.1 for the mechanism description).
We also trained ALD-VAE on 5 different seeds for each dataset. While the resulting nz was rela-
tively consistent for MNIST and FashionMNIST (standard deviation sd=3 dimensions for MNIST
and sd=2 dimensions for FashionMNIST), there were more significant differences for the two re-
maining datasets (sd=6 for EuroSAT and sd=7 dimensions for SPRITES). However, we also found
that the diverse final dimensionality nz was caused by a different course of the observed metrics
in the particular seeds. It might be thus possible that, provided we are seeking a balance between
the clustering and reconstructing capabilities, there are different optima in different seeds due to the
noisy nature of VAEs.

6     D ISCUSSION
In Section 5, we have shown that the latent space compression with ALD-VAE reaches the same
performance as when training a model with fixed dimensionality from scratch while being signif-
icantly faster. We have also shown that our model is robust towards various initial nz . Here we
discuss further findings and possible extensions.
Firstly, we found that the optimal latent dimensionality obtained with ALD-VAE sometimes dif-
fers across different seeds. However, we observe that the evaluation metrics (Reconstruction loss,
FID, Silhouette score) have also variable shapes during latent space compression. Considering that
the optimum dimensionality was compared with the hyperparameter grid search in each seed, we
attribute the differences across seeds to the stochastic and noisy nature of VAEs.
Next, the stopping mechanism of ALD-VAE was designed to find a balance between reconstruction
and clustering quality. However, users have the flexibility to adjust the decision thresholds to favour
one quality over the other, providing a customizable approach.
Finally, the experimental evaluation was performed on image datasets, allowing for the straight-
forward calculation of the Fréchet Inception Distance (FID). However, it is important to note that
for datasets of other types, using FID might not be appropriate or may need to be replaced with


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


an alternative metric more suitable for the specific data. We leave it for future research to explore
ALD-VAE, e.g., for text data or robotic actions.
7   C ONCLUSION
We have introduced a new method for automatically determining the optimal size of the latent space
in Variational Autoencoders during a single training. Compared to parameter grid search, our ap-
proach significantly speeds up the process of finding the optimal latent space dimensionality.
Our model, called ALD-VAE, gradually reduces the size of the latent space during the training
process and evaluates the quality of the reconstruction and clustering using the FID score, Recon-
struction loss and Silhouette score. We compare our method to the results obtained using a random
hyperparameter search on four different image datasets and show that our proposed method can
approximate the optimal size of the latent space and eliminate the need for manual tuning. Further-
more, ALD-VAE reaches comparable accuracies as the baselines trained with the same latent size
from scratch. As ALD-VAE requires only simple adjustments to the original architecture and is easy
to implement, it might be a convincing alternative to the classical models that require manual tuning
of the latent space dimensionality.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

R EFERENCES
Taufique Ahmed and Luca Longo. Examining the size of the latent space of convolutional variational
  autoencoders trained with spectral topographic maps of eeg frequency bands. IEEE Access, 10:
  107575–107586, 2022.
Bin Dai and David Wipf. Diagnosing and enhancing vae models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.05789,
  2019a.
Bin Dai and David P. Wipf. Diagnosing and enhancing VAE models. In 7th International Conference
  on Learning Representations, ICLR 2019, New Orleans, LA, USA, May 6-9, 2019, 2019b.
Li Deng. The mnist database of handwritten digit images for machine learning research. IEEE
  Signal Processing Magazine, 29(6):141–142, 2012.
Patrick Helber, Benjamin Bischke, Andreas Dengel, and Damian Borth. Eurosat: A novel dataset
  and deep learning benchmark for land use and land cover classification. IEEE Journal of Selected
  Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing, 2019.
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
 Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. Advances in
 neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Irina Higgins, Loic Matthey, Arka Pal, Christopher Burgess, Xavier Glorot, Matthew Botvinick,
   Shakir Mohamed, and Alexander Lerchner. beta-vae: Learning basic visual concepts with a
   constrained variational framework. 2016.
Qiwen Hu and Casey S Greene. Parameter tuning is a key part of dimensionality reduction via
  deep variational autoencoders for single cell rna transcriptomics. In BIOCOMPUTING 2019:
  Proceedings of the Pacific Symposium, pp. 362–373. World Scientific, 2018.
Hyunjik Kim and Andriy Mnih. Disentangling by factorising. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 2649–2658. PMLR, 2018.
Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes. In 2nd International
  Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2014.
Yingzhen Li and Stephan Mandt. Disentangled sequential autoencoder. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, 2018.
Francesco Locatello, Stefan Bauer, Mario Lucic, Gunnar Raetsch, Sylvain Gelly, Bernhard
  Schölkopf, and Olivier Bachem. Challenging common assumptions in the unsupervised learning
  of disentangled representations. In international conference on machine learning, pp. 4114–4124.
  PMLR, 2019.


                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Arnab Mondal, Sankalan Pal Chowdhury, Aravind Jayendran, Himanshu Asnani, Parag Singla, and
  Prathosh A P. Maskaae: Latent space optimization for adversarial auto-encoders. In Proceedings
  of the 36th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI), volume 124, pp. 689–698.
  PMLR, 2020.
Hariharan Narayanan and Sanjoy Mitter. Sample complexity of testing the manifold hypothesis.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 23, 2010.
Huajie Shao, Shuochao Yao, Dachun Sun, Aston Zhang, Shengzhong Liu, Dongxin Liu, Jun Wang,
  and Tarek Abdelzaher. Controlvae: Controllable variational autoencoder. In International Con-
  ference on Machine Learning, pp. 8655–8664. PMLR, 2020.
Gregory P Way, Michael Zietz, Vincent Rubinetti, Daniel S Himmelstein, and Casey S Greene.
  Compressing gene expression data using multiple latent space dimensionalities learns comple-
  mentary biological representations. Genome biology, 21(1):1–27, 2020.
Han Xiao, Kashif Rasul, and Roland Vollgraf. Fashion-mnist: a novel image dataset for benchmark-
  ing machine learning algorithms, 2017.
Wilson Yan, Yunzhi Zhang, Pieter Abbeel, and Aravind Srinivas. Videogpt: Video generation using
 vq-vae and transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.10157, 2021.


                                               10
