Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C O -L EARNING E MPIRICAL G AMES & W ORLD M ODELS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Game-based decision-making involves reasoning over both world dynamics and
         strategic interactions among the agents. Typically, empirical models capturing these
         respective aspects are learned and used separately. We investigate the potential gain
         from co-learning these elements: a world model for dynamics and an empirical
         game for strategic interactions. Empirical games drive world models toward a
         broader consideration of possible game dynamics induced by a diversity of strategy
         profiles. Conversely, world models guide empirical games to efficiently discover
         new strategies through planning. We demonstrate these benefits first independently,
         then in combination as a new algorithm, Dyna-PSRO, that co-learns an empirical
         game and a world model. When compared to PSRO—a baseline empirical-game
         building algorithm, Dyna-PSRO is found to compute lower regret solutions on
         partially observable general-sum games. In our experiments, Dyna-PSRO also
         requires substantially fewer experiences than PSRO, a key algorithmic advantage
         for settings where collecting player-game interaction data is a cost-limiting factor.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Even seemingly simple games can actually embody a level of complexity rendering them intractable
to direct reasoning. This complexity stems from the interplay of two sources: dynamics of the
game environment, and strategic interactions among the game’s players. As an alternative to direct
reasoning, models have been developed to facilitate reasoning over these distinct aspects of the
game. Empirical games capture strategic interactions in the form of payoff estimates for joint
policies (Wellman, 2006). World models represent a game’s transition dynamics and reward signal
directly (Sutton & Barto, 2018; Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018b). Whereas each of these forms of model
have been found useful for game reasoning, typical use in prior work has focused on one or the other,
learned and employed in isolation from its natural counterpart.
Co-learning both models presents an opportunity to leverage their complementary strengths as a
means to improve each other. World models predict successor states and rewards given a game’s
current state and action(s). However, their performance depends on coverage of their training data,
which is limited by the range of strategies considered during learning. Empirical games can inform
training of world models by suggesting a diverse set of salient strategies, based on game-theoretic
reasoning (Wellman, 2006). These strategies can expose the world model to a broader range of
relevant dynamics. Moreover, as empirical games are estimated through simulation of strategy
profiles, this same simulation data can be reused as training data for the world model.
Strategic diversity through empirical games, however, comes at a cost. In the popular framework of
Policy-Space Response Oracles (PSRO) (Lanctot et al., 2017), empirical normal-form game models
are built iteratively, at each step expanding a restricted strategy set by computing best-response
policies to the current game’s solution. As computing an exact best-response is generally intractable,
PSRO uses Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) to compute approximate response policies. However,
each application of DRL can be considerably resource-intensive, necessitating the generation of
a vast amount of gameplays for learning. Whether gameplays, or experiences, are generated via
simulation (Obando-Ceron & Castro, 2021) or from real-world interactions (Hester & Stone, 2012),
their collection poses a major limiting factor in DRL and by extension PSRO. World models can
reduce this cost by transferring previously learned game dynamics across response computations.
We investigate the mutual benefits of co-learning a world model and an empirical game by first
verifying the potential contributions of each component independently. We then show how to realize


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the combined effects in a new algorithm, Dyna-PSRO, that co-learns a world model and an empirical
game (illustrated in Figure 1). Dyna-PSRO extends PSRO to learn a world model concurrently
with empirical game expansion, and applies this world model to reduce the computational cost of
computing new policies.
This is implemented by a Dyna-based reinforce-
ment learner (Sutton, 1990; 1991) that integrates
planning, acting, and learning in parallel. Dyna-
PSRO is evaluated against PSRO on a collec-                           Strategic Diversity
tion of partially observable general-sum games.
In our experiments, Dyna-PSRO found lower-                                Planning
regret solutions while requiring substantially
fewer cumulative experiences.                                                                World
                                                          Empirical      Dyna-PSRO
The main points of novelty of this paper are as            Game                              Model
follows: (1) empirically demonstrate that world
models benefit from the strategic diversity in-
duced by an empirical game; (2) empirically           Figure 1: Dyna-PSRO co-learns a world model and
demonstrate that a world model can be effec-          empirical game. Empirical games offer world mod-
tively transferred and used in planning with new      els strategically diverse game dynamics. World
other-players. The major contribution of this         models offer empirical games more efficient strat-
work is a new algorithm, Dyna-PSRO, that co-          egy discovery through planning.
learns an empirical game and world model find-
ing a stronger solution at less cost than the base-
line, PSRO.

2    R ELATED W ORK

Empirical Game Theoretic Analysis (EGTA). The core idea of EGTA (Wellman, 2006) is to
reason over approximate game models (empirical games) estimated by simulation over a restricted
strategy set. This basic approach was first demonstrated by Walsh et al. (2002), in a study of pricing
and bidding games. Phelps et al. (2006) introduced the idea of extending a strategy set automatically
through optimization, employing genetic search over a policy space. Schvartzman & Wellman (2009a)
proposed using RL to derive new strategies that are approximate best responses (BRs) to the current
empirical game’s Nash equilibrium. The general question of which strategies to add to an empirical
game has been termed the strategy exploration problem (Jordan et al., 2010). PSRO (Lanctot et al.,
2017) generalized the target for BR beyond NE, and introduced DRL for BR computation in empirical
games. Many further variants and extensions of EGTA have been proposed, for example those using
structured game representations such as extensive-form (McAleer et al., 2021; Konicki et al., 2022).
Some prior work has considered transfer learning across BR computations in EGTA, specifically by
reusing elements of policies and value functions (Smith et al., 2023a;b; 2021).

Model-Based Reinforcement Learning (MBRL). Model-Based RL algorithms construct or use
a model of the environment (henceforth, world model) in the process of learning a policy or value
function (Sutton & Barto, 2018). World models may either predict successor observations directly
(e.g., at pixel level (Wahlström et al., 2015; Watter et al., 2015)), or in a learned latent space (Ha &
Schmidhuber, 2018a; Gelada et al., 2019). World models can be either used for background planning
by rolling out model-predicted trajectories to train a policy, or for decision-time planning where
the world model is used to evaluate the current state by planning into the future. Talvitie (2014)
demonstrated that even in small Markov decision processes (Puterman, 1994), model-prediction
errors tend to compound—rendering long-term planning at the abstraction of observations ineffective.
A follow-up study demonstrated that for imperfect models, short-term planning was no better than
repeatedly training on previously collected real experiences; however, medium-term planning offered
advantages even with an imperfect model (Holland et al., 2018). Parallel studies hypothesized that
these errors are a result of insufficient data for that transition to be learned (Kurutach et al., 2018;
Buckman et al., 2018). To remedy the data insufficiency, ensembles of world models were proposed
to account for world model uncertainty (Buckman et al., 2018; Kurutach et al., 2018; Yu et al.,
2020), and another line of inquiry used world model uncertainty to guide exploration in state-action
space (Ball et al., 2020; Sekar et al., 2020). This study extends this problem into the multiagent


                                                      2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


setting, where now other-agents may preclude transitions from occurring. The proposed remedy is to
leverage the strategy exploration process of building an empirical game to guide data generation.

Multiagent Reinforcement Learning (MARL). Previous research intersecting MARL and MBRL
has primarily focused on modeling the opponent, particularly in scenarios where the opponent is fixed
and well-defined. Within specific game sub-classes, like cooperative games and two-player zero-sum
games, it has been theoretically shown that opponent modeling reduces the sample complexity of
RL (Tian et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020). Opponent models can either explicitly (Mealing & Shapiro,
2015; Foerster et al., 2018) or implicitly (Bard et al., 2013; Indarjo, 2019) model the behavior of the
opponent. Additionally, these models can either construct a single model of opponent behavior, or
learn a set of models (Collins, 2007; He et al., 2016). While opponent modeling details are beyond
the scope of this study, readers can refer to Albrecht & Stone’s survey (Albrecht & Stone, 2018) for a
comprehensive review on this subject. Instead, we consider the case where the learner has explicit
access to the opponent’s policy during training, as is the case in empirical-game building. A natural
example is that of Self-Play, where all agents play the same policy; therefore, a world model can be
learned used to evaluate the quality of actions with Monte-Carlo Tree Search (Silver et al., 2016; 2017;
Tesauro, 1995; Schrittwieser et al., 2020). Li et al. (2023) expands on this by building a population of
candidate opponent policies through PSRO to augment the search procedure. Krupnik et al. (2020)
demonstrated that a generative world model could be useful in multi-step opponent-action prediction.
Sun et al. (2019) examined modeling stateful game dynamics from observations when the agents’
policies are stationary. Chockingam et al. (2018) explored learning world models for homogeneous
agents with a centralized controller in a cooperative game. World models may also be shared by
independent reinforcement learners in cooperative games (Willemsen et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022).


3       C O -L EARNING B ENEFITS

We begin by specifying exactly what we mean by world model and empirical game. This requires
defining some primitive elements. Let t ∈ T denote time in the real game, with st ∈ S the
information state and ht ∈ H the game state at time t. The information state st ≡ (mπ,t , ot )
is composed of the agent’s memory mπ ∈ Mπ , or recurrent state, and the current observation
o ∈ O. Subscripts denote a player-specific component si , negative subscripts denote all but the
player s−i , and boldface denote the joint of all players s. The transition dynamics p : H × A →
∆(H) × ∆(R) define the game state update and reward signal. The agent experiences transitions, or
experiences, (st , at , rt+1 , st+1 ) of the game; where, sequences of transitions are called trajectories τ
and trajectories ending in a terminal game state are episodes.
At the start of an episode, all players sample their current policy π from their strategy1 σ : Π →
[0, 1], where Π is the policy space and Σ is the corresponding strategy space. A utility function
U : Π → Rn defines the payoffs/returns (i.e., cumulative reward) for each of n players. The tuple
Γ ≡ (Π, U, n) defines a normal-form game (NFG) based on these elements. We represent empirical
games in normal form. An empirical normal-form game (ENFG) Γ̂ ≡ (Π̂, Û , n) models a game
with a restricted strategy set Π̂ and an estimated payoff function Û . An empirical game is typically
built by alternating between game reasoning and strategy exploration. During the game reasoning
phase, the empirical game is solved based on a solution concept predefined by the modeler. The
strategy exploration step uses this solution to generate new policies to add to the empirical game. One
common heuristic is to generate new policies that best-respond to the current solution (McMahan
et al., 2003; Schvartzman & Wellman, 2009b). As exact best-responses typically cannot be computed,
RL or DRL are employed to derive approximate best-responses (Lanctot et al., 2017).
An agent world model w represents dynamics in terms of information available to the agent. Specifi-
cally, w maps observations and actions to observations and rewards for all agents, w : O×A×Mw →
O × R, where mw ∈ Mw is the world model’s memory, or recurrent state. For simplicity, in this
work, we assume the agents learn and use a shared deterministic world model, irrespective of stochas-
ticity that may be present in the true game. Implementation details are provided in Appendix C.2.
Until now, we have implicitly assumed the need for distinct models. However, if a single model could
serve both functions, co-learning two separate models would not be needed. Empirical games, in
    1
        This is equivalent to the meta-strategy defined in PSRO (Lanctot et al., 2017).


                                                          3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


general, cannot replace a world model as they entirely abstract away any concept of game dynamics.
Conversely, world models have the potential to substitute for the payoff estimations in empirical
games by estimating payoffs as rollouts with the world model. We explore this possibility in an
auxiliary experiment included in Appendix E.4, but our findings indicate that this substitution is
impractical. Due to compounding of model-prediction errors, the payoff estimates and entailed game
solutions were quite inaccurate.
Having defined the models and established the need for their separate instantiations, we can proceed
to evaluate the claims of beneficial co-learning. Our first experiment shows that the strategic diversity
embodied in an empirical game yields diverse game dynamics, resulting in the training of a more
performant world model. The second set of experiments demonstrates that a world model can help
reduce the computational cost of policy construction in an empirical game.

3.1   S TRATEGIC D IVERSITY

A world model is trained to predict successor observations and rewards, from the current observations
and actions, using a supervised learning signal. Ideally, the training data would cover all possible
transitions. This is not feasible, so instead draws are conventionally taken from a dataset generated
from play of a behavioral [joint] strategy. Performance of the world model is then measured against
a target [joint] strategy. Differences between the behavioral and target strategies present challenges
in learning an effective world model.
We call the probability of drawing a state-action pair under some joint strategy its reach probability.
From this, we define a joint strategy’s strategic diversity as the distribution induced from reach
probabilities across the full state-action space. These terms allow us to observe two challenges for
learning world models. First, the diversity of the behavioral joint strategy ought to cover the target
joint strategy’s diversity. Otherwise, transitions will be absent from the training data. It is possible to
supplement coverage of the absent transitions if they can be generalized from covered data; however,
this cannot be generally guaranteed. Second, the closer the diversities are, the more accurate the
learning objective will be. An extended description these challenges is provided in Appendix C.3.
If the target joint strategy were known, we could readily construct the ideal training data for the world
model. However the target is generally not known at the outset; indeed determining this target is the
ultimate purpose of empirical game reasoning. The evolving empirical game essentially reflects a
search for the target. Serendipitously, construction of this empirical game entails generation of data
that captures elements of likely targets. This data can be reused for world model training without
incurring any additional data collection cost.

Game. We evaluate the claims of independent co-learning benefits within the context of a commons
game called “Harvest”. In Harvest, players move around an orchard picking apples. The challenging
commons element is that apple regrowth rate is proportional to nearby apples, so that socially
optimum behavior would entail managed harvesting. Self-interested agents capture only part of the
benefit of optimal growth, thus non-cooperative equilibria tend to exhibit collective over-harvesting.
The game has established roots in human-behavioral studies (Janssen et al., 2010) and in agent-
based modeling of emergent behavior (Pérolat et al., 2017; Leibo et al., 2017; 2021). For our
initial experiments, we use a symmetric two-player version of the game, where in-game entities are
represented categorically (HumanCompatibleAI, 2019). Each player has a 10 × 10 viewbox within
their field of vision. The possible actions include moving in the four cardinal directions, rotating
either way, tagging, or remaining idle. A successful tag temporarily removes the other player from
the game, but can only be done to other nearby players. Players receive a reward of 1 for each apple
picked. More detailed information and visualizations are available in Appendix D.1.

Experiment. To test the effects of strategic diversity, we train a suite of world models that differ
in the diversity of their training data. The datasets are constructed from the play of three policies:
a random baseline policy, and two PSRO-generated policies. The PSRO policies were arbitrarily
sampled from an approximate solution produced by a run of PSRO. We sampled an additional
policy from PSRO for evaluating the generalization capacity of the world models. These policies
are then subsampled and used to train seven world models. The world models are referred to by
icons      that depict the symmetric strategy profiles used to train them in the normal-form. Strategy
profiles included in the training data of the world models are shaded black. For instance, the first


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(random) policy       , or the first and third policies . Each world model’s dataset contains 1 million
total transitions, collected uniformly from each distinct strategy profile (symmetric profiles are not
re-sampled). The world models are then evaluated on accuracy and recall for their predictions of both
observation and reward for both players. The world models are optimized with a weighted-average
cross-entropy objective. Additional details are in Appendix C.2.

                0.27±0.04   0.75±0.02     0.80±0.02   0.58±0.05   0.83±0.02     0.62±0.05   0.68±0.04
                                                                                                        1.0
  Observation


                                                                                                        0.8

                                                                                                        0.6
                0.73±0.08   0.52±0.10     0.53±0.10   0.68±0.08   0.50±0.10     0.68±0.08   0.69±0.08
                                                                                                        0.4
  Reward


                                                                                                        0.2

                                                                                                        0.0



                                        Profiles Sampled To Train World Model


Figure 2: World model accuracy across strategy profiles. Each heatmap portrays a world model’s
accuracy over 16 strategy profiles. The meta x-axis corresponds to the profiles used to train the world
model (as black cells). Above each heatmap is the model’s average accuracy.

Results. Figure 2 presents each world model’s per-profile accuracy, as well as its aver-
age over all profiles. Inclusion of the random policy corresponds to decreases in observa-
tion prediction accuracy:    0.75 ± 0.02 →       0.58 ± 0.05,    0.80 ± 0.02 →     0.62 ± 0.05,
and       0.83 ± 0.02 →      0.68 ± 0.04.     Figure 14 (Appendix E.1) contains the world
model’s per-profile recall. Inclusion of the random policy corresponds to increases in re-
ward 1 recall:         0.25 ± 0.07 →      0.37 ± 0.11,      0.25 ± 0.07 →     0.36 ± 0.11, and
     0.26 ± 0.07 →      0.37 ± 0.11.

Discussion. The PSRO policies offer the most strategically salient view of the game’s dynamics.
Consequently, the world model          trained with these policies yields the highest observation accuracy.
However, this model performs poorly on reward accuracy, scoring only 0.50 ± 0.10. In comparison,
the model trained on the random policy         scores 0.73 ± 0.08. This seemingly counterintuitive result
can be attributed to a significant class imbalance in rewards.       predicts only the most common class,
no reward, which gives the illusion of higher performance. In contrast, the remaining world models
attempt to predict rewarding states, reducing their overall accuracy. Therefore, we should compare
the world models based on their ability to recall rewards. When we examine              again, we find that
it also struggles to recall rewards, scoring only 0.26 ± 0.07. However, when the random policy is
included in the training data ( ), the recall improves to 0.37 ± 0.11. This improvement is also due
to the same class imbalance. The PSRO policies are highly competitive, tending to over-harvest. This
limits the proportion of rewarding experiences. Including the random policy enhances the diversity of
rewards in this instance, as its coplayer can demonstrate successful harvesting. Given the importance
of accurately predicting both observations and rewards for effective planning,           appears to be the
most promising option. However, the strong performance of             suggests future work on algorithms
that can benefit solely from observation predictions. Overall, these results provide some evidence
supporting the claim that strategic diversity enhances the training of world models.

3.2             R ESPONSE C ALCULATIONS

Empirical games are built by iteratively calculating and incorporating responses to the current
solution. However, direct computation of these responses is often infeasible, so RL or DRL is used
to approximate the response. This process of approximating a single response policy using RL is
computationally intensive, posing a significant constraint in empirical game modeling when executed


                                                             5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


repeatedly. World models present an opportunity to address this issue. A world model can serve as a
medium for transferring previously learned knowledge about the game’s dynamics. Therefore, the
dynamics need not be relearned, reducing the computational cost associated with response calculation.
Exercising a world model for transfer is achieved through a process called planning. Planning is
any procedure that takes a world model and produces or improves a policy. In the context of games,
planning can optionally take into account the existence of coplayers. This consideration can reduce
experiential variance caused by unobserved confounders (i.e., the coplayers). However, coplayer
modeling errors may introduce further errors in the planning procedure (He et al., 2016).
Planning alongside empirical-game construction allows us to side-step this issue as we have direct
access to the policies of all players during training. This allows us to circumvent the challenge
of building accurate agent models. Instead, the policies of coplayers can be directly queried and
used alongside a world model, leading to more accurate planning. In this section, we empirically
demonstrate the effectiveness of two methods that decrease the cost of response calculation by
integrating planning with a world model and other agent policies.

3.2.1           BACKGROUND P LANNING
The first type of planning that is investigated is background planning, popularized by the Dyna
architecture (Sutton, 1990). In background planning, agents interact with the world model to produce
planned experiences2 . The planned experiences are then used by a model-free reinforcement learning
algorithm as if they were real experiences (experiences generated from the real game). Background
planning enables learners to generate experiences of states they are not currently in.

Experiment. To assess whether planned experiences are effective for training a policy in the actual
game, we compute two response policies. The first response policy, our baseline, learns exclusively
from real experiences. The second response policy, referred to as the planner, is trained using
a two-step procedure. Initially, the planner is exclusively trained on planned experiences. After
10 000 updates, it then transitions to learning solely from real experiences. Policies are trained using
IMPALA (Espeholt et al., 2018), with further details in Appendix C.1. The planner employs the
world model from Section 3.1, and the opponent plays the previously held-out policy. In this and
subsequent experiments, the cost of methods is measured by the number of experiences they require
with the actual game. Throughout the remainder of this work, each experience represents a trajectory
of 20 transitions, facilitating the training of recurrent policies.

           40
                                                      Baseline
           30                                         Plan: Real
                                                      Plan: Model
  Return


           20

           10

            0
                0.0    0.5       1.0              −1.0        −0.5         0.0         0.5         1.0
                       Real Exp.    ×106                 Plan Exp.                     Real Exp.         ×106


Figure 3: Effects of background planning on response learning. Left: Return curves measured by the
number of real experiences used. Right: Return curves measured by usage of both real and planned
experiences. The planner’s return is measured against the real game (Plan: Real) and the world model
(Plan: Model). (5 seeds, with 95 % bootstrapped CI).

Results. Figure 3 presents the results of the background planning experiment. The methods are
compared based on their final return, utilizing an equivalent amount of real experiences. The baseline
yields a return of 23.00 ± 4.01, whereas the planner yields a return of 31.17 ± 0.25.
    2
        Other names include “imaginary”, “simulated”, or “hallucinated” experiences.


                                                         6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Discussion. In this experiment, the planner converges to a stronger policy, and makes earlier gains
in performance than the baseline. Despite this, there is a significant gap in the planner’s learning
curves, which are reported with respect to both the world model and real game. This gap arises due
to accumulated model-prediction errors, causing the trajectories to deviate from the true state space.
Nevertheless, the planner effectively learns to interact with the world model during planning, and
this behavior shows positive transfer into the real game, as evidenced by the planner’s rapid learning.
The exact magnitude of benefit will vary across coplayers’ policies, games, and world models. In
Figure 16 (Appendix E.2), we repeat the same experiment with the poorly performing               world
model, and observe a marginal benefit (26.05 ± 1.32). The key take-away is that background planning
tends to lead towards learning benefits, and not generally hamper learning.

3.2.2           D ECISION -T IME P LANNING
The second main way that a world model is used is to inform action selection at decision time
[planning] (DT). In this case, the agent evaluates the quality of actions by comparing the value of
the model’s predicted successor state for all candidate actions. Action evaluation can also occur
recursively, allowing the agent to consider successor states further into the future. Overall, this process
should enable the learner to select better actions earlier in training, thereby reducing the amount of
experiences needed to compute a response. A potential flaw with decision-time planning is that the
agent’s learned value function may not be well-defined on model-predicted successor states (Talvitie,
2014). To remedy this issue, the value function should also be trained on model-predicted states.

Experiment. To evaluate the impact the decision-time planning, we perform an experiment similar
to the background planning experiment (Section 3.2.1). However, in this experiment, we evaluate
the quality of four types of decision-time planners that perform one-step three-action search. The
planners differ in the their ablations of background planning types: (1) warm-start background
planning (BG: W) learning from planned experiences before any real experiences, and (2) concurrent
background planning (BG: C) where after BG: W, learning proceeds simultaneously on both planned
and real experiences. The intuition behind BG: C is that the agent can complement its learning
process by incorporating planned experiences that align with its current behavior, offsetting the
reliance on costly real experiences. Extended experimental details are provided in Appendix C.

          50

          40
                                                                                                    BG: W
                                                                                                            BG: C
                                                                                               DT
 Return


          30

          20                                                                                   X
                                                                                               X    X
                                                                                               X            X
          10                                                                                   X    X       X

           0
               0.0    0.5     1.0     0.0    0.5    1.0     1.5    2.0      2.5
                     Real Exp. ×106                Real & Planned Exp.         ×106


Figure 4: Effects of decision-time planning on response learning. Four planners using decision-
time planning (DT) are shown in combinations with warm-start background planning (BG: W) and
concurrent background planning (BG: C). (5 seeds, with 95 % bootstrapped CI).


Results. The results for this experiment are shown in Figure 4. The baseline policy receives a final
return of 23.00 ± 4.01. The planners that do not include BG: W, perform worse, with final returns of
9.98 ± 7.60 (DT) and 12.42 ± 3.97 (DT & BG: C). The planners that perform BG: W outperform the
baseline, with final returns of 44.11 ± 2.81 (DT & BG: W) and 44.31 ± 2.56 (DT, BG: W, & BG: C).

Discussion. Our results suggest that the addition of BG: W provides sizable benefits: 9.98 ± 7.60
(DT) → 44.11 ± 2.81 (DT & BG:W) and 12.42 ± 3.97 (DT & BG: C) → 44.31 ± 2.56 (DT, BG: W,
& BG: C). We postulate that this is because it informs the policy’s value function on model-predictive


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


states early into training. This allows that the learner is able to more effectively search earlier into
training. BG: C appears to offer minor stability and variance improvements throughout the training
procedure; however, it does not have a measurable difference in final performance.
However, we caution against focusing on the magnitude of improvement found within this experiment.
As the margin of benefit depends on many factors including the world model accuracy, the opponent
policy, and the game. To exemplify, similar to the background planning section, we repeat the same
experiment with the poorly performing       world model. The results of this ancillary experiment are
in Figure 18 (Appendix E.3). The trend of BG: W providing benefits was reinforced: 6.29 ± 5.12
(DT) → 20.98 ± 9.76 (DT & BG: W) and 3.64 ± 0.26 (DT & BG: C) → 33.07 ± 7.67 (DT, BG: W,
& BG: C). However, the addition of BG: C now measurably improved performance 20.98 ± 9.76
(DT & BG: W) → 33.07 ± 7.67 (DT, BG: W, & BG: C). The main outcome of these experiments
is the observation that multi-faceted planning is unlikely to harm a response calculation, and has a
potentially large benefit when applied effectively. In total, the results of this experiment support the
claim that world models offer the potential to improve response calculation through DT planning.

4    DYNA -PSRO
In this section we introduce Dyna-PSRO, Dyna-Policy-Space Response Oracles, an approximate
game-solving algorithm that builds on the PSRO (Lanctot et al., 2017) framework. Dyna-PSRO
employs co-learning to combine the benefits of world models and empirical games.
Dyna-PSRO is defined by two significant alterations to the original PSRO algorithm. First, it trains
a world model in parallel with all the typical PSRO routines (i.e., game reasoning and response
calculation). We collect training data for the world model from both the episodes used to estimate the
empirical game’s payoffs, and the episodes that are generated during response learning and evaluation.
This approach ensures that the world model is informed by a diversity of data from a salient set of
strategy profiles. By reusing data from empirical game development, training the world model incurs
no additional cost for data collection.
The second modification introduced by Dyna-PSRO pertains to the way response policies are learned.
Dyna-PSRO adopts a Dyna-based reinforcement learner (Sutton, 1990; 1991; Sutton et al., 2012)
that integrates simultaneous planning, learning, and acting. Consequently, the learner concurrently
processes experiences generated from decision-time planning, background planning, and direct
game interaction. These experiences, regardless of their origin, are then learned from using the
IMPALA (Espeholt et al., 2018) update rule. For all accounts of planning, the learner uses the single
world model that is trained within Dyna-PSRO. This allows game knowledge accrued from previous
response calculations to be transferred and used to reduce the cost of the current and future response
calculations. Pseudocode and additional details are provided in Appendix C.4.

Games. Dyna-PSRO is evaluated on three games. The first is the harvest commons game used in
the experiments described above, denoted “Harvest: Categorical”. The other two games come from
the MeltingPot (Leibo et al., 2021) evaluation suite and feature image-based observations. “Harvest:
RGB” is their version of the same commons harvest game (details in Appendix D.2). “Running With
Scissors” is a temporally extended version of rock-paper-scissors (details in Appendix D.3). World
model details for each game are in Appendix C.2, likewise, policies in Appendix C.1.

Experiment. Dyna-PSRO’s performance is measured by the quality of the Nash equilibrium
solution it produces when compared against the world-model-free baseline PSRO. The two methods
are evaluated on SumRegret (sometimes called Nash convergence), which measures the regret
                                          P
across all players SumRegret(σ, Π) =         i∈n maxπi ∈Πi Ûi (πi , σ−i ) − Ûi (σi , σ−i ), where σ is
the method’s solution and Π ⊆ Π denotes  S the deviation set. We define deviation sets based on
policies generated across methods: Π ≡ method Π̂method (i.e., regret is with respect to the combined
game—a union of each method’s empirical game), for all methods for a particular seed (detailed in
Appendix C.5) (Balduzzi et al., 2018). We measure SumRegret for intermediate solutions, and report
it as a function of the cumulative number of real experiences employed in the respective methods.

Results. Figure 5 presents the results for this experiment. For Harvest: Categorical, Dyna-PSRO
found a no regret solution within the combined-game in 3.2e6 experiences. Whereas, PSRO achieves


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          Harvest: Categorical                 Harvest: RGB                     Running With Scissors
                102                                                                  0.02

    SumRegret
                101                                  101



                100                                  100

                 0                                    0                                0
                      0            1             2         0        1            2          0            1          2
                               Real Exp.   ×107                 Real Exp.     ×107                   Real Exp.   ×107

                                                       PSRO           Dyna-PSRO



                 Figure 5: PSRO compared against Dyna-PSRO. (5 seeds, with 95 % bootstrapped CI).



a solution of at best 5.45 ± 1.62 within 2e7 experiences. In Harvest: RGB, Dyna-PSRO reaches a
solution with 0.89 ± 0.74 regret at 5.12e6 experiences. At the same time, PSRO had found a solution
with 6.42 ± 4.73 regret, and at the end of its run had 2.50 ± 2.24 regret. In the final game, RWS,
Dyna-PSRO has 2e−3±5e−4 regret at 1.06e7 experiences, and at a similar point (9.6e6 experiences),
PSRO has 6.68e−3 ± 2.51e−3. At the end of the run, PSRO achieves a regret 3.50e−3 ± 7.36e−4.


Discussion. The results indicate that across all games, Dyna-PSRO consistently outperforms PSRO
by achieving a superior solution. Furthermore, this improved performance is realized while consuming
fewer real-game experiences. For instance, in the case of Harvest: Categorical, the application of
the world model for decision-time planning enables the computation of an effective policy after only
a few iterations. On the other hand, we observe a trend of accruing marginal gains in other games,
suggesting that the benefits are likely attributed to the transfer of knowledge about the game dynamics.
In Harvest: Categorical and Running With Scissors, Dyna-PSRO also had lower variance than PSRO.



5               C ONCLUSION & L IMITATIONS

This study showed the mutual benefit of co-learning a world model and empirical game. First, we
demonstrated that empirical games provide strategically diverse training data that could inform a more
robust world model. We then showed that world models can reduce the computational cost, measured
in experiences, of response calculations through planning. These two benefits were combined and
realized in a new algorithm, Dyna-PSRO. In our experiments, Dyna-PSRO computed lower-regret
solutions than PSRO on several partially observable general-sum games. Dyna-PSRO also required
substantially fewer experiences than PSRO, a key algorithmic advantage for settings where collecting
experiences is a cost-limiting factor.
Although our experiments demonstrate benefits for co-learning world models and empirical games,
there are several areas for potential improvement. The world models used in this study necessitated
observational data from all players for training, and assumed a simultaneous-action game. Future
research could consider relaxing these assumptions to accommodate different interaction protocols,
a larger number of players, and incomplete data perspectives. Furthermore, our world models
functioned directly on agent observations, which made them computationally costly to query. If
the generation of experiences is the major limiting factor, as assumed in this study, this approach is
acceptable. Nevertheless, reducing computational demands through methods like latent world models
presents a promising avenue for future research. Lastly, the evaluation of solution concepts could
also be improved. While combined-game regret employs all available estimates in approximating
regret, its inherent inaccuracies may lead to misinterpretations of relative performance.


                                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Stefano V Albrecht and Peter Stone. Autonomous agents modelling other agents: A comprehensive
  survey and open problems. Artificial Intelligence, 258:66–95, 2018.
David Balduzzi, Karl Tuyls, Julien Pérolat, and Thore Graepel. Re-evaluating evaluation. In 32nd
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.
Philip Ball, Jack Parker-Holder, Aldo Pacchiano, Krzysztof Choromanski, and Stephen Roberts.
  Ready policy one: World building through active learning. In 37th International Conference of
  Machine Learning, 2020.
Nolan Bard, Michael Johanson, Neil Burch, and Michael Bowling. Online implicit agent modelling.
  In 12th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2013.
Samy Bengio, Oriol Vinyals, Navdeep Jaitly, and Noam Shazeer. Scheduled sampling for sequence
  prediction with recurrent neural networks. In 28th Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems, pp. 1171–1179, 2015.
James Bradbury, Roy Frostig, Peter Hawkins, Matthew James Johnson, Chris Leary, Dougal
  Maclaurin, George Necula, Adam Paszke, Jake VanderPlas, Skye Wanderman-Milne, and
  Qiao Zhang. JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs, 2018. URL
  http://github.com/google/jax.
Jacob Buckman, Danijar Hafner, George Tucker, Eugene Brevdo, and Honglak Lee. Sample-efficient
  reinforcement learning with stochastic ensemble value expansion. In 22nd Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2018.
Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. Exploration by random network
  distillation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Albin Cassirer, Gabriel Barth-Maron, Eugene Brevdo, Sabela Ramos, Toby Boyd, Thibault Sottiaux,
  and Manuel Kroiss. Reverb: A framework for experience replay, 2021.
Silvia Chiappa, Sébastien Racaniere, Daan Wierstra, and Shakir Mohamed. Recurrent environment
   simulators. In 5th International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
Valliappa Chockingam, Tegg Taekyong Sung, Feryal Behbanai, Rishab Gargeya, Amlesh Sivanan-
  tham, and Aleksandra Malysheva. Extending world models for multi-agent reinforcement learning
  in malmö. In Joint AIIDE 2018 Workshops co-located with the 14th AAAI conference on artificial
  intelligence and interactive digital entertainment, 2018.
Brian Collins. Combining opponent modeling and model-based reinforcement learning in a two-
  player competitive game. Master’s thesis, University of Edinburgh, 2007.
B. Curtis Eaves. The linear complementarity problem. Management Science, 17(9):612–634, 1971.
Lasse Espeholt, Hubert Soyer, Remi Munos, Karen Simonyan, Volodymyr Mnih, Tom Ward, Yotam
  Doron, Vlad Firoiu, Tim Harley, Iain Dunning, Shane Legg, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. IMPALA:
  Scalable distributed deep-RL with importance weighted actor-learner architectures. In 35th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2018.
Jakob N Foerster, Richard Y Chen, Maruan Al-Shedivat, Shimon Whiteson, Pieter Abbeel, and Igor
  Mordatch. Learning with opponent-learning awareness. In 17th International Conference on
  Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems, 2018.
Kunihiko Fukushima. Cognitron: A self-organizing multilayered neural network. Biological
 Cybernetics, 20:121–136, 1975.
Carles Gelada, Saurabh Kumar, Jacob Buckman, Ofir Nachum, and Marc G. Bellemare. Deep-
  MDP: Learning continuous latent space models for representation learning. In 36th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97, pp. 2170–2179, 2019.
David Ha and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Recurrent world models facilitate policy evolution. In 31st
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018a.


                                              10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


David Ha and Jürgen Schmidhuber. World models. In arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.10122, 2018b.
He He, Jordan Boyd-Graber, Kevin Kwok, and Hal Daumé III. Opponent modeling in deep reinforce-
  ment learning. In 33rd International Conference on Machine Learning, 2016.
Tom Hennigan, Trevor Cai, Tamara Norman, and Igor Babuschkin. Haiku: Sonnet for JAX, 2020.
  URL http://github.com/deepmind/dm-haiku.
Todd Hester and Peter Stone. Texplore: Real-time sample-efficient reinforcement learning for robots.
  In Machine Learning for Robotics (MLR), 2012.
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural Computation, 9(8):
  1735–1780, 1997.
Matthew W. Hoffman, Bobak Shahriari, John Aslanides, Gabriel Barth-Maron, Nikola Momchev,
 Danila Sinopalnikov, Piotr Stańczyk, Sabela Ramos, Anton Raichuk, Damien Vincent, Léonard
 Hussenot, Robert Dadashi, Gabriel Dulac-Arnold, Manu Orsini, Alexis Jacq, Johan Ferret, Nino
 Vieillard, Seyed Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Sertan Girgin, Olivier Pietquin, Feryal Behbahani,
 Tamara Norman, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Albin Cassirer, Fan Yang, Kate Baumli, Sarah Henderson,
 Abe Friesen, Ruba Haroun, Alex Novikov, Sergio Gómez Colmenarejo, Serkan Cabi, Caglar
 Gulcehre, Tom Le Paine, Srivatsan Srinivasan, Andrew Cowie, Ziyu Wang, Bilal Piot, and Nando
 de Freitas. Acme: A research framework for distributed reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2006.00979, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.00979.
G. Zacharias Holland, Erin Talvitie, and Michael Bowling. The effect of planning shape on dyna-
  style planning in high-dimensional state spaces. In FAIM workshop “Prediction and Generative
  Modeling in Reinforcement Learning”, 2018.
HumanCompatibleAI.        https://github.com/HumanCompatibleAI/multi-agent,
  2019.
Pararawendy Indarjo. Deep state-space models in multi-agent systems. Master’s thesis, Leiden
  University, 2019.
Marco A. Janssen, Robert Holahan, Allen Lee, and Elinor Ostrom. Lab experiments for the study
 of social-ecological systems. Science, 328(5978):613–617, 2010. doi: 10.1126/science.1183532.
 URL https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.1183532.
Patrick R. Jordan, L. Julian Schvartzman, and Michael P. Wellman. Strategy exploration in empirical
  games. In 9th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, pp.
  1131–1138, 2010.
Christine Konicki, Mithun Chakraborty, and Michael P. Wellman. Exploiting extensive-form struc-
  ture in empirical game-theoretic analysis. In Web and Internet Economics: 18th International
  Conference, 2022.
Orr Krupnik, Igor Mordatch, and Aviv Tamar. Multi-agent reinforcement learning with multi-step
  generative models. In 4th Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 776–790, 2020.
Thanard Kurutach, Ignasi Clavera, Yan Duan, Aviv Tamar, and Pieter Abbeel. Model-ensemble
  trust-region policy optimization. In 6th International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2018.
Marc Lanctot, Vinicius Zambaldi, Audrūnas Gruslys, Angeliki Lazaridou, Karl Tuyls, Julien Pérolat,
 David Silver, and Thore Graepel. A unified game-theoretic approach to multiagent reinforcement
 learning. In 31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 4193–4206, 2017.
Joel Z. Leibo, Vinicius Zambaldi, Marc Lanctot, Janusz Marecki, and Thore Graepel. Multi-agent
  reinforcement learning in sequential social dilemmas. In 16th International Conference on
  Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2017.
Joel Z. Leibo, Edgar Duéñez-Guzmán, Alexander Sasha Vezhnevets, John P. Agapiou, Peter Sunehag,
  Raphael Koster, Jayd Matyas, Charles Beattie, Igor Mordatch, and Thore Graepel. Scalable
  evaluation of multi-agent reinforcement learning with melting pot. PMLR, 2021.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Zun Li, Marc Lanctot, Kevin McKee, Luke Marris, Ian Gemp, Daniel Hennes, Paul Muller, Kate
  Larson, Yoram Bachrach, and Michael P. Wellman. Search-improved game-theoretic multiagent
  reinforcement learning in general and negotiation games (extended abstract). In 32nd International
  Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, AAMAS, 2023.
Stephen McAleer, John Lanier, Kevin Wang, Pierre Baldi, and Roy Fox. XDO: A double oracle
  algorithm for extensive-form games. In 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2021.
Richard D. McKelvey, Andrew M. McLennan, and Theodore L. Turocy. Gambit: Software tools for
  game theory. http://www.gambit-project.org/, 2016.
H. Brendan McMahan, Geoffrey J Gordon, and Avrim Blum. Planning in the presence of cost
  functions controlled by an adversary. In 20th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  536–543, 2003.
Richard Mealing and Jonathan L Shapiro. Opponent modeling by expectation–maximization and
  sequence prediction in simplified poker. In IEEE Transactions on Computational Intelligence and
  AI in Games, volume 9, pp. 11–24, 2015.
Vicent Michalski, Roland Memisevic, and Kishore Konda. Modeling deep temporal dependencies
  with recurrent grammar cells. In 27th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2014.
Johan S. Obando-Ceron and Pablo Samuel Castro. Revisiting rainbow: Promoting more insightful
  and inclusive deep reinforcement learning research. In 38th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, 2021.
Junhyuk Oh, Xiaoxiao Guo, Honglak Lee, Richard Lewis, and Satinder Singh. Action-conditional
  video prediction using deep networks in atari games. In 28th Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2015.
S. Phelps, M. Marcinkiewicz, and S. Parsons. A novel method for automatic strategy acquisition in
   N -player non-zero-sum games. In Fifth International Joint Conference on Autonomous Agents
   and Multiagent Systems, pp. 705–712, 2006.
Martin L Puterman. Markov Decision Processes: Discrete Stochastic Dynamic Programming. John
 Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1994.
Julien Pérolat, Joel Z. Leibo, Vinicius Zambaldi, Charles Beattie, Karl Tuyls, and Thore Graepel.
  A multi-agent reinforcement learning model of common-pool resource appropriation. In 31st
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017.
Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Thomas Hubert, Karen Simonyan, Laurent Sifre, Simon
  Schmitt, Arthur Guez, Edward Lockhart, Demis Hassabis, Thore Graepel, Timothy Lillicrap, and
  David Silver. Mastering atari, go, chess and shogi by planning with a learned model. Nature, 588:
  604–609, 2020.
L. Julian Schvartzman and Michael P. Wellman. Stronger CDA strategies through empirical game-
   theoretic analysis and reinforcement learning. In 8th International Conference on Autonomous
  Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, pp. 249–256, 2009a.
L. Julian Schvartzman and Michael P. Wellman. Exploring large strategy spaces in empirical game
   modeling. In AAMAS-09 Workshop on Agent-Mediated Electronic Commerce, 2009b.
Ramanan Sekar, Oleh Rybkin, Kostas Daniilidis, Pieter Abbeel, Danijar Hafner, and Deepak Pathak.
  Planning to explore via self-supervised world models. In 37th International Conference of Machine
  Learning, pp. 8583–8592, 2020.
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J. Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George van den Driessche,
  Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, Sander Dieleman,
  Dominik Grewe, John Nham, Nal Kalchbrenner, Ilya Sutskever, Timothy Lillicrap, Madeleine
  Leach, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Thore Graepel, and Demis Hassabis. Mastering the game of Go with
  deep neural networks and tree search. Nature, 529:484–489, 2016.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


David Silver, Julian Schrittwieser, Karen Simonyan, Ioannis Antonoglou, Aja Huang, Arthur Guez,
  Thomas Hubert, Lucas Baker, Matthew Lai, Adrian Bolton, et al. Mastering the game of go without
  human knowledge. Nature, 550(7676):354–359, 2017.
Max Olan Smith, Thomas Anthony, and Michael P. Wellman. Iterative empirical game solving via
 single policy best response. In 9th International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Max Olan Smith, Thomas Anthony, and Michael P. Wellman. Learning to play against any mixture
 of opponents. Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence, 6, 2023a.
Max Olan Smith, Thomas Anthony, and Michael P. Wellman. Strategic knowledge transfer. Journal
 of Machine Learning Research, 24, 2023b.
Chen Sun, Per Karlsson, Jiajun Wu, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Kevin Murphy. Stochastic prediction
  of multi-agent interactions from partial observations. In 7th International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2019.
Richard S. Sutton. Integrated architectures for learning, planning, and reacting based on approximat-
  ing dynamic programming. In 7th International Workshop on Machine Learning, pp. 216–224.
  Morgan Kaufmann, 1990.
Richard S. Sutton. Dyna, an integrated architecture for learning, planning, and reacting. In SIGART
  Bulletin, volume 2, pp. 160–163. ACM, 1991.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. The MIT Press,
  2018.
Richard S Sutton, Csaba Szepesvári, Alborz Geramifard, and Michael P. Bowling. Dyna-style
  planning with linear function approximation and prioritized sweeping. In 28th Conference on
  Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2012.
Erin Talvitie. Model regularization for stable sample rollouts. In 30th Conference on Uncertainty in
  Artificial Intelligence, 2014.
Gerald Tesauro. Temporal difference learning and td-gammon. Communications of the ACM, 38(3):
  58–68, 1995.
Zheng Tian, Ying Wen, Zhichen Gong, Faiz Punakkath, Shihao Zou, and Jun Wang. A regularized
  opponent model with maximum entropy objective. In International Joint Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, 2019.
Karl Tuyls, Julien Pérolat, Marc Lanctot, Edward Hughes, Richard Everett, Joel Z. Leibo, Csaba
  Szepesvári, and Thore Graepel. Bounds and dynamics for empirical game theoretic analysis.
 Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, 34(7), 2020.
Yevgeniy Vorobeychik. Probabilistic analysis of simulation-based games. ACM Transactions on
  Modeling and Computer Simulation, 20(3), 2010.
Niklas Wahlström, Thomas B. Schön, and Marc Peter Deisenroth. From pixels to torques: Policy
  learning with deep dynamical models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.02251, 2015.
William Walsh, Rajarshi Das, Gerald Tesauro, and Jeffrey Kephart. Analyzing complex strategic
 interactions in multi-agent systems. In AAAI-02 Workshop on Game Theoretic and Decision
 Theoretic Agents, 2002.
Manuel Watter, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Joschka Boedecker, and Martin Riedmiller. Embed to
 control: A locally linear latent dynamics model for control from raw images. In 28th Conference
 on Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 2746–2754, 2015.
Michael P. Wellman. Methods for empirical game-theoretic analysis. In 21st National Conference on
 Artificial Intelligence, pp. 1552–1555, 2006.
Daniël Willemsen, Mario Coppola, and Guido CHE de Croon. MAMBPO: Sample-efficient multi-
  robot reinforcement learning using learned world models. In IEEE/RSJ International Conference
  on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2021.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ronald J. Williams and David Zipser. A learning algorithm for continually running fully recurrent
  neural networks. Neural Computation, 1(2), 1989.
Fan Yang, Gabriel Barth-Maron, Piotr Stańczyk, Matthew Hoffman, Siqi Liu, Manuel Kroiss, Aedan
  Pope, and Alban Rrustemi. Launchpad: A programming model for distributed machine learning
  research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.04516, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.
  04516.
Tianhe Yu, Garrett Thomas, Lantao Yu, Stefano Ermon, James Zou, Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn,
  and Tengyu Ma. MOPO: Model-based offline policy optimization. In 33rd Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Kaiqing Zhang, Sham Kakade, Tamer Basar, and Lin Yang. Model-based multi-agent rl in zero-sum
  markov games with near-optimal sample complexity. In 33rd Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2020.
Qizhen Zhang, Chris Lu, Animesh Garg, and Jakob Foerster. Centralized model and exploration
  policy for multi-agent RL. In 21st International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent
  Systems, 2022.


                                               14
