Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ODEF ORMER : S YMBOLIC R EGRESSION OF
DYNAMICAL S YSTEMS WITH T RANSFORMERS
 Stéphane d’Ascoli∗                                         Sören Becker∗
 EPFL                                                       Helmholtz Munich
 stephane.dascoli@gmail.com                                 Munich Center for Machine Learning
                                                            TU Munich
                                                            soren.a.becker@gmail.com

 Alexander Mathis               Philippe Schwaller          Niki Kilbertus
 EPFL                           EPFL                        Helmholtz Munich
                                                            Munich Center for Machine Learning
                                                            TU Munich



                                               A BSTRACT

             We introduce ODEFormer, the first transformer able to infer multidimensional ordi-
             nary differential equation (ODE) systems in symbolic form from the observation of
             a single solution trajectory. We perform extensive evaluations on two datasets: (i)
             the existing ‘Strogatz’ dataset featuring two-dimensional systems; (ii) ODEBench,
             a collection of one- to four-dimensional systems that we carefully curated from
             the literature to provide a more holistic benchmark. ODEFormer consistently
             outperforms existing methods while displaying substantially improved robustness
             to noisy and irregularly sampled observations, as well as faster inference. We
             release our code, model and benchmark at https://github.com/sdascoli/odeformer.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Recent triumphs of machine learning (ML) spark growing enthusiasm for accelerating scientific
discovery (Davies et al., 2021; Jumper et al., 2021; Degrave et al., 2022). In particular, inferring
dynamical laws governing observational data is an extremely challenging task that is anticipated to
benefit substantially from modern ML methods. Modeling dynamical systems for forecasting, control,
and system identification has been studied by various communities within ML. Successful modern
approaches are primarily based on advances in deep learning, such as neural ordinary differential
equation (NODE) (see Chen et al. (2018) and many extensions thereof). However, these models
typically lack interpretability due to their black-box nature, which has inspired extensive research
on explainable ML of overparameterized models (Tjoa & Guan, 2020; Dwivedi et al., 2023). An
alternative approach is to directly infer human-readable representations of dynamical laws.
This is the main goal of symbolic regression (SR) techniques, which make predictions in the form
of explicit symbolic mathematical expressions directly from observations. Recent advances in SR
make it a promising alternative to infer natural laws from data and have catalyzed initial successes in
accelerating scientific discoveries (Aréchiga et al., 2021; Udrescu & Tegmark, 2021; Butter et al.,
2021). So far, SR has most commonly been used to infer a function g(x) from paired observations
(x, g(x)) – we call this functional SR. However, in many fields of science, understanding a system
involves deciphering its dynamics, i.e., inferring a function f (x) governing its evolution via an ODE
ẋ = f (x) – we call this setting dynamical SR. The task is then to uncover f from an observed solution
trajectory (t, x(t)), where observations of x(t) may be noisy and times t may be irregularly sampled.
Contributions. In this work, we introduce ODEFormer, the first Transformer trained to infer
dynamical laws in the form of multidimensional ODEs from observational (noisy, irregularly sampled)
data. It relies on large-scale training of a sequence-to-sequence transformer on diverse synthetic data,
leading to efficient and scalable inference for unseen trajectories. Faced with the lack of benchmarks
    ∗
        Equal contribution.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

        Language death model for two           Landau equation (typical                  Lotka-Volterra simple (as on            Duffing equation (weakly
                 languages                       time scale tau = 1)                             Wikipedia)                       non-linear oscillation)


    0                5              10   0                5                 10       0                5                 10   0              5               10
                     t
          Maxwell-Bloch equations
                                                          t
                                                  Lorenz equations in
                                                                                                      t
                                                                                         Binocular rivalry model with
                                                                                                                                            t
                                                                                                                                  SEIR infection model
             (laser dynamics)                well-behaved periodic regime                  adaptation (oscillations)                 (proportions)


    0               5               10   0                5               10         0                5                 10   0             5                10
                    t                                     t                                           t                                    t
Figure 1: ODEFormer predicts dynamics from noisy and irregularly sampled trajectories in 1-4
dimensional systems. Ground truth trajectories (thick lines) are corrupted (5% noise) and unevenly
sampled (50% of the equally spaced points are dropped uniformly at random), yielding the observed
data (dots) from which ODEFormer infers a symbolic ODE. Integrating the predicted ODE from the
original initial values gives a trajectory (thin lines) that closely approximates the observed data.

for dynamical SR (the only existing one, called “Strogatz dataset” (La Cava et al., 2021), contains only
seven two-dimensional systems, and is not integrated with sufficient precision (Omejc et al., 2023)),
we also introduce ODEBench, a more extensive dataset of 63 ODEs curated from the literature,
which model real-world phenomena in dimensions one to four (see Appendix A for details). On
both benchmarks, ODEFormer achieves higher accuracy than existing methods for irregular, noisy
observations while being faster than most competitors.
Problem setting and overview. We assume observations {(ti , xi )}i∈[N ] , of a solution x(t) of
ẋ = f (x), for some f : RD → RD , where xi can be noisy observations of x(ti ) with irregularly
sampled ti . Here, we use the notation [N ] := {1, . . . , N } and ẋ for the temporal derivative. The
task is to infer f in symbolic form from {(ti , xi )}i∈[N ] . As illustrated in Figure 2, ODEFormer is
based on large-scale pre-training on “labelled” examples that consist of randomly generated symbolic
mathematical expressions as the prediction target f and a discrete solution trajectory {(ti , xi )}i∈[N ]
as input, obtained by integrating ẋ = f (x) for a random initial condition.

2        R ELATED W ORK
Modeling dynamical systems. We briefly mention some relevant cornerstones from the long history
of modeling dynamical systems from data, each of which has inspired a large body of follow-up work.
Neural ODEs (NODE) (Chen et al., 2018) parameterize the ODE f by a neural network and train it
by backpropagating through ODE solvers (either directly or via adjoint sensitivity methods). NODEs
require no domain knowledge but only represent the dynamics as a generally overparameterized
black-box model void of interpretability. Assuming prior knowledge about the observed data, physics-
informed neural networks (Raissi et al., 2019; Karniadakis et al., 2021) aim to model dynamical
systems using neural networks regularized to satisfy a set of physical constraints. This approach was
recently extended to uncover unknown terms in differential equations (Podina et al., 2023). In this
work, we aim to infer interpretable dynamical equations when no domain knowledge is available.
Approaches to symbolic regression. While it is possible to generate complex analytical expressions
that fit the observations, an unnecessarily lengthy function is often impractical. Symbolic regression
seeks a balance between fidelity to the data and simplicity of form. Therefore, predictions are
typically also evaluated in terms of some “complexity” metric. Because the symbolic output makes
it difficult to formulate differentiable losses, SR has traditionally benefitted comparably little from
advances in autodifferentiation and gradient-based optimization frameworks. The dominant approach
has thus been based on evolutionary algorithms such as genetic programming (GP) (La Cava et al.,
2016b; 2018; Kommenda et al., 2020; Virgolin et al., 2021; Tohme et al., 2022; Cranmer, 2023),
optionally guided by neural networks (Mundhenk et al., 2021; Udrescu & Tegmark, 2020; Costa et al.,
2021) and recently also employing reinforcement learning (Petersen et al., 2020) – see (La Cava et al.,
2021; Makke & Chawla, 2022) for reviews. Most of these approaches require a separate optimization
for each new observed system, severely limiting scalability.


                                                                                 2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                       ...


                                                                                                                             ...


                                                                                                                                   ...
                       (+, 9783, E-3), (+, 1735, E-3), ...                                                       +
                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                 x1                      ...
                       (+, 6134, E-3), (+, 5992, E-3), ...   ...               ...                               x2
                                                                       FFN           Encoder   Decoder


 x(t)
                                                                                                                 E-4
                                                                                                                 E-3
                       (+, 1034, E-4), (+, 4365, E-4), ...
                                                                       demb
                                                                                                         Target seq.    +     x1    x2   ...
                                     N 3                     N
            time


                                       +
        Observations            Tokenization                       Embedding           Transformer              Cross-Entropy loss


Figure 2: Model overview. ODEFormer maps (noisy) observations to symbolic sequences that
represent (the right-hand side of) an ordinary differential equation (ODE). Model input includes
representations of all state variables (blue & orange) and time (gray). The model is optimized via
cross-entropy loss between the softmax distribution over the model vocabulary (gray) vs. the one-hot
encoded true target symbol (green). Target sequences are predicted in prefix notation. The illustration
includes the first three predictions [+, x2 , x1 ] for the target sequence [+, x1 , x2 ]. This example
showcases that the loss may be high despite mathematical equivalence between predicted and target
sequence - this does not impact training in practice.
Transformers for symbolic regression. With the advent of transformer models (Vaswani et al.,
2017), efficient learning of sequence-to-sequence tasks for a broad variety of modalities has become
feasible. Paired with large-scale pre-training on synthetic data, transformers have been used for
symbolic tasks such as integration (Lample & Charton, 2019), formal logic (Hahn et al., 2021), and
theorem proving (Polu & Sutskever, 2020). Few recent works applied them to functional SR (Biggio
et al., 2021; Valipour et al., 2021; Kamienny et al., 2022; Vastl et al., 2022) obtaining comparable
results to GP methods, with a key advantage: after one-time pre-training, inference is often orders
of magnitude faster since no training is needed for previously unseen systems. Landajuela et al.
(2022) recently proposed a hybrid system combining and leveraging the advantages of most previous
approaches for state of the art performance on functional SR tasks.
Symbolic regression for dynamical systems. In principle, dynamical SR, inferring f from (t, x(t)),
can be framed as functional SR for (x(t), ẋ(t)) pairs. However, when transitioning from functional
to dynamical symbolic regression, a key challenge is the absence of regression targets ẋ(t) since
temporal derivatives are usually not observed directly. A common remedy is to use numerical
approximations of the missing derivatives as surrogate targets instead. This approach has been
employed in the GP community (Gaucel et al., 2014; La Cava et al., 2016a; Kronberger et al., 2020;
Quade et al., 2016) and is also key to the widely used SINDy (Brunton et al., 2016) algorithm
which performs sparse linear regression on a manually pre-defined set of basis functions. While
SINDy is computationally efficient, its modeling capacity is limited to linear combinations of its
basis functions. Like in functional SR, neural networks have also been combined with GP for
dynamical SR (Atkinson et al., 2019), and the divide-and-conquer strategy by Udrescu & Tegmark
(2020) has also been extended to inferring dynamical systems (Weilbach et al., 2021). Omejc et al.
(2023) recently introduced ProGED, which performs dynamical SR via random search of candidate
equations, constrained by probabilistic context-free grammars (PCFGs). However, this approach
requires knowledge about the ground truth as parameters of the PCFGs need to be carefully tailored
to each problem. Finally, Qian et al. (2021) recently presented an innovative loss function to mitigate
finite difference approximations which are error-prone in the presence of signal corruptions. In the
realm of transformers, d’Ascoli et al. (2022) infer one-dimensional recurrence relations in sequences
of numbers, which as discrete maps are closely related to differential equations. Most related to our
work, Becker et al. (2023) explore a transformer-based approach to dynamical SR for ODEs (for a
detailed comparison, see Appendix H). However, their method is limited to univariate ODEs. Such
systems exhibit extremely limited behavior, where solution trajectories can only either monotonically
diverge or monotonically approach a fixed value – not even inflections let alone oscillations are
possible (Strogatz, 2000). In this work, we tackle the important yet unsolved task of efficiently
discovering arbitrary non-linear ODE systems in symbolic form directly from data in multiple
dimensions, without assuming prior knowledge of the ground truth.
Theoretical identifiability. Traditionally, the identifiability of ODEs from data has been studied in a
case-by-case analysis for pre-defined parametric functions (Åström & Eykhoff, 1971; Miao et al.,
2011; Villaverde et al., 2016; Hamelin et al., 2020). Recent work made progress on identifiability
within function classes such as linear (in parameters) autonomous ODE systems (Stanhope et al.,
2014; Duan et al., 2020; Qiu et al., 2022) or, in the scalar case, even non-parametric classes such as
analytic, algebraic, continuous, or smooth functions (Scholl et al., 2023). As it stands, it is difficult to
gain practical insights from these results for our setting as they do not conclude whether non-linear
ODEs can practically be uniquely inferred from data – see Appendix B for details.


                                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3    DATA G ENERATION
Our method builds on pretraining on a large dataset of ODEs which is assembled as follows.
Generating ODEs. For a D-dimensional ODE f , we independently sample the D component
functions f1 , . . . , fD as random unary-binary trees following the method of (Lample & Charton,
2019), where internal nodes represent mathematical operators and leaves represent constants or
variables. In our specific procedure, we first sample the system dimension D uniformly from [Dmax ]
for a fixed Dmax ∈ N and then perform the following steps for each component function:
1. Sample the number of binary operators b uniformly from [bmax ] for a fixed bmax ∈ N.
2. Sample a binary tree with b non-leaf nodes, following the procedure of Lample & Charton (2019).
3. Decorate each non-leaf node with a binary operator sampled from P (+) = 3/4 and P (×) = 1/4.1
4. For each leaf in the tree, sample one of the variables xi for i ∈ [D].
5. Sample the number of unary operators u uniformly from [umax ] for a fixed umax ∈ N.
6. Iteratively with u repetitions, select a node whose subtree has a depth smaller than 62 and insert a
   new node directly above. Populate the new node with a unary operator that is sampled uniformly
   at random from {x 7→ sin(x), x 7→ x−1 , x 7→ x2 }.
7. Convert the tree into a mathematical expression via preorder traversal (Lample & Charton, 2019).
8. Finally, prepend a coefficient to each term and wrap the argument of any unary operator in an
   affine transformation x 7→ a · x + b. Coefficients and constants of affine transformations are
   sampled independently from a log-uniform distribution on [cmin , cmax ] with cmin , cmax ∈ R.
Due to random continuous constants (and initial conditions), we almost surely never sample a function
twice. In our experiments, we use Dmax = 6, bmax = 5, umax = 3, (cmin , cmax ) = (0.05, 20).
Integrating ODEs. Once the function f is generated, we sample an initial condition x0 ∼ N (0, γID )
for a fixed γ ∈ R>0 and identity matrix ID , and integrate the ODE from t = 1 to t = T using the
numerical solver scipy.integrate.solve_ivp provided by SciPy (Virtanen et al., 2020).
The solve_ivp function defaults to an adaptive 5th order explicit Runge Kutta method with 4th
order error control (Dormand & Prince, 1980) as well as relative and absolute tolerances of 10−3
and 10−6 respectively. To avoid the sampling grid to be informative of signal variation, we use the
solver’s internal option to interpolate the adaptive step-size solution to obtain the final solution on a
equidistant grid of N sampling points, where N ∼ U{50, 200}. When integration fails, i.e., when
the solver throws an error, returns unsuccessfully, or takes longer than one second, we simply discard
the current sample. Section 4 explains in detail that we can fix T and γ during training without loss
of generality, as we can rescale observations at inference time. Hence, we use γ = 1 and T = 10.
Filtering data. Under the distribution over functions f defined implicitly by our generator, a
substantial fraction of sampled ODEs (and initial conditions) leads to solutions where at least one
component diverges over time. Continued divergence over long time spans is typically deemed
“unphysical”. Among the trajectories that remain finite, we observe that again a substantial fraction
swiftly converges towards a fixed point. Although these solutions may be realistic, their dominance
hampers diversity in our dataset. Also, stable constant observations over long times spans are arguably
rarely of interest. Hence, we use the following heuristics to increase diversity of the generated ODEs:
 • If any variable of the solution trajectory exceeds a fixed threshold (102 in our experiments), we
   discard the example. This amounts to filtering out divergent systems.
 • If the oscillation of all component functions over the last quarter of the integration range is below
   a certain threshold (10−3 in our experiments), we discard the example with a probability of 90%.3
   This filters out a majority of rapidly converging systems.

4    M ODEL , T RAINING , AND I NFERENCE
ODEFormer is an encoder-decoder transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) for end-to-end dynamical SR
as illustrated in Figure 2. The model comprises 16 attention heads and an embedding dimension
    1
      Subtractions and divisions are included via multiplication with negative numbers and the unary operator
x 7→ x−1 respectively. It has been argued that divisions appear less frequently than additions and multiplications
in “typical” expressions (Guimerà et al., 2020).
    2
      This aims at avoiding deeply nested uninterpretable expressions, which often occur in GP-based SR.
    3
      The oscillation of a function h : [a, b] → R is given by supx∈[a,b] h(x) − inf x∈[a,b] h(x).


                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


of 512, leading to a total parameter count of 86M. As observed by Charton (2022), we find that
optimal performance is achieved in an asymmetric architecture, using 4 layers in the encoder and
16 in the decoder. As measurement time is explicitly included in the inputs, we remove positional
embeddings from the encoder. ODEFormer is trained on the data set of 50M samples generated as
described in Section 3 following established principles, with details given in Appendix C. Whereas
the transformer itself follows the standard architecture, we adapted tokenization and embedding to
the particular task, i.e., inference of symbolic functions from multivariate observations.
Tokenizing numbers. Since numeric input trajectories as well as symbolic target sequences may
 contain floating point values, we need an efficient encoding scheme that allows the infinite number
 of floats to be sufficiently well conserved by a fixed-size vocabulary. Following Charton (2022),
 each number is rounded to four significant digits and disassembled into three components: sign,
 mantissa and exponent, each of which is represented by its own token. This tokenization scheme
 condenses the vocabulary size required to represent floating point values to just 10203 tokens (+,
-, 0, ..., 9999, E-100, ..., E100) and works well in practice despite the inherent loss of precision.
We also experimented with three alternative representations: (i) two-token encoding, where the sign
 and mantissa are merged together, (ii) one-token encoding where sign, mantissa and exponent are
 all merged together, (iii) a two-hot encoding inspired by Schrittwieser et al. (2020) and used by
 Becker et al. (2023), which interpolates linearly between fixed, pre-set values to represent continuous
values. These representations have the advantage of decreasing sequence length, and (iii) has the
 added benefit of increased numerical precision for the inputs. Since all three alternatives led to worse
 overall performance, we used the three token representation (sign, mantissa, exponent).
Embedding observed trajectories. For a D dimensional ODE system, the above tokenization
scheme represents data of a single observed time-point (ti , xi ) using R(D+1) × 3 tokens. Each such
token is fed separately to an embedding layer and the resulting token embeddings are concatenated
to give a combined embedding vector in R((D+1)×3)×demb for each observed time-point i. We
want a single ODEFormer model to flexibly handle systems of different dimensionalities (up to
Dmax = 6). In case the observed system has dimension D < Dmax we hence fill vacant dimensions
via zero-padding. Following Kamienny et al. (2022), the resulting embedding vector are subsequently
processed by a 2-layer fully-connected feed-forward network (FFN) with Sigmoid-weighted linear
unit (SiLU) activation functions (Elfwing et al., 2018), which reduces the dimension of the final
representation of a single time point to demb dimensions. This embedding process allows a single
trained model to flexibly handle input trajectories of variable lengths and ODE system dimensions.
Encoding symbolic functions. In addition to the tokens used to represent floating point values
as described above, the vocabulary of the decoder includes specific tokens for all operators and
variables. Importantly, the decoder is trained on expressions in prefix notations to relieve the model
from predicting parentheses (Lample & Charton, 2019). For D-dimensional systems, we simply
concatenate the encodings of the D component functions, separated by a special token “|”. With these
choices, the target sequence for an exemplary 2-dimensional ODE given by component functions
f1 (x) = cos(2.4242 · x1 ) + x2 and f2 (x) = x1 · x2 corresponds to the following token sequence
[+ cos mul + 2424 E-3 x1 x2 | mul x1 x2 ]. Using this simple method, the sequence
length scales linearly with the dimensionality of the system, i.e., the number of variables. While this
is unproblematic for small dimensions such as D ≤ Dmax = 6, it may impair the scalability of our
approach.4 As the encoder is only concerned with numeric input trajectories, its vocabulary only
includes tokens for numbers.
Decoding strategy. At inference, we use beam sampling (Van Gael et al., 2008) to decode candidate
equations, and select the candidate with highest reconstruction R2 score.5 For this, beam temperature
is an important parameter to control diversity – as the beam size increases, it typically becomes
useful to also increase the temperature to maintain diversity. Unless stated otherwise, we perform our
experiments with a beam size of 50 and a temperature of 0.1.
Inference-time rescaling. During training, the model only observes trajectories integrated on
the interval [1, 10] and starting from an initial condition sampled according to a standard normal
    4
      A possible alternative would be to treat the decoding of each component function as a separate problem,
adding a specifier to the BOS (beginning of sequence) token to identify which component is to be decoded.
    5
      Beam search tends to produce candidates which all have the same skeleton, and only differ by small
variations of the constants, leading to a lack of diversity. Beam sampling ensures that randomness is added at
each step of decoding leading to a more diverse set of candidate expressions.


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


distribution, as described in Section 3. To accommodate for different scales of initial conditions
and time ranges encountered during inference, we apply the affine transformations t 7→ t̃ = at + b
to rescale the observed time range to [1, 10] and xi (t) 7→ x̃i (t) = xi (t)/xi (t0 ) to rescale initial
values to unity. The prediction f˜ that ODEFormer provides on inputs (t̃, x̃) are then transformed as
fi = dx         1     dx̃i     1      ˜
       dt = axi (t0 ) dt̃ = axi (t0 ) fi to recover original units.
         i



Optional parameter optimization. Most SR methods break the task into two subroutines (possibly
alternating between the two): predicting the optimal “skeleton”, i.e., equation structure, and fitting of
the constants contained in the skeleton. Just like Kamienny et al. (2022), our model is end-to-end,
in the sense that it handles both subroutines simultaneously. However, we also experimented with
adding an extra parameter optimization step, as performed in methods such as ProGED (Omejc et al.,
2023). We describe the details of the parameter optimization procedure in Appendix D and denote
this method as “ODEFormer (opt)”.


5    E XPERIMENTS

Experimental tasks. For dynamical SR there is a spectrum of reasonable tasks. We could simply be
interested in finding some ODE fˆ, whose solution approximates the observed trajectory x(t) on the
observed time interval, even if fˆ still differs from f on (parts of) their domain. A more ambitious goal
closer to full identification is to find a fˆ that also approximates the correct trajectories for unobserved
initial conditions. This evaluation, which in our view is most meaningful to assess dynamical SR, is
often absent in the literature, e.g., from Omejc et al. (2023). If an inferred fˆ yields correct solutions
for all initial values and time spans, we would consider it as perfect identification of f . Accordingly,
we evaluate the following aspects of performance in our experiments.
 • Reconstruction: we compare the (noiseless, dense) ground truth trajectory with the trajectory
   obtained by integrating the predicted ODE from the same initial condition and on the same interval
   [1, T ] as the ground truth.
 • Generalization: we integrate both the ground truth and the inferred ODE for a new, different
   initial condition over the same interval [1, T ] and compare the obtained trajectories.
Metrics. When evaluating SR methods, the desired metric is whether the inferred ODE fˆ perfectly
agrees symbolically with the ground truth expression f . However, such an evaluation is problematic
primarily because (i) the ambiguity in representing mathematical expressions and non-determinism of
“simplify” operations in modern computer algebra systems render comparisons on the symbolic
level difficult, and (ii) expressions may differ symbolically, while evaluating to essentially the same
outputs on all possible inputs (e.g., in the presence of a negligible extra term). Hence, comparing
expressions numerically on a relevant range is more reliable and meaningful. Even modern computer
algebra systems include numerical evaluations in equality checks, which still require choosing a
range on which to compare expressions (Meurer et al., 2017). We consider the following metrics.
 • Accuracy: A classical performance    metric for regression tasks is the coefficient of determination,
                                     2 P
   defined as R2 = 1 − i (yi −ŷi ) / i (yi −ȳ)2 ∈ (−∞, 1]. Since R2 is unbounded from below,
                           P

   average R2 -scores across multiple predictions may be severely biased by even a single particularly
   poor outlier. We therefore instead report the percentage of predictions for which the R2 exceeds a
   threshold of 0.9 in the main text and show the distribution of scores in Appendix I.
 • Complexity: we define the complexity of a symbolic expression to be the total number of operators,
   variables and constants. We acknowledge that this is a crude measure, for example, it would
   assign a lower complexity to exp(tan(x)) (complexity=3) than to 1 + 2x (complexity=5). Yet,
   there is no agreed-upon meaning of the term “complexity” for a symbolic expression in this
   context so that simply counting “constituents” is common in the literature, see e.g. the discussion
   in the benchmark by La Cava et al. (2021).
 • Inference time: time to produce a prediction.
Datasets. We evaluate ODEFormer on a test set which is generated following the description in
Section 3. Although the test set is sampled from the same distribution as the training data, the
presence of continuous constants within every sample (step 8 in the sampling procedure in Section 3)
as well as i.i.d. initial values ensures that the test data does not overlap with the training data. In
addition we also evaluate our approach on two datasets not obtained via our generation procedure.


                                                     6
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                       100


% Accuracy (R 2>0.9)
                        80
                        60
                        40
                        20
                         0
                             2       4        6   0       2      4      6       20      40       60     50 100 150        200
                             # dimensions             # unary operators         # binary operators             # points
                               reconstruction         clean data                        5% noise, 0% subsampling
                               generalization         0% noise, 25% subsampling         5% noise, 25% subsampling
 Figure 3: Ablation study on synthetic data. We vary four parameters governing the difficulty of
 an example (from left to right): the dimension of the system, the total number of unary and binary
 operators, and the number of points in the trajectory. In each panel, we average the results over a
 dataset of 10,000 examples.
 For this we first consider the “Strogatz dataset”, included in the Penn Machine Learning Benchmark
 (PMLB) database (La Cava et al., 2021). It consists of seven ODE systems and has been used as a
 benchmark by various SR methods, in particular those specialized on dynamical SR (Omejc et al.,
 2023). However, it has several limitations: (i) it is small (only seven unique ODEs, each integrated for
 4 different initial conditions), (ii) it only contains 2-dimensional systems, (iii) it is not integrated with
 sufficient precision (Omejc et al., 2023), and (iv) its annotations are misleading (e.g., claiming that all
 systems develop chaos even though none of them does). Faced with these limitations, we introduce
 ODEBench, an extended benchmark curated from ODEs that have been used by Strogatz (2000)
 to model real-world phenomena as well as well-known systems from Wikipedia. We fix parameter
 values to obtain the behavior the models were developed for, and choose two initial conditions for
 each equation to evaluate generalization. ODEBench consists of 63 ODEs (1D: 23, 2D: 28, 3D: 10,
 4D: 2), four of which exhibit chaotic behavior. We publicly release ODEBench with descriptions,
 sources of all equations, and well integrated solution trajectories – more details are in Appendix A.
Corruptions. For all datasets, we also compare models on their robustness to two types of corruption:
(i) to simulate imprecise observations we add measurements noise to the observations via xj (ti ) →
(1 + ξ)xj (ti ) for j ∈ [D], i ∈ [N ] and ξ ∼ N (0, σ); (ii) to simulate missing data and imperfect
sampling processes, we drop a fraction ρ of the observations along the trajectory uniformly at random.
We report results for various noise levels σ and subsampling fractions ρ. In addition, an experiment
when entire intervals of data are missing (e.g. due to a sensor fault) can be found in Appendix F.
 Baselines. In our experiments, we extensively compare ODEFormer with (strong representatives
 of) existing methods described in Table 1. All baseline models are fitted to each equation separately,
 including a separate hyperparameter optimization per equation. In contrast, we evaluate a single,
 pre-trained ODEFormer model on all equations in all benchmarks. ODEFormer is hence the only
 model which does not require any hyperparameter tuning or prior knowledge on the set of operators
 to be used. Apart from ProGED and SINDy, all baselines were developed for functional SR. We
 use them for dynamical SR as described in Section 2, by computing temporal derivatives ẋi (t) via
 finite differences with hyperparameter search on the approximation order and optional use of a
 Savitzky-Savgol filter for smoothing. For more details, please refer to Appendix E. Moreover, for
 a performance comparison to the closely related univariate ODE inference model by Becker et al.
 (2023) see Appendix H.2.

  5.1                    R ESULTS

 Synthetic data We first assess how the performance of ODEFormer is affected by the dimensionality
 of the ODE system, the number of operators, and the number of points in the trajectory. Results on a
 test set comprising 10,000 i.i.d. examples generated as described in Section 3 are shown in Figure 3 –
 we asses the effect of the beam size in Appendix G. We make three observations:
          • Performance degrades with the system dimensionality as well as number of unary and binary
            operators as expected while ODEFormer is surprisingly insensitive to the number of points in the
            trajectory across the tested range.
          • Generalization accuracy is substantially lower than reconstruction accuracy as expected, but at
            least for low-dimensional systems we achieve non-trivial generalization (e.g., 60% generalization
            accuracy vs 85% reconstruction accuracy for 1D).
          • ODEFormer copes well with subsampling, but suffers more from noisy trajectories. However, the
            effect on generalization is smaller than that on reconstruction.


                                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



Table 1: Overview of models. f.d.: finite differences required, ode: method developed for dynamical
SR, T: transformer-based, GP: genetic programming, MC: Monte Carlo, reg: regression

    name            type   ode    f.d.                  description                              reference
 ODEFormer           T     yes    no              seq.-to-seq. translation                          ours
    AFP             GP     no     yes         age-fitness Pareto optimization            (Schmidt & Lipson, 2011)
  FE-AFP            GP     no     yes      AFP with co-evolved fitness estimates         (Schmidt & Lipson, 2011)
    EHC             GP     no     yes        AFP with epigenetic hillclimbing                  (La Cava, 2016)
  EPLEX             GP     no     yes            epsilon-lexicase selection                (La Cava et al., 2016b)
   PySR             GP     no     yes       AutoML-Zero + simulated annealing                 (Cranmer, 2023)
   SINDy            reg    yes    yes             sparse linear regression                  (Brunton et al., 2016)
    FFX             reg    no     yes    pathwise regularized ElasticNet regression          (McConaghy, 2011)
  ProGED            MC     yes    yes    MC on probabilistic context free grammars           (Omejc et al., 2023)



Reconstruction results. We present results on both “Strogatz” and ODEBench in Figure 4. From top
to bottom, we ranked methods by their average accuracy across all noise and subsampling levels. The
ranking is similar on the two benchmarks and ODEFormer achieves the highest average score on both.
The two leftmost panels show that ODEFormer is only occasionally outperformed by PySR when
the data is very clean – as noise and subsampling kick in, ODEFormer gains an increasingly large
advantage over all other methods. In the two rightmost panels of Figure 4, we show the distributions
of complexity and inference time. ODEFormer runs on the order of seconds, versus minutes for all
other methods except SINDy, while maintaining relatively low and consistent equation complexity
even at high noise levels. We show figures for all predictions in Appendix A.

                           =0.0           =0.01         =0.02          =0.03            =0.04          =0.05
ODEFormer (opt)       =0                      = 0.5
    ODEFormer
            PySR
             FFX
             EHC
     SINDy (poly)
      SINDy (esc)
    ProGED (poly)
         ProGED
             AFP
           EPLEX
          FE-AFP
           SINDy
                    0 20 40 60 80 100 0 20 40 60 80 100 101 103 105 107                      100 101 102 103
                     % Accuracy (R2 > 0.9) % Accuracy (R2 > 0.9) complexity                  inference time [sec.]
                                          (a) Reconstruction on Strogatz
ODEFormer (opt)       =0                      = 0.5
    ODEFormer
            PySR
             FFX
     SINDy (poly)
             EHC
    ProGED (poly)
         ProGED
             AFP
      SINDy (esc)
          FE-AFP
           EPLEX
           SINDy
                    0 20 40 60 80 100 0 20 40 60 80 100 100                102 104      106 100 102 104
                    % Accuracy (R2 > 0.9) % Accuracy (R2 > 0.9)            complexity       inference time [sec.]
                                         (b) Reconstruction on ODEBench
Figure 4: Performance comparison. We compare ODEFormer (and ODEFormer (opt) for additional
parameter optimization) to existing methods, following the protocol described in Section 5. We
present results for two values of the subsampling parameter ρ and six values of the noise parameter σ.
Whiskers in box plot panels mark minimum and maximum values.



                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Generalization results. We present general-           =0.0      =0.01      =0.02       =0.03     =0.04     =0.05
ization results on ODEBench in Figure 5. Con- ODEFormer (opt) = 0                              = 0.5
sistently across all models, accuracies drop by        ODEFormer
                                                               PySR
about half, meaning that half the correctly recon-              EHC
structed ODEs do not match the ground truth           ProGED (poly)
symbolically. This highlights the importance                    FFX
                                                            ProGED
of evaluating dynamical SR on different initial                 AFP
conditions. Note, however, that the overall rank-            FE-AFP
ings of the different methods is rather consistent       SINDy (esc)
                                                              EPLEX
with the reconstruction results, and ODEFormer          SINDy (poly)
achieves the best results on average thanks to its            SINDy
robustness to noise and subsampling.                                  0      25       50 0           25     50
                                                                      % Accuracy (R2 > 0.9) % Accuracy (R2 > 0.9)
                                                   Figure 5: Generalization on ODEBench. We
                                                   consider the same setting as in Figure 4.

6    C ONCLUSION


We foresee real-world applications of ODEFormer across the sciences, for hypothesis generation of
dynamical laws underlying experimental observations. However, in the following we also highlight
several limitations of the current method, opening up interesting directions for future work.
First, we only considered first order ODEs. While any higher-order ODE can be written as a system
of first order ODEs, this does not immediately allow ODEFormer to make predictions based only on
a solution trajectory, since we would still need to approximate time derivatives up to the order of the
ODE. While possible in principle via finite differencing schemes, we would suffer similar drawbacks
as other methods that rely on finite differences from noisy, irregularly sampled data.
Second, ODEFormer only works when all variables are observed. In real-world settings, some
relevant variables may be unknown or unobservable. For example, inferring chemical kinematics
may be challenged by the difficulty in measuring the concentration of reaction intermediates (Burés
& Larrosa, 2023). We may circumvent this issue by randomly masking variables during training
(replacing their observations by a dedicated token), to emulate unobserved variables. While this
raises questions around identifiability and robustness, we plan to explore masking in future work.
This technique could also handle higher-order ODEs by considering the derivatives as unobserved.
Third, based on the four representatives in ODEBench, ODEFormer (as well as all other benchmarked
models) struggles with chaotic systems, which have been argued to provide good assessments for data-
driven modeling and forecasting (Gilpin, 2021). For chaotic systems, understanding properties of the
attractor is often more desirable: nearby trajectories diverge exponentially, rendering identification
notoriously challenging. Dynamical law learning from short (transient) trajectories for chaotic
systems remains an interesting direction for future work.
Lastly, all existing methods for dynamical SR, including ours, perform inference based on a single
observed trajectory. In our opinion, one of the most promising directions for future work is to enable
inference from multiple solution trajectories of the same ODE. Key benefits may include averaging
out possible noise sources as well as improving identifiability, as we “explore the domain of f ”.
However, initial experiments with various forms of logit aggregation in ODEFormer’s decoder during
inference did not yield convincing results. In future work, we plan to exploit a cross-attention encoder
to combine the embeddings of the different trajectories to leverage the combined information, in the
spirit of Liu et al. (2023).
In addition to developing solutions to these limitation another exciting direction for future work
concerns the extension of the framework towards other classes of differential equations, e.g. partial or
stochastic DEs. Although conceptually straightforwards, finding scalable data generation procedures
for these classes may be challenging - yet would considerably expand the set of possible applications.
We conclude by emphasizing that the difficulty and potential ambiguity in dynamical law learning calls
for caution during deployment. Methods like ODEFormer primarily serve as hypothesis generators,
ultimately requiring further experimental verification, something that can be done well based on
ODEs (rather than black-box models).


                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


7   R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
The reproducibility of our work is ensured through several means. First and foremost, all
code, model weights, and created benchmark datasets will be made publicly available at
https://github.com/sdascoli/odeformer together with notebooks to directly reproduce key results,
as well as a pip-installable package for easy usage. We also describe in detail the data generation in
Section 3, our architecture and model choices in Section 4, and additional details about training in
Appendices C and D.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Luca Biggio, François Charton and Tommaso Bendinelli for insightful conversations. We
acknowledge funding from the EPFL’s AI4science program (SA), Helmholtz Association under the
joint research school “Munich School for Data Science - MUDS" (SB), Swiss National Science
Foundation grant (310030_212516) (AM), NCCR Catalysis (grant number 180544), and a National
Centre of Competence in Research funded by the Swiss National Science Foundation (PS). The
authors gratefully acknowledge the Gauss Centre for Supercomputing e.V. (www.gauss-centre.eu) for
funding this project (application number 29063, project “dynadis”) by providing computing time on
the GCS Supercomputer JUWELS (Jülich Supercomputing Centre, 2021) at Jülich Supercomputing
Centre (JSC).

R EFERENCES
Nikos Aréchiga, Francine Chen, Yan-Ying Chen, Yanxia Zhang, Rumen Iliev, Heishiro Toyoda,
  and Kent Lyons. Accelerating understanding of scientific experiments with end to end symbolic
  regression. ArXiv, abs/2112.04023, 2021.
Karl Johan Åström and Peter Eykhoff. System identification—a survey. Automatica, 7(2):123–162,
 1971.
Steven Atkinson, Waad Subber, Liping Wang, Genghis Khan, Philippe Hawi, and Roger
  Ghanem. Data-driven discovery of free-form governing differential equations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1910.05117, 2019.
Sören Becker, Michal Klein, Alexander Neitz, Giambattista Parascandolo, and Niki Kilbertus.
  Predicting ordinary differential equations with transformers. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 1978–2002. PMLR, 2023.
Luca Biggio, Tommaso Bendinelli, Alexander Neitz, Aurelien Lucchi, and Giambattista Parascandolo.
  Neural symbolic regression that scales. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  936–945. PMLR, 2021.
Steven L. Brunton, Joshua L. Proctor, and J. Nathan Kutz. Discovering governing equations from data
  by sparse identification of nonlinear dynamical systems. Proceedings of the National Academy
  of Sciences, 113(15):3932–3937, 2016. ISSN 0027-8424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1517384113. URL
  https://www.pnas.org/content/113/15/3932.
Jordi Burés and Igor Larrosa. Organic reaction mechanism classification using machine learning.
  Nature, 613(7945):689–695, 2023.
Anja Butter, Tilman Plehn, Nathalie Soybelman, and Johann Brehmer. Back to the formula—lhc
  edition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.10414, 2021.
Francois Charton. Linear algebra with transformers. Transactions on Machine Learning Research,
  2022.
Ricky TQ Chen, Yulia Rubanova, Jesse Bettencourt, and David K Duvenaud. Neural ordinary
  differential equations. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Allan Costa, Rumen Dangovski, Owen Dugan, Samuel Kim, Pawan Goyal, Marin Soljačić, and
  Joseph Jacobson. Fast neural models for symbolic regression at scale, 2021.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Miles Cranmer. Interpretable machine learning for science with pysr and symbolicregression. jl.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.01582, 2023.
Stéphane d’Ascoli, Pierre-Alexandre Kamienny, Guillaume Lample, and Francois Charton. Deep
  symbolic regression for recurrence prediction. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song,
  Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  4520–4536. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/
  d-ascoli22a.html.
A Davies, P Velickovic, L Buesing, S Blackwell, D Zheng, N Tomasev, R Tanburn, P Battaglia,
  C Blundell, A Juhasz, et al. Advancing mathematics by guiding human intuition with ai. Nature,
  2021.
Brian de Silva, Kathleen Champion, Markus Quade, Jean-Christophe Loiseau, J Nathan Kutz, and
  Steven Brunton. PySINDy: A Python package for the sparse identification of nonlinear dynamical
  systems from data. Journal of Open Source Software, 5(49):1–4, 2020.
Jonas Degrave, Federico Felici, Jonas Buchli, Michael Neunert, Brendan Tracey, Francesco Carpanese,
  Timo Ewalds, Roland Hafner, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Diego de Las Casas, et al. Magnetic control of
  tokamak plasmas through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 602(7897):414–419, 2022.
John R Dormand and Peter J Prince. A family of embedded runge-kutta formulae. Journal of
  computational and applied mathematics, 6(1):19–26, 1980.
X Duan, JE Rubin, and D Swigon. Identification of affine dynamical systems from a single trajectory.
  Inverse Problems, 36(8):085004, 2020.
Rudresh Dwivedi, Devam Dave, Het Naik, Smiti Singhal, Rana Omer, Pankesh Patel, Bin Qian,
  Zhenyu Wen, Tejal Shah, Graham Morgan, et al. Explainable ai (xai): Core ideas, techniques, and
  solutions. ACM Computing Surveys, 55(9):1–33, 2023.
Stefan Elfwing, Eiji Uchibe, and Kenji Doya. Sigmoid-weighted linear units for neural network
  function approximation in reinforcement learning. Neural networks, 107:3–11, 2018.
Sébastien Gaucel, Maarten Keijzer, Evelyne Lutton, and Alberto Tonda. Learning dynamical systems
  using standard symbolic regression. In Genetic Programming: 17th European Conference, EuroGP
  2014, Granada, Spain, April 23-25, 2014, Revised Selected Papers 17, pp. 25–36. Springer, 2014.
William Gilpin. Chaos as an interpretable benchmark for forecasting and data-driven modelling. In
 Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track
 (Round 2), 2021.
Roger Guimerà, Ignasi Reichardt, Antoni Aguilar-Mogas, Francesco A Massucci, Manuel Miranda,
  Jordi Pallarès, and Marta Sales-Pardo. A bayesian machine scientist to aid in the solution of
  challenging scientific problems. Science advances, 6(5):eaav6971, 2020.
Christopher Hahn, Frederik Schmitt, Jens U Kreber, Markus N Rabe, and Bernd Finkbeiner. Teaching
  temporal logics to neural networks. In 9th International Conference on Learning Representations,
  ICLR 2021, Virtual Event, Austria, May 3-7, 2021. OpenReview.net, 2021. URL https://
  openreview.net/forum?id=dOcQK-f4byz.
Frédéric Hamelin, Abderrahman Iggidr, Alain Rapaport, and Gauthier Sallet. Observability, identifia-
  bility and epidemiology a survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.12202, 2020.
A.C. Hindmarsh and Lawrence Livermore Laboratory. ODEPACK, a Systematized Collection of ODE
  Solvers. Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, 1982. URL https://books.google.
  de/books?id=9XWPmwEACAAJ.
Jülich Supercomputing Centre. JUWELS Cluster and Booster: Exascale Pathfinder with Modular
  Supercomputing Architecture at Juelich Supercomputing Centre. Journal of large-scale research fa-
  cilities, 7(A138), 2021. doi: 10.17815/jlsrf-7-183. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.17815/
  jlsrf-7-183.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


John Jumper, Richard Evans, Alexander Pritzel, Tim Green, Michael Figurnov, Olaf Ronneberger,
  Kathryn Tunyasuvunakool, Russ Bates, Augustin Žídek, Anna Potapenko, et al. Highly accurate
  protein structure prediction with alphafold. Nature, 596(7873):583–589, 2021.
Pierre-Alexandre Kamienny, Stéphane d’Ascoli, Guillaume Lample, and Francois Charton. End-to-
  end symbolic regression with transformers. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave,
  and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=GoOuIrDHG_Y.
George Em Karniadakis, Ioannis G Kevrekidis, Lu Lu, Paris Perdikaris, Sifan Wang, and Liu Yang.
  Physics-informed machine learning. Nature Reviews Physics, 3(6):422–440, 2021.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. 2015.
Michael Kommenda, Bogdan Burlacu, Gabriel Kronberger, and Michael Affenzeller. Parameter
 identification for symbolic regression using nonlinear least squares. Genetic Programming and
 Evolvable Machines, 21(3):471–501, 2020. doi: 10.1007/s10710-019-09371-3. URL https:
 //doi.org/10.1007/s10710-019-09371-3.
Gabriel Kronberger, Lukas Kammerer, and Michael Kommenda. Identification of dynamical systems
  using symbolic regression. In Roberto Moreno-Díaz, Franz Pichler, and Alexis Quesada-Arencibia
  (eds.), Computer Aided Systems Theory – EUROCAST 2019, pp. 370–377, Cham, 2020. Springer
  International Publishing. ISBN 978-3-030-45093-9.
William La Cava, Kourosh Danai, and Lee Spector. Inference of compact nonlinear dynamic models
 by epigenetic local search. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence, 55:292–306, 2016a.
William La Cava, Lee Spector, and Kourosh Danai. Epsilon-lexicase selection for regression. In
 Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference 2016, pp. 741–748, 2016b.
William La Cava, Tilak Raj Singh, James Taggart, Srinivas Suri, and Jason H Moore. Learning
 concise representations for regression by evolving networks of trees. In International Conference
 on Learning Representations, 2018.
William La Cava, Patryk Orzechowski, Bogdan Burlacu, Fabricio Olivetti de Franca, Marco Virgolin,
 Ying Jin, Michael Kommenda, and Jason H Moore. Contemporary symbolic regression methods
 and their relative performance. Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
 Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 1), 2021.
William G La Cava. Automatic Development and Adaptation of Concise Nonlinear Models for System
 Identification. PhD thesis, University of Massachusetts Amherst, 2016.
Guillaume Lample and François Charton. Deep learning for symbolic mathematics. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Mikel Landajuela, Chak Shing Lee, Jiachen Yang, Ruben Glatt, Claudio P Santiago, Ignacio Aravena,
 Terrell Mundhenk, Garrett Mulcahy, and Brenden K Petersen. A unified framework for deep
 symbolic regression. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:33985–33998, 2022.
Yuchen Liu, Natasha Ong, Kaiyan Peng, Bo Xiong, Qifan Wang, Rui Hou, Madian Khabsa, Kaiyue
  Yang, David Liu, Donald S Williamson, et al. Mmvit: Multiscale multiview vision transformers.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.00104, 2023.
Nour Makke and Sanjay Chawla. Interpretable scientific discovery with symbolic regression: a
  review. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.10873, 2022.
Trent McConaghy. Ffx: Fast, scalable, deterministic symbolic regression technology. In Genetic
  Programming Theory and Practice IX, pp. 235–260. Springer, 2011.

Aaron Meurer, Christopher P Smith, Mateusz Paprocki, Ondřej Čertík, Sergey B Kirpichev, Matthew
  Rocklin, AMiT Kumar, Sergiu Ivanov, Jason K Moore, Sartaj Singh, et al. Sympy: symbolic
  computing in python. PeerJ Computer Science, 3:e103, 2017.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Hongyu Miao, Xiaohua Xia, Alan S Perelson, and Hulin Wu. On identifiability of nonlinear ode
  models and applications in viral dynamics. SIAM review, 53(1):3–39, 2011.
Terrell Mundhenk, Mikel Landajuela, Ruben Glatt, Claudio P Santiago, Daniel Faissol, and Brenden K
  Petersen. Symbolic regression via deep reinforcement learning enhanced genetic programming
  seeding. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:24912–24923, 2021.
Jorge Nocedal and Stephen J. Wright. Numerical Optimization. Springer, New York, NY, USA, 2e
  edition, 2006.
Nina Omejc, Boštjan Gec, Jure Brence, Ljupčo Todorovski, and Sašo Džeroski. Probabilistic
  grammars for modeling dynamical systems from coarse, noisy, and partial data. Researchsquare
  preprint rs-2678362, 2023. doi: https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-2678362/v1.
Fabian Pedregosa, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gramfort, Vincent Michel, Bertrand Thirion, Olivier
  Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron Weiss, Vincent Dubourg, Jak Vanderplas, Alexan-
  dre Passos, David Cournapeau, Matthieu Brucher, Matthieu Perrot, and Édouard Duchesnay.
  Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. JMLR, 2011.
Brenden K Petersen, Mikel Landajuela Larma, Terrell N Mundhenk, Claudio Prata Santiago,
  Soo Kyung Kim, and Joanne Taery Kim. Deep symbolic regression: Recovering mathemat-
  ical expressions from data via risk-seeking policy gradients. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2020.
Lena Podina, Brydon Eastman, and Mohammad Kohandel. Universal physics-informed neural
  networks: Symbolic differential operator discovery with sparse data. In Andreas Krause, Emma
  Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), Pro-
  ceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings
  of Machine Learning Research, pp. 27948–27956. PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023.
Stanislas Polu and Ilya Sutskever. Generative language modeling for automated theorem proving.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.03393, 2020.
Zhaozhi Qian, Krzysztof Kacprzyk, and Mihaela van der Schaar. D-code: Discovering closed-form
  odes from observed trajectories. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Xing Qiu, Tao Xu, Babak Soltanalizadeh, and Hulin Wu. Identifiability analysis of linear ordinary
  differential equation systems with a single trajectory. Applied Mathematics and Computation, 430:
  127260, 2022.
Markus Quade, Markus Abel, Kamran Shafi, Robert K Niven, and Bernd R Noack. Prediction of
 dynamical systems by symbolic regression. Physical Review E, 94(1):012214, 2016.
Maziar Raissi, Paris Perdikaris, and George E Karniadakis. Physics-informed neural networks: A
 deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial
 differential equations. Journal of Computational physics, 378:686–707, 2019.
Michael Schmidt and Hod Lipson. Age-fitness pareto optimization. In Genetic programming theory
 and practice VIII, pp. 129–146. Springer, 2011.
Philipp Scholl, Aras Bacho, Holger Boche, and Gitta Kutyniok. The uniqueness problem of physical
  law learning. In ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
  Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 1–5. IEEE, 2023.
Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Thomas Hubert, Karen Simonyan, Laurent Sifre, Simon
  Schmitt, Arthur Guez, Edward Lockhart, Demis Hassabis, Thore Graepel, et al. Mastering atari,
  go, chess and shogi by planning with a learned model. Nature, 588(7839):604–609, 2020.
Shelby Stanhope, Jonathan E Rubin, and David Swigon. Identifiability of linear and linear-in-
  parameters dynamical systems from a single trajectory. SIAM Journal on Applied Dynamical
  Systems, 13(4):1792–1815, 2014.
Steven H. Strogatz. Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos: With Applications to Physics, Biology, Chemistry
  and Engineering. Westview Press, 2000.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Erico Tjoa and Cuntai Guan. A survey on explainable artificial intelligence (xai): Toward medical
  xai. IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems, 32(11):4793–4813, 2020.
Tony Tohme, Dehong Liu, and Kamal Youcef-Toumi. Gsr: A generalized symbolic regression
  approach. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2022.
Silviu-Marian Udrescu and Max Tegmark. Ai feynman: A physics-inspired method for symbolic
   regression. Science Advances, 6(16):eaay2631, 2020.
Silviu-Marian Udrescu and Max Tegmark. Symbolic pregression: Discovering physical laws from
   raw distorted video. Physical review. E, 103 4-1:043307, 2021.
Mojtaba Valipour, Bowen You, Maysum Panju, and Ali Ghodsi. Symbolicgpt: A generative trans-
 former model for symbolic regression. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.14131, 2021.
Jurgen Van Gael, Yunus Saatci, Yee Whye Teh, and Zoubin Ghahramani. Beam sampling for the
  infinite hidden markov model. In Proceedings of the 25th international conference on Machine
  learning, pp. 1088–1095, 2008.
Martin Vastl, Jonáš Kulhánek, Jirí Kubalík, Erik Derner, and Robert Babuška. Symformer: End-to-
 end symbolic regression using transformer-based architecture. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.15764,
 2022.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in neural information
  processing systems, pp. 5998–6008, 2017.
Alejandro F Villaverde, Antonio Barreiro, and Antonis Papachristodoulou. Structural identifiability
  of dynamic systems biology models. PLoS computational biology, 12(10):e1005153, 2016.
Marco Virgolin, Tanja Alderliesten, Cees Witteveen, and Peter AN Bosman. Improving model-based
 genetic programming for symbolic regression of small expressions. Evolutionary computation, 29
 (2):211–237, 2021.
Pauli Virtanen, Ralf Gommers, Travis E Oliphant, Matt Haberland, Tyler Reddy, David Cournapeau,
  Evgeni Burovski, Pearu Peterson, Warren Weckesser, Jonathan Bright, et al. Scipy 1.0: fundamental
  algorithms for scientific computing in python. Nature methods, 17(3):261–272, 2020.
Juliane Weilbach, Sebastian Gerwinn, Christian Weilbach, and Melih Kandemir. Inferring the
  structure of ordinary differential equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.07345, 2021.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    ODEB ENCH
ODEBench features a selection of ordinary differential equations primarily from Steven Strogatz’s
book “Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos” with manually chosen parameter values and initial condi-
tions (Strogatz, 2000). Some other famous known systems have been selected from other sources
such as Wikipedia, which are included in the dictionary entries as well. We selected ODEs primarily
based on whether they have actually been suggested as models for real-world phenomena as well as
on whether they are ‘iconic’ ODEs in the sense that they are often used as examples in textbooks
and/or have recognizable names. Whenever there were ‘realistic’ parameter values suggested, we
chose those.
In this benchmark, we typically include only one set of parameter values per equation. Many of the
ODEs in Strogatz’ book are analyzed in terms of the different limit behavior for different parameter
settings. For some systems that exhibit wildly different behavior for different parameter settings, we
include multiple sets of parameter values as separate equations (e.g., the Lorenz system in chaotic and
non-chaotic regimes). For each equation, we include two sets of manually chosen initial conditions.
There are 23 equations in one dimension, 28 equations in two dimensions, 10 equations in three
dimensions, and 2 equations in four dimensions. This results in a total of 63 equations, 4 of which
display chaotic behavior. We provide the analytical expressions and initial conditions in Tables 2 to 4,
visualizations of a single trajectory for each ODE in Figure 6, and ODEFormer’s predictions for each
ODE in Figure 7.


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 ID   System description                       Equation                                          Parameters               Initial values
                                                    x0
                                               c0 −
                                                    c1
 1    RC-circuit (charging capacitor)             c2
                                                                                                 0.7, 1.2, 2.31           [10.0], [3.54]
 2    Population growth (naive)                c0 x0                                             0.23                     [4.78], [0.87]
                                                             x

 3    Population growth with carrying ca-      c0 x0 · 1 − c 0                                   0.79, 74.3               [7.3], [21.0]
                                                                1
      pacity
 4    RC-circuit with non-linear resistor      −0.5 +       1                                    0.5, 0.96                [0.8], [0.02]
                                                            x
                                                        c0 − 0
      (charging capacitor)                             e    c1 +1
 5    Velocity of a falling object with air    c0 − c1 x2
                                                        0                                        9.81, 0.0021175          [0.5], [73.0]
      resistance
 6    Autocatalysis with one fixed abun-       c0 x0 − c1 x2
                                                           0                                     2.1, 0.5                 [0.13], [2.24]
      dant chemical
 7    Gompertz law for tumor growth            c0 x0
                                                     log (c1 x0 )                                0.032, 2.29              [1.73], [9.5]
                                                               x              x

 8    Logistic equation with Allee effect      c0 x0 −1 + c 0            1 − c0                  0.14, 130.0, 4.4         [6.123], [2.1]
                                                                 2             1
 9    Language death model for two lan-        c0 · (1 − x0 ) − c1 x0                            0.32, 0.28               [0.14], [0.55]
      guages
                                                   c
 10   Refined language death model for         c0 x01 · (1 − x0 ) − x0 · (1 − c0 ) (1 − x0 )c1   0.2, 1.2                 [0.83], [0.34]
      two languages
 11   Naive critical slowing down (statis-     −x3
                                                 0                                                                        [3.4], [1.6]
      tical mechanics)
 12   Photons in a laser (simple)              c0 x0 − c1 x2
                                                           0                                     1.8, 0.1107              [11.0], [1.3]
 13   Overdamped bead on a rotating            c0 (c1 cos (x0 ) − 1) sin (x0 )                   0.0981, 9.7              [3.1], [2.4]
      hoop

                                                           x
                                                                 c x2
 14   Budworm outbreak model with pre-         c0 x0 · 1 − c 0 − 23 02                           0.78, 81.0, 21.2, 0.9    [2.76], [23.3]
                                                                1         c2 +x0
      dation

                                                           x
                                                                           x2
 15   Budworm outbreak with predation          c0 x0 · 1 − c 0 −             0                   0.4, 95.0                [44.3], [4.5]
                                                                1         x2
                                                                           0 +1
      (dimensionless)
 16   Landau equation (typical time scale      c0 x0 − c1 x3        5
                                                           0 − c 2 x0                            0.1, -0.04, 0.001        [0.94], [1.65]
      tau = 1)
                                                           x

 17   Logistic equation with harvest-          c0 x0 · 1 − c 0 − c2                              0.4, 100.0, 0.3          [14.3], [34.2]
                                                                1
      ing/fishing
                                                           x

                                                                  c x
 18   Improved logistic equation with har-     c0 x0 · 1 − c 0 − c 2+x0                          0.4, 100.0, 0.24, 50.0   [21.1], [44.1]
                                                                1         3       0
      vesting/fishing
                                                  c x
 19   Improved logistic equation with har-     − c 0+x0 + x0 · (1 − x0 )                         0.08, 0.8                [0.13], [0.03]
                                                  1    0
      vesting/fishing (dimensionless)
                                                             x2
 20   Autocatalytic gene switching (di-        c0 − c1 x0 + 2 0                                  0.1, 0.55                [0.002], [0.25]
                                                            x0 +1
      mensionless)
 21   Dimensionally reduced SIR infec-         c0 − c1 x0 − e−x0                                 1.2, 0.2                 [0.0], [0.8]
      tion model for dead people (dimen-
      sionless)
                                                       c1 x 5
                                                            0 −c x
 22   Hysteretic activation of a protein ex-   c0 +             3 0                              1.4, 0.4, 123.0, 0.89    [3.1], [6.3]
                                                      c2 +x5 0
      pression (positive feedback, basal
      promoter expression)
 23   Overdamped                 pendulum      c0 − sin (x0 )                                    0.21                     [-2.74], [1.65]
      with         constant         driving
      torque/fireflies/Josephson       junc-
      tion (dimensionless)


                                               Table 2: Scalar ODEs in ODEBench.


                                                                              16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  ID   System description                     Equation                                    Parameters              Initial values
                                              (
                                                  x1
  24   Harmonic oscillator without damp-                                                  2.1                     [0.4, -0.03], [0.0, 0.2]
       ing                                        −c0 x0
                                              (
                                                  x1
  25   Harmonic oscillator with damping                                                   4.5, 0.43               [0.12, 0.043], [0.0, -0.3]
                                                  −c0 x0 − c1 x1
                                              (
                                                  x0 (c0 − c1 x1 − x0 )
  26   Lotka-Volterra competition model                                                   3.0, 2.0, 2.0           [5.0, 4.3], [2.3, 3.6]
       (Strogatz version with sheeps and          x1 (c2 − x0 − x1 )
       rabbits)                               (
                                                  x0 (c0 − c1 x1 )
  27   Lotka-Volterra   simple     (as   on                                               1.84, 1.45, 3.0, 1.62   [8.3, 3.4], [0.4, 0.65]
       Wikipedia)                                 −x1 (c2 − c3 x0 )
                                              (
                                                  x1
  28   Pendulum without friction                                                          0.9                     [-1.9, 0.0], [0.3, 0.8]
                                                  −c0 sin (x0 )
                                              (
                                                  c0 x0 x1
  29   Dipole fixed point                                                                 0.65                    [3.2, 1.4], [1.3, 0.2]
                                                  −x2      2
                                                      0 + x1
                                              (
                                                  x0 (−c0 x0 x1 + x1 )
  30   RNA molecules catalyzing each oth-                                                 1.61                    [0.3, 0.04], [0.1, 0.21]
       ers replication                            x1 (−c0 x0 x1 + x0 )
                                              (
                                                  −c0 x0 x1
  31   SIR infection model only for healthy                                               0.4, 0.314              [7.2, 0.98], [20.0, 12.4]
       and sick                                   c0 x0 x1 − c1 x1
                                              (
                                                  x1
  32   Damped double well oscillator                                                      0.18                    [-1.8, -1.8], [5.8, 0.0]
                                                  −c0 x1 − x3
                                                            0 + x0
                                                  −c0 x2
                                              (
                                                       0 − sin (x1 )
  33   Glider (dimensionless)                            cos (x1 )                        0.08                    [5.0, 0.7], [9.81, -0.8]
                                                  x0 −      x0
                                              (
                                                  x1
  34   Frictionless bead on a rotating hoop                                               0.93                    [2.1, 0.0], [-1.2, -0.2]
       (dimensionless)                            (−c0 + cos (x0 )) sin (x0 )
                                              (
                                                  cos (x0 ) cot (x1 )
  35   Rotational dynamics of an object in                                                4.2                     [1.13, -0.3], [2.4, 1.7]
       a shear flow                                c0 sin2 (x1 ) + cos2 (x1 ) sin (x0 )
                                              (
                                                  x1
  36   Pendulum with non-linear damping,                                                  0.07                    [0.45, 0.9], [1.34, -0.8]
       no driving (dimensionless)                 −c0 x1 cos (x0 ) − x1 − sin (x0 )
                                              (
                                                  x1
  37   Van der Pol oscillator (standard                                                   0.43                    [2.2, 0.0], [0.1, 3.2]
       form)                                    −c0 x1 x2   0 − 1 − x0
                                              
                                                       x3

                                                         0
                                                 0 − 3 + x0 + x1
                                              
                                               c
  38   Van der Pol oscillator (simplified                                                 3.37                    [0.7, 0.0], [-1.1, -0.7]
                                                   x
       form from Strogatz)                      − c0
                                              
                                              
                                              (     0
                                                c0 x1 + x2 0 x1 − x0
  39   Glycolytic oscillator, e.g., ADP and                                               2.4, 0.07               [0.4, 0.31], [0.2, -0.7]
       F6P in yeast (dimensionless)             −c0 x0 + c1 − x2   0 x1
                                              (
                                                x1
  40   Duffing equation (weakly non-linear                                                0.886                   [0.63, -0.03], [0.2, 0.2]
       oscillation)                             c0 x1 · 1 − x2  0 − x0
                                              (
                                                c0 c1 + x2   0 (−x0 + x1 ) − x0
  41   Cell cycle model by Tyson for in-                                                  15.3, 0.001, 0.3        [0.8, 0.3], [0.02, 1.2]
       teraction between protein cdc2 and         c2 − x0
       cyclin (dimensionless)
                                                    c1 x 0 x 1
                                               c0 − x2 +1 − x0
                                              
  42   Reduced model for chlorine dioxide-             0                                  8.9, 4.0, 1.4           [0.2, 0.35], [3.0, 7.8]
                                                            x
       iodine-malonic acid rection (dimen-     c2 x0 − 2 1 + 1
                                              
                                                             x0 +1
       sionless)                              (
                                                  x1
  43   Driven pendulum with linear damp-                                                  1.67, 0.64              [1.47, -0.2], [-1.9, 0.03]
       ing / Josephson junction (dimension-       c0 − c1 x1 − sin (x0 )
       less)                                  (
                                                  x1
  44   Driven pendulum with quadratic                                                     1.67, 0.64              [1.47, -0.2], [-1.9, 0.03]
       damping (dimensionless)                    c0 − c1 x1 |x1 | − sin (x0 )
                                              (
                                                  c0 · (1 − x0 ) − x0 x2
                                                                       1
  45   Isothermal autocatalytic reaction                                                  0.5, 0.02               [1.4, 0.2], [0.32, 0.64]
       model by Gray and Scott 1985 (di-          −c1 x1 + x0 x2 1
       mensionless)                           (
                                                c0 sin (x0 − x1 ) − sin (x0 )
  46   Interacting bar magnets                                                            0.33                    [0.54, -0.1], [0.43, 1.21]
                                                −c0 sin (x0 − x1 ) − sin (x1 )
                                              
                                               −x0 + c x 1   −c
  47   Binocular rivalry model (no oscilla-                 e 0 1    1 +1
                                                                                          4.89, 1.4               [0.65, 0.59], [3.2, 10.3]
                                               −x1 + c x 1
       tions)                                          e 0 0 −c1 +1
                                                      x0 x1
                                              
                                               c0 − c x
                                              
                                                         2 +1 − x0
  48   Bacterial respiration model for nu-                1 0                             18.3, 0.48, 11.23       [0.1, 30.4], [13.2, 5.21]
                                                        x0 x1
       trients and oxygen levels               c2 − c x2 +1
                                              
                                              (         1 0
                                                    2
                                                c1 x0 x1 − x0 (c0 + 1) + 1
  49   Brusselator: hypothetical chemical                                                 3.03, 3.1               [0.7, -1.4], [2.1, 1.3]
       oscillation model (dimensionless)        c0 x0 − c1 x20 x1
                                              (
                                                c0 + x20 x1 − x0
  50   Chemical oscillator model by                                                       0.24, 1.43              [0.14, 0.6], [1.5, 0.9]
       Schnackenberg 1979 (dimension-           c1 − x20 x1
       less)                                  (
                                                  c0 + sin (x1 ) cos (x0 )
  51   Oscillator death model by Ermen-                                                   1.432, 0.972            [2.2, 0.67], [0.03, -0.12]
       trout and Kopell 1990                      c1 + sin (x1 ) cos (x0 )



                                         Table 3: 2 dimensional ODEs in ODEBench.

                                                                       17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 ID   System description                       Equation                                                Parameters                   Initial values
                                               
                                                c0 (−x0 + x1 )
                                               
 52   Maxwell-Bloch equations (laser dy-           c1 (x0 x2 − x1 )                                    0.1, 0.21, 0.34, 3.1         [1.3, 1.1, 0.89], [0.89,
      namics)                                                                                                                       1.3, 1.1]
                                               
                                                c (−c x x + c − x + 1)
                                                     2    3 0 1        3       2
                                                                 c5 x 0 x 1
                                                c0 − c4 x0 − c9 +x0
                                               
                                                                          c x     c x0 x1
                                               
 53   Model for apoptosis (cell death)             c1 x2 (c8 + x1 ) − c 2+x1 − c3 +x                   0.1, 0.6, 0.2, 7.95, 0.05,   [0.005, 0.26, 2.15],
                                                                          6     1   7    1
                                                −c x (c + x ) + c2 x1 + c3 x0 x1                      0.4, 0.1, 2.0, 0.1, 0.1      [0.248, 0.0973, 0.0027]
                                               
                                               
                                                       1 2   8      1      c6 +x1    c7 +x1
                                               
                                                c0 (−x0 + x1 )
                                               
 54   Lorenz equations in well-behaved             c1 x0 − x0 x2 − x1                                  5.1, 12.0, 1.67              [2.3, 8.1, 12.4], [10.0,
      periodic regime                                                                                                               20.0, 30.0]
                                               
                                                −c x + x x
                                                      2 2      0 1
                                                c0 (−x0 + x1 )
                                               
 55   Lorenz equations in complex peri-            c1 x0 − x0 x2 − x1                                  10.0, 99.96, 8/3             [2.3, 8.1, 12.4], [10.0,
      odic regime                                                                                                                   20.0, 30.0]
                                               
                                                −c x + x x
                                                      2 2      0 1
                                                c0 (−x0 + x1 )
                                               
 56   Lorenz equations standard parame-            c1 x0 − x0 x2 − x1                                  10.0, 28.0, 8/3              [2.3, 8.1, 12.4], [10.0,
      ters (chaotic)                                                                                                                20.0, 30.0]
                                               
                                                −c x + x x
                                                      2 2      0 1
                                                c3 (−x1 − x2 )
                                               
 57   Rössler attractor (stable fixed point)       c3 (c0 x1 + x0 )                                    -0.2, 0.2, 5.7, 5.0          [2.3, 1.1, 0.8], [-0.1, 4.1,
                                                                                                                                    -2.1]
                                               
                                                c (c + x (−c + x ))
                                                    3  1      2     2       0
                                                c3 (−x1 − x2 )
                                               
 58   Rössler attractor (periodic)                 c3 (c0 x1 + x0 )                                    0.1, 0.2, 5.7, 5.0           [2.3, 1.1, 0.8], [-0.1, 4.1,
                                                                                                                                    -2.1]
                                               
                                                c (c + x (−c + x ))
                                                    3  1      2     2       0
                                                c3 (−x1 − x2 )
                                               
 59   Rössler attractor (chaotic)                  c3 (c0 x1 + x0 )                                    0.2, 0.2, 5.7, 5.0           [2.3, 1.1, 0.8], [-0.1, 4.1,
                                                                                                                                    -2.1]
                                               
                                                c (c + x (−c + x ))
                                                     3  1      2     2       0
                                               
                                                −c3 x1 + x0 (−c1 + x2 )
                                               
 60   Aizawa attractor (chaotic)                   c3 x0 + x1 (−c1 + x2 )                              0.95, 0.7, 0.65, 3.5,        [0.1, 0.05, 0.05], [-0.3,
                                                c x + c + c x3 x − 1/3x3 − x2 + x2 (c x + 1)
                                               
                                                                                                       0.25, 0.1                    0.2, 0.1]
                                                     0 2     2     5 0 2          2        0 1   4 2
                                               
                                                c0 x0 − x1 x2
                                               
 61   Chen-Lee attractor; system for gyro          c1 x1 + x0 x2                                       5.0, -10.0, -3.8, 3.0        [15, -15, -15], [8, 14, -
      motion with feedback control of           c x + x0 x1
                                               
                                                                                                                                    10]
                                                     2 2      c
      rigid body (chaotic)                                  3

                                                 −x0 + c x +c 1x −c
                                               
                                                         e 0 2   1 1 2 +1
                                               
                                               
                                               
                                               
                                                c (x − x )
                                                  3    0    1
 62   Binocular rivalry model with adap-                          1                                    0.89, 0.4, 1.4, 1.0          [2.25, -0.5, -1.13, 0.4],
                                                −x2 + c x +c x −c
      tation (oscillations)                    
                                               
                                                        e 0 0   1 3 2 +1                                                           [0.342, -0.431, -0.86,
                                               
                                                 c3 (x2 − x3 )                                                                      0.041]
                                               
                                               
                                                −c1 x0 x2
                                               
                                                −c0 x1 + c1 x0 x2
 63   SEIR infection model (proportions)                                                               0.47, 0.28, 0.3              [0.6, 0.3, 0.09, 0.01],
                                                c0 x1 − c2 x2
                                               
                                                                                                                                   [0.4, 0.3, 0.25, 0.05]
                                                 c2 x2
                                               



                                     Table 4: 3 and 4 dimensional ODEs in ODEBench.


                                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                                           Population growth with carrying                       RC-circuit with non-linear                      Velocity of a falling object                Autocatalysis with one fixed
        RC-circuit (charging capacitor)               Population growth (naive)                        capacity                                 resistor (charging capacitor)                        with air resistance                         abundant chemical                   Gompertz law for tumor growth
   10                                                                                                                                   3.5                                           60                                               4
                                                                                                                                        3.0                                                                                                                                   2.75
                                           40                                             60
    8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                                                        2.5                                           40                                                                                      2.50
    6                                      30
                                                                                          40                                            2.0                                                                                            2                                      2.25
    4                                      20                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                        1.5                                                                                                                                   2.00
                                                                                          20                                                                                                                                           1
    2                                      10
                                                                                                                                        1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                       0                                                                                      1.75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
         Logistic equation with Allee            Language death model for two              Refined language death model for                    Naive critical slowing down                                                                  Overdamped bead on a rotating            Budworm outbreak model with
                    effect                                languages                                  two languages                               (statistical mechanics)                         Photons in a laser (simple)                          hoop                                   predation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               80
                                                                                         0.8                                                                                          16                                              3.0
                                           0.5                                                                                            3
   80
                                                                                         0.6                                                                                          15                                                                                       60
   60                                      0.4                                                                                                                                                                                        2.5
                                                                                                                                          2                                           14
                                                                                         0.4                                                                                                                                                                                   40
   40                                      0.3                                                                                                                                        13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2.0
                                                                                         0.2                                              1                                                                                                                                    20
   20                                      0.2                                                                                                                                        12

                                                                                         0.0                                                                                          11                                              1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                            Improved logistic equation with                                                            Dimensionally reduced SIR
    Budworm outbreak with predation              Landau equation (typical time                      Logistic equation with                    Improved logistic equation with                    harvesting/fishing                          Autocatalytic gene switching            infection model for dead people
           (dimensionless)                              scale tau = 1)                               harvesting/fishing                            harvesting/fishing                              (dimensionless)                                (dimensionless)                             (dimensionless)
   90
                                            6                                             80                                                                                                                                          0.3
                                                                                                                                         80                                           0.8                                                                                       4
   80
                                                                                          60                                                                                                                                          0.2                                       3
   70                                       4                                                                                            60                                           0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2
   60                                                                                     40                                                                                          0.4                                             0.1
                                                                                                                                         40
                                            2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
   50                                                                                                                                                                                 0.2
                                                                                          20
                                                                                                                                         20                                                                                           0.0                                       0
          Hysteretic activation of a              Overdamped pendulum with
         protein expression (positive                   constant driving                                                                                                   Lotka-Volterra competition model
          feedback, basal promoter                 torque/fireflies/Josephson                   Harmonic oscillator without                                                  (Strogatz version with sheeps                                   Lotka-Volterra simple (as on
                 expression)                        junction (dimensionless)                            damping                           Harmonic oscillator with damping            and rabbits)                                                   Wikipedia)                           Pendulum without friction
                                                                                                                                                                           5                                                                                                    2
  3.0                                       0                                           0.50
                                                                                                                                        0.1                                                                                            8
                                                                                                                                                                                       4                                                                                        1
                                                                                        0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       6
  2.5                                      −1                                                                                           0.0                                            3
                                                                                        0.00                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                                       2                                               4
                                                                                       −0.25                                           −0.1
  2.0                                      −2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 −1
                                                                                                                                                                                       1                                               2
                                                                                       −0.50                                           −0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                       0                                               0                                      −2
                                                 RNA molecules catalyzing each                  SIR infection model only for                                                                                                                Frictionless bead on a rotating          Rotational dynamics of an object
               Dipole fixed point                     others replication                              healthy and sick                        Damped double well oscillator                       Glider (dimensionless)                         hoop (dimensionless)                        in a shear flow
                                                                                                                                                                                      20                                               2
                                           0.5                                                                                            2                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                           6
    2                                      0.4                                                                                            1                                           15                                               1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                           0.3                                             4
                                                                                                                                          0                                           10                                               0                                      −1
    0
                                           0.2                                             2                                            −1                                             5                                             −1                                       −2
                                           0.1
  −2                                                                                                                                    −2                                                                                           −2                                       −3
                                                                                           0                                                                                           0
            Pendulum with non-linear                                                                                                                                                                                                       Cell cycle model by Tyson for               Reduced model for chlorine
              damping, no driving                Van der Pol oscillator (standard                  Van der Pol oscillator                  Glycolytic oscillator, e.g., ADP                      Duffing equation (weakly                interaction between protein cdc2              dioxide-iodine-malonic acid
                (dimensionless)                               form)                            (simplified form from Strogatz)            and F6P in yeast (dimensionless)                        non-linear oscillation)                   and cyclin (dimensionless)                   rection (dimensionless)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1.25
                                            2                                              2                                            0.4                                                                                                                                     8
 0.75                                                                                                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1.00
                                            1                                              1                                                                                           1                                                                                        6
 0.50                                                                                                                                   0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.75
 0.25                                       0                                              0                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                4
                                                                                                                                        0.0                                                                                          0.50
 0.00                                      −1                                                                                                                                        −1
                                                                                         −1                                                                                                                                                                                     2
−0.25                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.25
                                                                                                                                       −0.2                                          −2
                                           −2
                                                                                         −2                                                                                                                                                                                     0
        Driven pendulum with linear                                                             Isothermal autocatalytic                                                                                                                                                                   Brusselator: hypothetical
        damping / Josephson junction         Driven pendulum with quadratic                reaction model by Gray and Scott                                                                   Binocular rivalry model (no                   Bacterial respiration model for               chemical oscillation model
              (dimensionless)                    damping (dimensionless)                          1985 (dimensionless)                              Interacting bar magnets                          oscillations)                           nutrients and oxygen levels                       (dimensionless)
   20                                      15
                                                                                                                                                                                      0.6                                             40
                                                                                           3                                            0.4                                                                                                                                     1
   15
                                           10
                                                                                                                                                                                      0.5                                             30
   10                                                                                      2                                            0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20                                        0
                                            5                                                                                                                                         0.4
    5                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                        0.0                                                                                           10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              −1
                                            0                                                                                                                                         0.3
    0                                                                                      0                                                                                                                                           0
        Chemical oscillator model by
           Schnackenberg 1979                      Oscillator death model by                   Maxwell-Bloch equations (laser                                                           Lorenz equations in well-behaved                     Lorenz equations in complex                  Lorenz equations standard
             (dimensionless)                      Ermentrout and Kopell 1990                            dynamics)                             Model for apoptosis (cell death)                  periodic regime                                    periodic regime                           parameters (chaotic)
                                           15                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  40
                                                                                         1.2                                            2.0                                          12.5                                            150
    3

                                                                                         1.0                                            1.5                                          10.0                                            100                                       20
                                           10
    2
                                                                                         0.8                                            1.0                                           7.5                                             50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
    1                                       5                                                                                                                                         5.0                                              0
                                                                                         0.6                                            0.5

                                                                                                                                                                                      2.5                                            −50                                      −20
    0                                       0                                            0.4                                            0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                            Chen-Lee attractor; system for
        Rössler attractor (stable fixed                                                                                                                                                     gyro motion with feedback                       Binocular rivalry model with                   SEIR infection model
                     point)                           Rössler attractor (periodic)                Rössler attractor (chaotic)                    Aizawa attractor (chaotic)               control of rigid body (chaotic)                    adaptation (oscillations)                       (proportions)
                                                                                                                                          2                                           40                                                                                       0.6
    2                                                                                     20                                                                                                                                           2
                                            5                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                          1
    1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.4
                                                                                          10                                                                                                                                           1
                                            0                                                                                                                                          0
    0                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                           0                                                                                                                                           0                                       0.2
  −1                                       −5                                                                                                                                        −20
                                                                                                                                        −1
                                                                                        −10                                                                                                                                          −1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.0
        0              5              10          0                5              10           0                5                 10           0               5                10           0                5                 10           0            5             10            0               5            10
                       t                                            t                                           t                                              t                                              t                                            t                                          t



         Figure 6: Solution trajectories of all equations in ODEBench for one of the initial conditions.


                                                                                                                                                        19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           RC-circuit (charging                  Population growth (naive)                 Population growth with                RC-circuit with non-linear                Velocity of a falling object            Autocatalysis with one fixed             Gompertz law for tumor
                capacitor)                                                                   carrying capacity                      resistor (charging                         with air resistance                     abundant chemical                           growth
                                                                                                                                        capacitor)


   0                5                 10   0                 5                 10   0                 5                 10   0                 5                 10   0                 5                 10   0                5                 10   0               5                 10
                    t                                        t                                        t                                        t                                        t                                       t                                      t
       Logistic equation with Allee            Language death model for two             Refined language death model             Naive critical slowing down               Photons in a laser (simple)               Overdamped bead on a              Budworm outbreak model with
                  effect                                languages                             for two languages                    (statistical mechanics)                                                               rotating hoop                         predation


   0                5                 10   0                 5                 10   0                 5                 10   0                 5                 10   0                 5                 10   0                5                 10   0               5                 10
                    t                                        t                                        t                                        t                                        t                                       t                                      t
         Budworm outbreak with                   Landau equation (typical                  Logistic equation with                Improved logistic equation                Improved logistic equation              Autocatalytic gene switching            Dimensionally reduced SIR
        predation (dimensionless)                  time scale tau = 1)                       harvesting/fishing                    with harvesting/fishing                   with harvesting/fishing                     (dimensionless)                    infection model for dead
                                                                                                                                                                                (dimensionless)                                                              people (dimensionless)


   0                5                 10   0                 5                 10   0                 5                 10   0                 5                 10   0                 5                 10   0                5                 10   0               5                 10
                    t                                        t                                        t                                        t                                        t                                       t                                      t
        Hysteretic activation of a             Overdamped pendulum with                  Harmonic oscillator without              Harmonic oscillator with                 Lotka-Volterra competition              Lotka-Volterra simple (as on            Pendulum without friction
       protein expression (positive                  constant driving                            damping                                damping                           model (Strogatz version with                     Wikipedia)
        feedback, basal promoter                torque/fireflies/Josephson                                                                                                    sheeps and rabbits)
               expression)                       junction (dimensionless)


   0                5                 10   0                 5                 10   0                 5                 10   0                 5                 10   0                 5                 10   0                5                 10   0               5                 10
                    t                                        t                                        t                                        t                                        t                                       t                                      t
            Dipole fixed point                   RNA molecules catalyzing                SIR infection model only for               Damped double well                       Glider (dimensionless)                   Frictionless bead on a               Rotational dynamics of an
                                                  each others replication                      healthy and sick                         oscillator                                                                        rotating hoop                      object in a shear flow
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (dimensionless)


   0                5                 10   0                 5                 10   0                 5                 10   0                 5                 10   0                 5                 10   0                5                 10   0               5                 10
                    t                                        t                                        t                                        t                                        t                                       t                                      t
        Pendulum with non-linear                   Van der Pol oscillator                   Van der Pol oscillator                Glycolytic oscillator, e.g.,              Duffing equation (weakly                Cell cycle model by Tyson              Reduced model for chlorine
          damping, no driving                        (standard form)                        (simplified form from                  ADP and F6P in yeast                      non-linear oscillation)                 for interaction between               dioxide-iodine-malonic acid
            (dimensionless)                                                                       Strogatz)                           (dimensionless)                                                                protein cdc2 and cyclin                 rection (dimensionless)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (dimensionless)


   0                5                 10   0                 5                 10   0                 5                 10   0                 5                 10   0                 5                 10   0                5                 10   0               5                 10
                    t                                        t                                        t                                        t                                        t                                       t                                      t
       Driven pendulum with linear                Driven pendulum with                     Isothermal autocatalytic               Interacting bar magnets                  Binocular rivalry model (no             Bacterial respiration model              Brusselator: hypothetical
       damping / Josephson junction                quadratic damping                     reaction model by Gray and                                                               oscillations)                     for nutrients and oxygen               chemical oscillation model
             (dimensionless)                         (dimensionless)                     Scott 1985 (dimensionless)                                                                                                           levels                            (dimensionless)


   0                5                 10   0                 5                 10   0                 5                 10   0                 5                 10   0                 5                 10   0                5                 10   0               5                 10
                    t                                        t                                        t                                        t                                        t                                       t                                      t
       Chemical oscillator model by             Oscillator death model by                 Maxwell-Bloch equations                 Model for apoptosis (cell                    Lorenz equations in                 Lorenz equations in complex             Lorenz equations standard
          Schnackenberg 1979                   Ermentrout and Kopell 1990                    (laser dynamics)                             death)                          well-behaved periodic regime                   periodic regime                     parameters (chaotic)
            (dimensionless)


   0                5                 10   0                 5                 10   0                 5                 10   0                 5                 10   0                 5                 10   0                5                 10   0               5                 10
                    t                                        t                                        t                                        t                                        t                                       t                                      t
         Rössler attractor (stable              Rössler attractor (periodic)             Rössler attractor (chaotic)             Aizawa attractor (chaotic)                Chen-Lee attractor; system              Binocular rivalry model with               SEIR infection model
               fixed point)                                                                                                                                                   for gyro motion with                   adaptation (oscillations)                   (proportions)
                                                                                                                                                                            feedback control of rigid
                                                                                                                                                                                 body (chaotic)


   0                5                 10   0                 5                 10   0                 5                 10   0                 5                 10   0                 5                 10   0                5                 10   0               5                 10
                    t                                        t                                        t                                        t                                        t                                       t                                      t


Figure 7: Predictions of ODEFormer for all equations in ODEBench for the first set of initial
conditions.


                                                                                                                                           20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B     I DENTIFIABILITY
Traditionally, when inferring dynamical laws as ODEs from observations, one assumed a parametric
form of the ODE to be known. In addition, typical assumptions included that the state of the system
may not be fully observed, and that one may not be interested in identifying the system fully (all
parameters), but that there are only certain (combinations of) parameters that need to be identified.
For example, in a typical epidemiological model of disease spread, e.g., modelling the fractions of
susceptible, infected, and recovered people (SIR model) in a population, one may only be able to
measure the number of infected people, but may also only be interested in estimating the reproduction
rate (a ratio of two parameters in the full equations). Hence a typical identifiability question would
start from a known system, a known observation function, and a specific target quantity. Researchers
have then developed various general methods and procedures to decide whether such a query is
solvable, i.e., whether the target is identified from the observations within the assumptions (Åström &
Eykhoff, 1971; Miao et al., 2011; Villaverde et al., 2016; Hamelin et al., 2020).
The study of identifiability from observations within larger non-parametric function classes from full
state observations has only been taken up more recently. For example, linear autonomous systems
as well as autonomous systems that are linear in parameters are fairly well understood (Stanhope
et al., 2014; Duan et al., 2020) with Qiu et al. (2022) recently essentially providing closure to this
question. A broad summary of these findings is that linear (in parameters) autonomous systems are
almost always (almost surely) identifiable from a single trajectory for many reasonable measures
(probability distributions) over parameters, i.e., over ODE systems.
When it comes to non-parametric classes such as analytic, algebraic, continuous, or smooth functions,
Scholl et al. (2023) have recently presented the first detailed analysis and results for a broad class of
scalar PDEs. These include ODEs as special cases, however their results only apply to scalar ODEs.
Even though they consider ODEs beyond first order, this still does not include multivariate ODE
systems. In the scalar case, identification from a single solution trajectory is possible for analytic
functions f , but essentially impossible for continuous (or smooth) f (Scholl et al., 2023).6
The function class considered by ODEFormer, i.e., the distribution implied by our generator, pre-
dominantly contains real analytic functions, but not exclusively since x 7→ 1/x is analytic only on
R \ {0}. Hence, it is not clear in which category we fall regarding identifiability.
Crucially, all these theoretical results assume the entire continuous, non-noisy solution trajectory to
be known. Little is known for discrete and noisy observations, where identifiability likely turns from
a yes/no question into one of probabilistic claims given a prior over functions and the assumed noise
model. Hence, current theoretical results do not conclude whether non-linear ODEs can practically
be inferred from data.

C     T RAINING DETAILS FOR ODEF ORMER
We optimize the cross-entropy loss between the predicted sequence of mathematical symbols and
the target sequence. During training, (the right-hand side of) ODEs are represented in prefix format
instead of the more familiar infix format in order to relieve the model from having to predict correct
opening and closing parenthesis (as an example: "3 · (x0 + x1 )" corresponds to "·, 3, +, x0 , x1 " in
prefix notation). We note that different target sequences may be mathematically equivalent but do not
attempt to resolve this ambiguity on the training data set as it does not hamper model optimization in
practice.
We use the Adam optimizer (with default parameters suggested by Kingma & Ba (2015)), with a
learning rate warming up from 10−7 to 2 × 10−4 across the initial 10,000 steps and a subsequent
decaying governed by a cosine schedule for the next 300,000 steps. The annealing cycle then
restarts with a damping factor of 3/2 as per Kingma & Ba (2015), resulting in approximately 800,000
optimization steps. We do not use any regularization such as weight decay or dropout. To efficiently
manage the greatly varying input sequence lengths, we group examples of similar lengths in batches,
with the constraint that each batch contains 10,000 tokens. Our model is trained on a set of about
    6
      The intuition here is that linear, polynomial, or more broadly even real analytic scalar univariate functions
can be uniquely extrapolated to all of R when they are known on any open interval. On the other hand, there are
infinitely many ways to extrapolate continuous or smooth functions beyond any interval.


                                                        21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


50M examples pre-generated with 80 CPU cores. When run on a single NVIDIA A100 GPU with
80GB memory and 8 CPU cores, ODEFormer’s training process takes roughly three days.
To enforce model robustness to signal corruptions we contaminate training trajectories x(ti ) with
noise according to xj (ti ) 7→ (1 + ξ)xj (ti ) for j ∈ [D], i ∈ [N ] and ξ ∼ N (0, σ).
An overview of the model architecture can be found in Table 6.

D     O PTIONAL CONSTANT OPTIMIZATION IN ODEF ORMER ( OPT )
In contrast to all baseline models, ODEFormer is a pretrained model and predicted ODEs are not
explicitly fit to the data observed at inference time. However, similar to Kamienny et al. (2022)
we can post-hoc optimize the parameters of a predicted ODE to improve the data fit. Although
parameter estimation for dynamical system is known to be a challenging inference problem, we use
the Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno algorithm (BFGS) (Nocedal & Wright, 2006) as implemented
in scipy.optimize.minimize (Virtanen et al., 2020) and thus opt for a comparatively simple
local, gradient-based method in the hope that the parameter values predicted by ODEFormer only
need slight refinement. The optimizer solves the following problem
       arg min loss({x(t0 ), . . . , x(tn )}, solve_ivp(fˆ(x; θ), x0 = x(t0 ), t = {t0 , . . . , tn }))
           θ

where {p1 , . . . , pk } denotes the set of parameters of the ODE fˆ that was predicted by ODEFormer,
and where (x(t0 ) . . . , x(tn )) represents the (potentially noisy) observations. We use the negative
variance-weighted R2 score as optimization loss.

E    E VALUATION OF BASELINE MODELS
Hyperparameter optimization. All baseline models are fitted to each trajectory separately and
each fit involves a separate hyperparameter optimization. Hyperparameters that are searched over
are listed in Table 5, all other hyperparameters are set to their respective default values. For each
combination of hyperparameters, the model is fitted on the first 70% and scored on the remaining 30%
of a trajectory. To reduce runtime, we parallelize optimization according to GridSearchCV from
scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al., 2011) and set the number of parallel jobs to min(# combinations,
# cpu cores (= 48)). After selecting the combination with highest R2 score, the final model is fitted
on the full trajectory.

Finite difference approximations. Except for ProGED, all baseline models require approxima-
tions of temporal derivatives of all state variables of an ODE system as regression targets. To
estimate temporal derivatives we use the central finite difference algorithm as implemented by
FiniteDifference in the pysindy software package (de Silva et al., 2020) and include the
approximation order in the hyperparameter search. For a fair comparison on noisy trajectories we
extend the hyperparameter search to also include optional smoothing of trajectories with a Savitzky-
Savgol filter with a window length of 15 as implemented by SmoothedFiniteDifference
(de Silva et al., 2020).

Vector-valued functions. Some of the baseline implementations (AFP, FE-AFP, EPLEX, EHC,
FFX) do not readily support vector-valued functions (f : RD → RD ) but only scalar-valued
functions (f : RD → R). To evaluate these baselines on systems of ODEs, we run them separately
for each component fi : RD → R of the system and combine the predictions for all components
i ∈ {1, . . . , D} via the Cartesian product {f11 , . . . , f1K1 }×. . .×{fD
                                                                           1            KD
                                                                             , . . . , fD  } where Ki represents
the number of predictions, e.g., the length of the Pareto front, obtained for component i.

Candidate selection. In symbolic regression, one typically faces a trade-off between accuracy
(how well the function/trajectory is recovered) and complexity of the proposed expression. There are
different strategies in the literature to select a single, final equation from the accuracy-complexity
Pareto front, which may bias comparisons across methods along one or the other dimension. For
a fair comparison, we evaluate all equations of a model’s Pareto front and pick the final equation
based on R2 score between (potentially noisy) observed trajectory and the integrated solution of the
predicted ODE.


                                                      22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 5: Hyperparameter names and values for optimization of baseline models. For FFX and
PySR, we optimize over finite difference order and smoother window length but no additional hyper
parameters.

         Model        Hyperparameter                                       Values
                      finite difference order                               2, 3, 4
      All models
                      smoother window length                              None, 15
                      population size                                  100, 500, 1000
          AFP         generations                                      2500, 500, 250
                                                          [n, v, +, -, *, /, exp, log, 2, 3, sqrt],
                      operators
                                                      [n, v, +, -, *, /, exp, log, 2, 3, sqrt, sin, cos]
                      population size                                  100, 500, 1000
         EHC          generations                                      1000, 200, 100
                                                          [n, v, +, -, *, /, exp, log, 2, 3, sqrt],
                      operators
                                                      [n, v, +, -, *, /, exp, log, 2, 3, sqrt, sin, cos]
                      population size                                  100, 500, 1000
        EPLEX         generations                                      2500, 500, 250
                                                          [n, v, +, -, *, /, exp, log, 2, 3, sqrt],
                      operators
                                                      [n, v, +, -, *, /, exp, log, 2, 3, sqrt, sin, cos]
                      population size                                  100, 500, 1000
        FE-AFP        generations                                      2500, 500, 250
                                                          [n, v, +, -, *, /, exp, log, 2, 3, sqrt],
                      operators
                                                      [n, v, +, -, *, /, exp, log, 2, 3, sqrt, sin, cos]
                                                                    universal, rational
       ProGED         grammar                                simplerational, trigonometric
                                                                         polynomial
                      polynomial degree                         1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10
                                                                       [polynomials],
        SINDy         basis functions                         [polynomials, sin, cos, exp],
                                                       [polynomials, sin, cos, exp, log, sqrt, 1/x]
                      optimizer threshold                              0.05, 0.1, 0.15
                      optimizer alpha                               0.025, 0.05, 0.075
                      optimizer max iterations                             20, 100
                      polynomial degree                         1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10
                                                                       [polynomials],
                      basis functions
      SINDy (esc)                                              [polynomials, sin, cos, exp]
                      optimizer threshold                              0.05, 0.1, 0.15
                      optimizer alpha                               0.025, 0.05, 0.075
                      optimizer max iterations                             20, 100
                      polynomial degree                         1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10
                      optimizer threshold                              0.05, 0.1, 0.15
     SINDy (poly)     optimizer alpha                               0.025, 0.05, 0.075
                      optimizer max iterations                             20, 100


                                                 23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        1.0                                      1.0                                     1.0

Accuracy


                                         Accuracy


                                                                                 Accuracy
        0.5                                 0.5                                          0.5
                         odeformer (opt)
                         odeformer
        0.0 10                20         30 0.0 10                    20         30 0.0 10                     20          30
                            T1 T0                                   T1 T0                                    T1 T0
                     (a) ρ = 0, σ = 0                      (b) ρ = 0, σ = 0.01                     (c) ρ = 0.1, σ = 0.01

            1.0                                      1.0                                     1.0
median R2


                                         median R2


                                                                                 median R2
            0.5                                      0.5                                     0.5


            0.0 10            20        30 0.0 10                     20         30 0.0 10                     20          30
                            T1 T0                                   T1 T0                                    T1 T0
                     (d) ρ = 0, σ = 0                      (e) ρ = 0, σ = 0.01                     (f) ρ = 0.1, σ = 0.01

Figure 8: Evaluation on Strogatz with missing chunks of data. We compare ODEFormer with and
without constant optimization (opt). Originally, trajectories in the Strogatz dataset comprise 100 time
points. For this evaluation we drop all data in the interval [T0 , T1 ] and additionally drop a fraction
of ρ of the remaining time points uniformly at random. For σ > 0 the trajectories are additionally
contaminated with noise. Plots in the upper row show results in terms of accuracy (fraction of samples
with R2 > 0.9) whereas the lower row shows the median R2 score across the dataset.


F           I NTERPOLATION EXPERIMENTS FOR MISSING DATA CHUNKS
Whereas in the main text we considered irregular grids and corruptions by Gaussian noise, here we
additionally evaluate ODEFormer in case of missing chunks of data. This scenario may for instance
correspond to a faulty sensor which stops recording data for a duration of time, e.g. until it gets fixed
or replaced.
To simulate this scenario we use the Strogatz dataset. Each trajectory in this dataset covers the time
interval [0, 10] and is originally comprised of 100 time points. Out of these 100 time points, we drop
all time points within the interval [T0 , T1 ] for [T0 , T1 ] ∈ {[45, 55], [40, 60], [35, 65]}, i.e., we assess
model performance on three progressively more challenging missing data scenarios. Additionally, we
corrupt the remaining data by randomly dropping observation and noise contamination as described
in Section 5. We evaluate the same (trained) model as in Section 5. We remark that this model
has not been optimized for this particular scenario as during training time points were dropped
uniformly at random across the entire trajectory. Thus, intervals of entirely missing data may have
been encountered in during training in exceptionally rare cases only.
Results under different signal corruptions are presented in Figure 8 while exemplary trajectories
and corresponding predictions are displayed in Figure 9. Even under this challenging scenario,
ODEFormer still performs reasonably well for the majority of samples as exemplified by both
accuracy and median R2 scores.


                                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           55                  R 2 = 0.986                  55                  R 2 = 0.958


   state


                                                    state
               5                                                5
                   0   2        4        6      8   10              0   2        4        6      8   10
                                    time                                             time
           7                   R 2 = 0.977                  7                   R 2 = 0.990
   state


                                                    state
           4                                                4
               0       2       4        6       8   10          0       2       4        6       8   10
                                  time                                             time
           18                  R 2 = 0.850                  18                  R 2 = 0.959
   state


            0                                       state    0
                   0   2        4      6        8   10              0   2        4      6        8   10
                                  time                                             time
               9               R = 0.490
                                2
                                                                9               R = 0.987
                                                                                 2
   state


                                                    state


               1                                                1
                   0       2    4       6       8   10              0       2    4       6       8   10
                                   time                                             time
           12                  R 2 = 0.467                  12                  R 2 = 0.594
   state


                                                    state


               1                                                1
                   0       2    4       6       8   10              0       2    4       6       8   10
                                   time                                             time
               2               R 2 = 0.843                      2               R 2 = 0.979
   state


                                                    state


               3                                                3
                   0       2    4      6        8   10              0       2    4      6        8   10
                                  time                                             time
               2               R = 0.809
                                2
                                                                2               R = 0.843
                                                                                 2
   state


                                                    state


               1                                                1
                   0       2     4          6   8   10              0       2     4          6   8   10
                                     time                                             time
Figure 9: Predictions of ODEFormer (left column) and ODEFormer (opt) (right column) on noisy
observations (black markers) when data is missing in a consecutive interval (red area). The thin
gray line corresponds to the true (but unobserved) solution trajectory, the red line corresponds to the
trajectory given by integrating the predicted ODE. Each row corresponds to one of the seven ODEs
available in dataset Strogatz.


                                                     25
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 G                E FFECT OF BEAM SIZE

 In Figure 10, we study the impact of the beam size on reconstruction and generalization performance.
 While reconstruction improves with the beam size, generalization hardly changes. This highlights
 the importance of using both metrics: the two are not necessarily correlated, and the latter is a much
 better proxy of symbolic recovery than the former.

            1.00                                                           Figure 10: Increasing the beam size im-
                                                         fitting
            0.75                                         generalization    proves reconstruction, but not generaliza-
R 2 score


            0.50                                         beam size 1       tion. We plot the average reconstruction and
                                                         beam size 50      generalization R2 -score on 10,000 noise-free,
            0.25                                                           densely samples synthetic examples for vari-
            0.00                                                           ous beam sizes and a temperature of 0.1.
                           2          4          6
                               # dimensions

 H                D ETAILED COMPARISON WITH CLOSELY RELATED MODELS

 H.1                  S IMILARITIES AND DIFFERENCES

 As mentioned in Section 2, ODEFormer is conceptually similar to the models proposed by d’Ascoli
 et al. (2022) and Becker et al. (2023). Like ODEFormer, these models leverage large-scale training on
 synthetically generated samples to learn a transformer model that maps numerical input sequences to
 symbolic output sequences. While the output for ODEFormer and NSODE (the model presented by
 Becker et al. (2023)) correspond to (the right-hand side of) symbolic ordinary differential equations
 (ODEs), the model by d’Ascoli et al. (2022) predicts the discrete recurrence relation of the input
 sequence. A major difference between ODEFormer and these two related models is that ODEFormer
 works with multivariate inputs, i.e., it is able to handle systems of differential equations, whereas
 both other models only support univariate input sequences. For this reason neither NSODE nor the
 model by d’Ascoli et al. (2022) include an embedding module that needs to combine multivariate
 inputs as described in Section 4.
 While the recurrent sequence prediction approach outlined by d’Ascoli et al. (2022) already delineates
 a distinct use-case, the divergence between ODEFormer and NSODE is especially noteworthy from
 a practical perspective. While multivariate systems of ODEs can capture rich dynamic behaviors
 (including e.g. limit cycles), univariate ODEs are somewhat limited in that they can only capture
 monotonically converging or monotonically diverging behavior. Moreover, the majority of intricate
 modeling scenarios typically involves multiple dynamically interacting variables, rendering a univari-
 ate model simply inadequate. Consequently, ODEFormer significantly broadens the practical toolset
 for ODE modelers in practice. We list the technical differences between all three models in Table 6.


                      Table 6: Model architecture of ODEFormer in comparison to closely related models.

                                              ODEFormer (ours)        Becker et al. (2023)     d’Ascoli et al. (2022)
                                               multivariate ODE                                  discrete univariate
                      Developed for                                       univariate ODEs
                                                    systems                                    recurrence sequences
                       # layers                        4                         6                        8
                       # attn. heads                   16                       16                         8
            Encoder


                       embedding dim.                 512                      512                       512
                       forward dim.                   512                     2048                       512
                       positional enc.                  -                    learned                       -
                       # layers                        16                        6                        8
            Decoder


                       # attn. heads                   16                       16                         8
                       embedding dim.                 512                      512                       512
                       forward dim.                   512                     2048                       512
                       beam size                       50                     1536                        10
                       constants enc.         sign, mantissa, exp.           two-hot            sign, mantissa, exp.


                                                                     26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H.2    P ERFORMANCE COMPARISON

Experimental setup. As NSODE can not be applied to multivariate systems, we can not evaluate
its performance on Strogatz and ODEBench. Instead, we evaluate ODEFormer on the datasets used
in Becker et al. (2023), following their exact experimental conditions, which we briefly restate here
for self-containment:
 • The evaluation includes three datasets: Textbook contains 12 ODEs transcribed from physics
   textbooks, Classic contains 26 ODEs which correspond to classic (algebraic) equations in the
   symbolic regression literature which are re-interpreted as ODEs and lastly Large comprises 163
   ODEs which are synthetically generated following the algorithm of Lample & Charton (2019).
   Although this dataset is generated following a similar procedure as described in Section 3, we
   expect the distribution of the generated data to be quite different from ODEFormer’s training
   distribution as essentially all hyper-parameters (e.g. maximum. tree depth, operator probabilities,
   probability to sample a variable vs. a constant) differ. For details on the construction of the Large
   dataset, see section 3.1 in Becker et al. (2023).
 • All equations are integrated in the interval [0, 2] with 512 steps using
   scipy.integrate.odeint (Virtanen et al., 2020) to interface the LSODA (Hind-
   marsh & Laboratory, 1982) solver package. Numerical solution are subsequently systematically
   or randomly subsampled, resulting in an equidistant or irregular sampling grid. We remark that
   trajectories with 256 time points contain more time points than ODEFormer has seen for any
   trajectory during training (max. 200, see Section 3). Furthermore the numerical solver differs
   from the one used for generating the training data according to Section 3.
 • Trajectories are corrupted with multiplicative noise drawn from N (1, σ).
 • Evaluation always occurs on the original non-subsampled and noise-free solution trajectory.
Results for ODEFormer are obtained with a beam size of 50 and without additional constant opti-
mization. Performance is evaluated in terms of median R2 (which is the main metric used in Becker
et al. (2023)) as well as accuracy as defined in Section 5, that is, the fraction of predictions for which
R2 > 0.9.

Results. The results in Tables 7 to 9 show that across all three datasets and all experimental
conditions, ODEFormer performs quite similar to NSODE. In particular on Textbook and Large
both models achieve strong results with negligible differences in median R2 yet slightly superior
performance of NSODE in terms of accuracy. This trend is also observable on dataset Large
where differences in median R2 are again small in most cases yet differences in accuracy are more
pronounced in favor of NSODE. This result is expected given that equations in Large are generated
from the same distribution that NSODE is trained on while the training distribution for ODEFormer
differs. Overall, we conclude that ODEFormer generalizes well to different test time distributions.

                                      Table 7: Results on Textbook

                  model       #points     sampling         σ (noise)   median R2   accuracy
               ODEFormer        128      equidistant          0          0.99         1
                NSODE           128      equidistant          0          0.99         1
               ODEFormer        128       irregular          0.01         0.99       0.91
                NSODE           128       irregular          0.01        0.999         1
               ODEFormer        128       irregular          0.02        0.994      0.818
                NSODE           128       irregular          0.02        0.988       0.91
               ODEFormer        256      equidistant          0          0.999        1
                NSODE           256      equidistant          0          0.997        1
               ODEFormer        256       irregular          0.01        0.994        1
                NSODE           256       irregular          0.01        0.999        1
               ODEFormer        256       irregular          0.02        0.993        1
                NSODE           256       irregular          0.02        0.987        1


                                                      27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                     Table 8: Results on Classic

                model      #points      sampling         σ (noise)   median R2   accuracy
             ODEFormer      128        equidistant          0          0.999       0.92
              NSODE         128        equidistant          0          0.999         1
             ODEFormer      128         irregular          0.01        0.998       0.92
              NSODE         128         irregular          0.01        0.999         1
             ODEFormer      128         irregular          0.02        0.998       0.84
              NSODE         128         irregular          0.02        0.997       0.88
             ODEFormer      256        equidistant          0          0.999       0.92
              NSODE         256        equidistant          0          0.999         1
             ODEFormer      256         irregular          0.01        0.998       0.88
              NSODE         256         irregular          0.01        0.999         1
             ODEFormer      256         irregular          0.02        0.998       0.84
              NSODE         256         irregular          0.02        0.993       0.92


                                     Table 9: Results on Large

                model      #points      sampling         σ (noise)   median R2   accuracy
             ODEFormer      128        equidistant          0          0.978      0.652
              NSODE         128        equidistant          0          0.998      0.789
             ODEFormer      128         irregular          0.01        0.961      0.571
              NSODE         128         irregular          0.01        0.997      0.776
             ODEFormer      128         irregular          0.02        0.933      0.565
              NSODE         128         irregular          0.02        0.982      0.671
             ODEFormer      256        equidistant          0          0.996       0.64
              NSODE         256        equidistant          0          0.998      0.801
             ODEFormer      256         irregular          0.01         0.99      0.627
              NSODE         256         irregular          0.01        0.999       0.82
             ODEFormer      256         irregular          0.02        0.923      0.522
              NSODE         256         irregular          0.02        0.991      0.745


                                                    28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I     A DDITIONAL RESULTS ON BENCHMARKS
In Figures 11 to 16, we plot histograms to better visualize how each model performs across different
noise conditions, datasets, and evaluation tasks.
20   ODEFormer (opt)                                  20   ODEFormer (opt)                                   20   ODEFormer (opt)
 0                                                     0                                                      0
20   ODEFormer                                        20   ODEFormer                                         20   ODEFormer
 0                                                     0                                                      0
20   PySR                                             28   PySR                                              20   PySR
 0                                                     0                                                      0
20   SINDy (poly)                                     20   SINDy (poly)                                      10   SINDy (poly)
 0                                                     0                                                      0
20   FFX                                              20   FFX                                               10   FFX
 0                                                     0                                                      0
20   EHC                                              20   EHC                                               20   EHC
 0                                                     0                                                      0
28   SINDy (esc)                                      20   SINDy (esc)                                       20   SINDy (esc)
 0                                                     0                                                      0
 5   ProGED (poly)                                     5   ProGED (poly)                                     10   ProGED (poly)
 0                                                     0                                                      0
20   ProGED                                           20   ProGED                                            20   ProGED
 0                                                     0                                                      0
20   SINDy                                            28   SINDy                                             28   SINDy
 0                                                     0                                                      0
20   FE-AFP                                           20   FE-AFP                                            20   FE-AFP
 0                                                     0                                                      0
20   EPLEX                                            20   EPLEX                                             28   EPLEX
 0                                                     0                                                      0
28   AFP                                              20   AFP                                               28   AFP
 0                                                     0                                                      0
 invalid <0    0.0    0.2        0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0 invalid <0    0.0     0.2        0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0 invalid <0    0.0     0.2        0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0
                            R2                                                     R2                                                     R2
                     (a) σ=0                                              (b) σ=0.01                                             (c) σ=0.05

Figure 11: Histogram of per equation R2 scores for the reconstruction task on Strogatz. Subfigures
correspond to different noise levels. The y-axis represents counts and is scaled per model for better
visibility of the distribution of scores. The x-axis annotations “invalid” and “<0” respectively denote
the number of invalid predictions as well as the number of predictions that yielded an R2 score below
0. The red dashed line corresponds to the mean R2 score across equations, the black dashed line
corresponds to the median R2 score.


                                                                              29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


20   ODEFormer (opt)                                  20   ODEFormer (opt)                                   20   ODEFormer (opt)
 0                                                     0                                                      0
20   ODEFormer                                        20   ODEFormer                                         20   ODEFormer
 0                                                     0                                                      0
20   PySR                                             20   PySR                                              10   PySR
 0                                                     0                                                      0
20   SINDy (poly)                                     20   SINDy (poly)                                      20   SINDy (poly)
 0                                                     0                                                      0
20   FFX                                              20   FFX                                               20   FFX
 0                                                     0                                                      0
20   EHC                                              10   EHC                                               10   EHC
 0                                                     0                                                      0
20   SINDy (esc)                                      20   SINDy (esc)                                       20   SINDy (esc)
 0                                                     0                                                      0
10   ProGED (poly)                                    10   ProGED (poly)                                     10   ProGED (poly)
 0                                                     0                                                      0
10   ProGED                                           20   ProGED                                            20   ProGED
 0                                                     0                                                      0
20   SINDy                                            28   SINDy                                             28   SINDy
 0                                                     0                                                      0
20   FE-AFP                                           20   FE-AFP                                            20   FE-AFP
 0                                                     0                                                      0
28   EPLEX                                            20   EPLEX                                             28   EPLEX
 0                                                     0                                                      0
20   AFP                                              28   AFP                                               28   AFP
 0                                                     0                                                      0
 invalid <0    0.0    0.2        0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0 invalid <0    0.0     0.2        0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0 invalid <0    0.0     0.2        0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0
                            R2                                                     R2                                                     R2
                     (a) σ=0                                              (b) σ=0.01                                             (c) σ=0.05

Figure 12: Histogram of per equation R2 scores for the reconstruction task on Strogatz where 50%
of the trajectory are dropped uniformly at random (ρ = 0.5). Subfigures correspond to different noise
levels. The y-axis represents counts and is scaled per model for better visibility of the distribution
of scores. The x-axis annotations “invalid” and “<0” respectively denote the number of invalid
predictions as well as the number of predictions that yielded an R2 score below 0. The red dashed
line corresponds to the mean R2 score across equations, the black dashed line corresponds to the
median R2 score.


                                                                              30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


50   ODEFormer (opt)                                  50   ODEFormer (opt)                                   40   ODEFormer (opt)
 0                                                     0                                                      0
50   ODEFormer                                        50   ODEFormer                                         40   ODEFormer
 0                                                     0                                                      0
63   PySR                                             63   PySR                                              40   PySR
 0                                                     0                                                      0
50   FFX                                              50   FFX                                               40   FFX
 0                                                     0                                                      0
40   SINDy (poly)                                     40   SINDy (poly)                                      20   SINDy (poly)
 0                                                     0                                                      0
40   ProGED (poly)                                    40   ProGED (poly)                                     40   ProGED (poly)
 0                                                     0                                                      0
50   EHC                                              50   EHC                                               40   EHC
 0                                                     0                                                      0
40   ProGED                                           40   ProGED                                            40   ProGED
 0                                                     0                                                      0
50   SINDy (esc)                                      40   SINDy (esc)                                       40   SINDy (esc)
 0                                                     0                                                      0
50   AFP                                              40   AFP                                               50   AFP
 0                                                     0                                                      0
40   SINDy                                            50   SINDy                                             63   SINDy
 0                                                     0                                                      0
50   FE-AFP                                           40   FE-AFP                                            40   FE-AFP
 0                                                     0                                                      0
40   EPLEX                                            50   EPLEX                                             61   EPLEX
 0                                                     0                                                      0
 invalid <0    0.0    0.2        0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0 invalid <0    0.0     0.2        0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0 invalid <0    0.0     0.2        0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0
                            R2                                                     R2                                                     R2
                     (a) σ=0                                              (b) σ=0.01                                             (c) σ=0.05

Figure 13: Histogram of per equation R2 scores for the reconstruction task on ODEBench. Subfig-
ures correspond to different noise levels. The y-axis represents counts and is scaled per model for
better visibility of the distribution of scores. The x-axis annotations “invalid” and “<0” respectively
denote the number of invalid predictions as well as the number of predictions that yielded an R2
score below 0. The red dashed line corresponds to the mean R2 score across equations, the black
dashed line corresponds to the median R2 score.


                                                                              31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


50   ODEFormer (opt)                                  50   ODEFormer (opt)                                   50   ODEFormer (opt)
 0                                                     0                                                      0
50   ODEFormer                                        50   ODEFormer                                         40   ODEFormer
 0                                                     0                                                      0
61   PySR                                             40   PySR                                              40   PySR
 0                                                     0                                                      0
40   FFX                                              20   FFX                                               40   FFX
 0                                                     0                                                      0
40   SINDy (poly)                                     20   SINDy (poly)                                      40   SINDy (poly)
 0                                                     0                                                      0
40   ProGED (poly)                                    40   ProGED (poly)                                     40   ProGED (poly)
 0                                                     0                                                      0
40   EHC                                              40   EHC                                               40   EHC
 0                                                     0                                                      0
50   ProGED                                           40   ProGED                                            40   ProGED
 0                                                     0                                                      0
50   SINDy (esc)                                      40   SINDy (esc)                                       63   SINDy (esc)
 0                                                     0                                                      0
40   AFP                                              40   AFP                                               50   AFP
 0                                                     0                                                      0
40   SINDy                                            50   SINDy                                             63   SINDy
 0                                                     0                                                      0
40   FE-AFP                                           40   FE-AFP                                            40   FE-AFP
 0                                                     0                                                      0
61   EPLEX                                            61   EPLEX                                             61   EPLEX
 0                                                     0                                                      0
 invalid <0    0.0    0.2        0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0 invalid <0    0.0     0.2        0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0 invalid <0    0.0     0.2        0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0
                            R2                                                     R2                                                     R2
                     (a) σ=0                                              (b) σ=0.01                                             (c) σ=0.05

Figure 14: Histogram of per equation R2 scores for the reconstruction task on ODEBench where
50% of the trajectory are dropped uniformly at random (ρ = 0.5). Subfigures correspond to
different noise levels. The y-axis represents counts and is scaled per model for better visibility of the
distribution of scores. The x-axis annotations “invalid” and “<0” respectively denote the number of
invalid predictions as well as the number of predictions that yielded an R2 score below 0. The red
dashed line corresponds to the mean R2 score across equations, the black dashed line corresponds to
the median R2 score.


                                                                              32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


40   ODEFormer                                        40   ODEFormer                                         40   ODEFormer
 0                                                     0                                                      0
40   ODEFormer (opt)                                  40   ODEFormer (opt)                                   40   ODEFormer (opt)
 0                                                     0                                                      0
40   FFX                                              40   FFX                                               40   FFX
 0                                                     0                                                      0
40   SINDy (poly)                                     40   SINDy (poly)                                      40   SINDy (poly)
 0                                                     0                                                      0
40   PySR                                             40   PySR                                              40   PySR
 0                                                     0                                                      0
40   SINDy (esc)                                      40   SINDy (esc)                                       63   SINDy (esc)
 0                                                     0                                                      0
50   ProGED (poly)                                    50   ProGED (poly)                                     50   ProGED (poly)
 0                                                     0                                                      0
40   EHC                                              50   EHC                                               40   EHC
 0                                                     0                                                      0
50   ProGED                                           50   ProGED                                            50   ProGED
 0                                                     0                                                      0
50   FE-AFP                                           50   FE-AFP                                            50   FE-AFP
 0                                                     0                                                      0
40   AFP                                              50   AFP                                               63   AFP
 0                                                     0                                                      0
50   SINDy                                            63   SINDy                                             63   SINDy
 0                                                     0                                                      0
50   EPLEX                                            40   EPLEX                                             50   EPLEX
 0                                                     0                                                      0
 invalid <0    0.0    0.2        0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0 invalid <0    0.0     0.2        0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0 invalid <0    0.0     0.2        0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0
                            R2                                                     R2                                                     R2
                     (a) σ=0                                              (b) σ=0.01                                             (c) σ=0.05

Figure 15: Histogram of per equation R2 scores for the generalization task on ODEBench. Subfig-
ures correspond to different noise levels. The y-axis represents counts and is scaled per model for
better visibility of the distribution of scores. The x-axis annotations “invalid” and “<0” respectively
denote the number of invalid predictions as well as the number of predictions that yielded an R2
score below 0. The red dashed line corresponds to the mean R2 score across equations, the black
dashed line corresponds to the median R2 score.


                                                                              33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


40   ODEFormer                                        40   ODEFormer                                         40   ODEFormer
 0                                                     0                                                      0
40   ODEFormer (opt)                                  40   ODEFormer (opt)                                   40   ODEFormer (opt)
 0                                                     0                                                      0
40   FFX                                              40   FFX                                               50   FFX
 0                                                     0                                                      0
40   SINDy (poly)                                     40   SINDy (poly)                                      50   SINDy (poly)
 0                                                     0                                                      0
40   PySR                                             40   PySR                                              50   PySR
 0                                                     0                                                      0
40   SINDy (esc)                                      50   SINDy (esc)                                       63   SINDy (esc)
 0                                                     0                                                      0
50   ProGED (poly)                                    50   ProGED (poly)                                     50   ProGED (poly)
 0                                                     0                                                      0
40   EHC                                              50   EHC                                               63   EHC
 0                                                     0                                                      0
50   ProGED                                           50   ProGED                                            50   ProGED
 0                                                     0                                                      0
40   FE-AFP                                           50   FE-AFP                                            50   FE-AFP
 0                                                     0                                                      0
50   AFP                                              50   AFP                                               63   AFP
 0                                                     0                                                      0
50   SINDy                                            63   SINDy                                             63   SINDy
 0                                                     0                                                      0
54   EPLEX                                            50   EPLEX                                             50   EPLEX
 0                                                     0                                                      0
 invalid <0    0.0    0.2        0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0 invalid <0    0.0     0.2        0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0 invalid <0    0.0     0.2        0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0
                            R2                                                     R2                                                     R2
                     (a) σ=0                                              (b) σ=0.01                                             (c) σ=0.05

Figure 16: Histogram of per equation R2 scores for the generalization task on ODEBench where
50% of the trajectory are dropped uniformly at random (ρ = 0.5). Subfigures correspond to
different noise levels. The y-axis represents counts and is scaled per model for better visibility of the
distribution of scores. The x-axis annotations “invalid” and “<0” respectively denote the number of
invalid predictions as well as the number of predictions that yielded an R2 score below 0. The red
dashed line corresponds to the mean R2 score across equations, the black dashed line corresponds to
the median R2 score.


                                                                              34
