Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S CALING PHYSICS - INFORMED HARD CONSTRAINTS
WITH MIXTURE - OF - EXPERTS

 Nithin Chalapathi, Yiheng Du, Aditi S. Krishnapriyan
 {nithinc, yihengdu, aditik1}@berkeley.edu
 University of California, Berkeley


                                            A BSTRACT

         Imposing known physical constraints, such as conservation laws, during neural
         network training introduces an inductive bias that can improve accuracy, reliabil-
         ity, convergence, and data efficiency for modeling physical dynamics. While such
         constraints can be softly imposed via loss function penalties, recent advancements
         in differentiable physics and optimization improve performance by incorporat-
         ing PDE-constrained optimization as individual layers in neural networks. This
         enables a stricter adherence to physical constraints. However, imposing hard con-
         straints significantly increases computational and memory costs, especially for
         complex dynamical systems. This is because it requires solving an optimization
         problem over a large number of points in a mesh, representing spatial and tem-
         poral discretizations, which greatly increases the complexity of the constraint. To
         address this challenge, we develop a scalable approach to enforce hard physical
         constraints using Mixture-of-Experts (MoE), which can be used with any neural
         network architecture. Our approach imposes the constraint over smaller decom-
         posed domains, each of which is solved by an “expert” through differentiable
         optimization. During training, each expert independently performs a localized
         backpropagation step by leveraging the implicit function theorem; the indepen-
         dence of each expert allows for parallelization across multiple GPUs. Compared
         to standard differentiable optimization, our scalable approach achieves greater ac-
         curacy in the neural PDE solver setting for predicting the dynamics of challenging
         non-linear systems. We also improve training stability and require significantly
         less computation time during both training and inference stages.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Many problems necessitate modeling the physical world, which is governed by a set of established
physical laws. For example, conservation laws such as conservation of mass and conservation of
momentum are integral to the understanding and modeling of fluid dynamics, heat transfer, chemi-
cal reaction networks, and other related areas (Herron & Foster, 2008). Recently, machine learning
(ML) approaches, and particularly neural networks (NNs), have shown promise in addressing prob-
lems in these areas.
The consistency of these physical laws means that they can provide a strong supervision signal for
NNs and act as inductive biases, rather than relying on unstructured data. A common approach to
incorporate physical laws into NN training is through a penalty term in the loss function, essentially
acting as a soft constraint. However, this approach has drawbacks, as empirical evidence suggests
that soft constraints can make the optimization problem difficult, leading to convergence issues (Kr-
ishnapriyan et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021). Additionally, at inference time, soft constraints offer no
guarantee of constraint enforcement, posing challenges for reliability and accuracy.
Alternatively, given the unchanging nature of these physical laws, there lies potential to create im-
proved constraint enforcement mechanisms during NN training. This can be particularly useful
when there is limited training data available, or a demand for heightened reliability. This notion
segues into the broader concept of a differentiable physics approach, where differentiation through


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


physical simulations ensures strict adherence to the underlying physical dynamics (Amos & Kolter,
2017; Qiao et al., 2020; Ramsundar et al., 2021; Kotary et al., 2021).
To solve a physical problem, typical practice in scientific computing is to use a mesh to represent the
spatiotemporal domain. This mesh is discretized, and physical laws can be enforced on the points
within the discretization. This can be considered an equality constrained optimization problem, and
there are lines of work focusing on incorporating such problems as individual layers in larger end-
to-end trainable NNs (Négiar et al., 2023; Amos & Kolter, 2017). The advantages of this approach
include stricter enforcement of constraints during both training and inference time, which can lead
to greater accuracy than the aforementioned soft constraint settings.
However, these approaches, aimed at enforcing constraints more precisely (“hard” constraints), also
face a number of challenges. Backpropagating through constraints over large meshes is a highly
non-linear problem that grows in dimensionality with respect to the mesh and NN model sizes.
This means that it can be both computationally and memory intensive. This scenario epitomizes an
inherent trade-off between how well the constraint is enforced, and the time and space complexity
of enforcing the constraint.
To address these challenges, we propose a mixture-of-experts formulation to enforce equality con-
straints of physical laws over a spatiotemporal domain. We focus on systems whose dynamics are
governed by partial differential equations (PDEs), and impose a set of scalable physics-informed
hard constraints. To illustrate this, we view our framework through the neural PDE solver setting,
where the goal is to learn a differential operator that models the solution to a system of PDEs. Our
approach imposes the constraint over smaller decomposed domains, each of which is solved by an
“expert” through differentiable optimization. Each expert independently performs a localized opti-
mization, imposing the known physical priors over its domain. During backpropagation, we then
compute gradients using the implicit function theorem locally on a per-expert basis. This allows us
to parallelize both the forward and backward pass, and improve training stability.
Our main contributions are as follows:

          • We introduce a physics-informed mixture-of-experts training framework (PI-HC-MoE),
            which offers a scalable approach for imposing hard physical constraints on neural networks
            by differentiating through physical dynamics represented via a constrained optimization
            problem. By localizing the constraint, we parallelize computation while reducing the com-
            plexity of the constraint, leading to more stable training.
          • We instantiate PI-HC-MoE in the neural PDE solver setting, and demonstrate our approach
            on two challenging non-linear problems: diffusion-sorption and turbulent Navier-Stokes.
            Our approach yields significantly higher accuracy than soft penalty enforcement methods
            and standard hard-constrained differentiable optimization.
          • Through our scalable approach, PI-HC-MoE exhibits substantial efficiency improvements
            when compared to standard differentiable optimization. PI-HC-MoE exhibits sub-linear
            scaling as the hard constraint is enforced on an increasing number of sampled points within
            the spatiotemporal domain. In contrast, the execution time for standard differentiable opti-
            mization significantly escalates with the expansion of sampled points.
          • We release our code1 , built using JAX, to facilitate reproducibility and enable researchers
            to explore and extend the results.

2       R ELATED W ORK

Constraints in Neural Networks. Prior works that impose constraints on NNs to enforce a prior
inductive bias generally fall into two categories: soft and hard constraints. Soft constraints use
penalty terms in the objective function to push the NN in a particular direction. For example,
physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) (Raissi et al., 2019) use physical laws as a penalty
term. Other examples include enforcing Lipschitz continuity (Miyato et al., 2018), Bellman op-
timally (Nikishin et al., 2022), turbulence (List et al., 2022), numerical surrogates (Pestourie et al.,
2023), prolongation matrices (Huang et al., 2021), solver iterations (Kelly et al., 2020), spectral
    1
        https://github.com/ASK-Berkeley/physics-NNs-hard-constraints


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


methods Du et al. (2023), and convexity over derivatives (Amos et al., 2017). We are primarily
concerned with hard constraints; methods that, by construction, exactly enforce the constraint at
train and test time. Hard constraints can be enforced in multiple ways, including neural conserva-
tion laws (Richter-Powell et al., 2022), PDE-CL (Négiar et al., 2023), BOON (Saad et al., 2023),
constrained neural fields (Zhong et al., 2023), boundary graph neural networks (Mayr et al., 2023),
PCL (Xu & Darve, 2022), constitutive laws (Ma et al., 2023), boundary conditions (Sukumar &
Srivastava, 2022), characteristic layers Braga-Neto (2023), and inverse design (Lu et al., 2021).

Differentiable Optimization. An approach to impose a hard constraint is to use differentiable op-
timization to solve a system of equations. Differentiable optimization folds in a second optimization
problem during the forward pass and uses the implicit function theorem (IFT) to compute gradi-
ents. OptNet (Amos & Kolter, 2017) provides one of the first formulations, which integrates linear
quadratic programs into deep neural networks. DC3 (Donti et al., 2021) propose a new training
and inference procedure involving two steps: completion to satisfy the constraint and correction to
remedy any deviations. A related line of work are implicit neural layers (Blondel et al., 2022; Chen
et al., 2018), which use IFT to replace the traditional autograd backprop procedure. Theseus (Pineda
et al., 2022) and JaxOpt (Blondel et al., 2022) are two open-source libraries implementing common
linear and non-linear least squares solvers on GPUs, and provide implicit differentiation capabili-
ties. Our formulation is agnostic to the exact method, framework, or iterative solver used. We focus
on non-linear least squares solvers because of their relevance to real-world problems, though many
potential alternative solver choices exist (Berahas et al., 2021; Fang et al., 2024; Na et al., 2022).

Differentiable Physics. Related to differentiable optimization, differentiable physics (de Avila
Belbute-Peres et al., 2018) embeds physical simulations within a NN training pipeline (Ramsundar
et al., 2021). Qiao et al. (2020) leverage meshes to reformulate the linear complementary problem
when simulating collisions. This line of work is useful within the context of reinforcement learning,
where computing the gradients of a physics state simulator may be intractable. Differentiable fluid
state simulators (Xian et al., 2023; Takahashi et al., 2021) are another example.

Mixture-of-Experts. MoE was popularized in natural language processing as a method to increase
NN capacity while balancing computation (Shazeer et al., 2017). The key idea behind MoE is to
conditionally route computation through “experts”, smaller networks that run independently. MoE
has been used in many settings, including vision (Ruiz et al., 2021) and GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020).


3    M ETHODS

General problem overview. We consider PDEs of the form Fϕ (u) = 0, where u : Ω → R
is the solution and ϕ may represent a variety of parameters including boundary conditions, initial
conditions, constant values (e.g., porosity of a medium), or varying parameters (e.g., density or
mass). Here, Ω defines the spatiotemporal grid. We would like to learn a mapping ϕ 7→ uθ , where
u is parameterized by θ such that Fϕ (uθ ) = 0. This mapping can be learned by a neural network
(NN). The soft constraint enforces Fϕ (uθ ) = 0 by using a penalty term in the loss function. That
is, we can minimize ||Fϕ (uθ )||22 as the loss function.

Enforcing Physics-Informed Hard Constraints in Neural Networks. We enforce physics-
informed hard constraints in NNs through differentiable optimization. While there are multiple dif-
ferent approaches to do this (de Avila Belbute-Peres et al., 2018; Donti et al., 2021; Amos & Kolter,
2017), our procedure here is most similar to Négiar et al. (2023). Let fθ : ϕ 7→ b, where b is a set
of N scalar-valued functions: b = [b0 , b1 , . . . bN ] and bi : Ω → R. We refer to b as a set of basis
functions. The objective of the hard constraint is to find ω ∈ RN such that Fϕ (b · ω T ) = 0. In other
words, ω is a linear combination of basis functions b such that the PDE is satisfied. We can solve for
ω using an iterative non-linear least squares solver, such as Levenberg-Marquardt (Nielsen & Mad-
sen, 2010). In practice, the non-linear least squares solver samples a set of x1 , . . . , xm points in the
spatiotemporal domain to evaluate b. This yields m equations of the form (Fϕ (b · ω T ))(xi ) = 0.
After solving the non-linear least squares problem, the final solution operator is fθ (ϕ)(x)·ω T for
x ∈ Ω, where fθ is a NN parameterized by θ.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Training Physics-Informed Hard Constraints. Traditional auto-differentiation systems con-
struct a computational graph, where each operation is performed in a “forward pass,” and gradients
are computed in a “backward pass” in reverse order using the chain rule. Training a NN through
backpropagation with the output of an iterative non-linear least squares solvers requires the solver to
be differentiable. However, iterative non-linear least squares solvers are not differentiable without
unrolling each of the iterations. Unrolling the solver is both computationally expensive (i.e., the
computation graph grows) and requires storing all intermediate values in the computation graph.

Physics-Informed Hard Constraints with Implicit Differentiation. Implicit differentiation, us-
ing the implicit function theorem (Blondel et al., 2022), serves as an alternative to standard auto-
differentiation. It performs a second non-linear least squares solve, bypassing the need to unroll the
computation graph of the iterative solver. This forgoes the need to store the entire computational
history of the solver. Next, we define how we use the implicit function theorem in the context of
training a NN via enforcing our physics-informed hard constraints.
The non-linear least squares solver finds ω such that Fϕ (b · ω T ) = 0. Fϕ (b · ω T ) has a non-singular
Jacobian ∂b Fϕ (b · ω T ). By the implicit function theorem, there exists open subsets Sb ⊆Rm×N
and Sω ⊆RN containing b and ω, respectively. There also exists a unique continuous function
z ∗ : Sb → Sω such that the following properties hold true:
                                      ω = z ∗ (b).                                          Property (1)
                                               ∗      T
                                      Fϕ (b · z (b) ) = 0.                                  Property (2)
                                      z ∗ is differentiable on Sb .                         Property (3)
                    ∂F (b·ω T )
Our goal is to find ϕ ∂θ     , where θ corresponds to NN parameters. This enables us to perform
gradient descent on θ to minimize the loss ||Fϕ (fθ (ϕ) · ω T )||22 , minimizing the PDE residual. To
compute the gradient of the PDE residual, we use Property (1) and differentiate Property (2):
            ∂Fϕ (b · z ∗ (b)T )   ∂Fϕ (b · ω T ) ∂b ∂Fϕ (b · z ∗ (b)T ) ∂z ∗ (b)
                                =               ·     +                 ·        = 0.                (1)
                  ∂θ                  ∂b          ∂θ    ∂z ∗ (b)          ∂θ
                                  |                  {z               }
                                               computed via auto-diff.
                                               ∗
Eq. 1 defines a system of equations, where ∂z∂θ(b) is unknown. We can use the same non-linear least
squares solver as the forward pass, concluding the backward pass of training the NN through the
hard constraint. Further details on the non-linear least squares solve in Eq. 1 can be found in §A.

Physics-Informed Hard Constraints with Mixture-of-Experts (MoE). Until now, we have fo-
cused on a single hard constraint with one forward non-linear least squares solve to predict a solu-
tion, and one backward solve to train the NN. However, using a single global hard constraint poses
multiple challenges. In complicated dynamical systems, the global behavior may drastically vary
across the domain, making it difficult for the hard constraint to converge to the right solution. In-
stead, using multiple constraints over localized locations on the domain can be beneficial to improve
constraint adherence on non-sampled points on the mesh. Unfortunately, increased sampling on the
mesh is not as simple as using a larger m because the non-linear least squares solve to compute
ω grows with the number of basis functions N and the number of sampled points m. As a result,
there exists a max m and N after which it is impractical to directly solve the entire system. This
can be mitigated by using a smaller batch size, but as we will show, comes at the cost of training
stability (Smith et al., 2018; Keskar et al., 2016).
To overcome these challenges, we develop a Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) approach to improve the
accuracy and efficiency of physics-informed hard constraints. Suppose we have K experts. The spa-
tiotemporal domain Ω is partitioned into K subsets Ωk , for k = 1 . . . K, corresponding to each ex-
pert. Each expert individually solves the constrained optimization problem (Fϕ (fθ (ϕ) · ωkT ))(xi ) =
0 for m sampled points xi ∈ Ωk using a non-linear least squares solver. Because the weighting
ωk is computed locally, the resulting prediction b · ωkT is a linear weighting of the global basis
functions tailored to the expert’s domain Ωk , which we find leads to more stable training and faster
convergence. Each expert is also provided with the global initial and boundary conditions. Given a
fixed initial and boundary conditions, the solution that satisfies Fϕ (u) may be solved point-wise, and
solving the constraint over each expert’s domain is equivalent to satisfying the constraint globally.


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                        MoE Router
                                                                x1 Expert 1
                                                             b = [b0, b1, … bN]
                                        x1 b on Ω
                     Basis                          1
                                                                  Find ω1 :
                   Functions              b on Ω2                                   uθ(x, t)
     fθ                             x                           𝓕ɸ( b ω1T) = 0                    || 𝓕ɸ(uθ) ||2
                                          b on Ω3
                          0
                b = [b , … b ]  N
                                                                  (N.L.L.S.)      =Σk b · ωk
                                          b on Ω4

                                              t                   Expert 2
                              Loss Function
                              Trainable Parameters                Expert 3

    [xi , ti , u0 , ɸi]       Predicted Functions                                 Forward Pass
x                                                                 Expert 4
                              Input Domain                                        Backward Pass (IFT)
                              Non-trainable Diﬀerentiable Optimization            Backward Pass (Autograd)
            t

Figure 1: Schematic of PI-HC-MoE in the 2D case. PI-HC-MoE is provided with the spatiotem-
poral grid and any PDE parameters (e.g., initial conditions, viscosity, Reynolds Number). fθ is a
NN parameterized by θ (blue box), which outputs a set of N basis functions b (left-most orange
box). b’s domain, the same as the green box, is partitioned into the domains Ωk of each expert by
the MoE router. Each expert (purple boxes) solves the non-linear least squares problem defined by
Fϕ (b·ωkT ) = 0. The resulting ωk values are used to produce a final solution uθ = Σk b·ωk . Finally,
a loss is computed using the L2 -norm of the PDE residual (red box). We denote the forward pass
with black arrows and the backwards pass with green arrows. Solid green arrows indicate the use of
traditional auto-differentiation, while dashed green arrows denote implicit differentiation.
There are multiple potential choices for constructing a domain decomposition Ωk , and the optimal
choice is problem dependent. As a simple 2D example, Fig. 1 uses non-overlapping uniform par-
titioning along the x dimension. We refer to the center orange boxes, which perform the domain
decomposition for the experts, as the MoE router. There are two important nuances to Fig. 1. First,
fθ , the function mapping ϕ to the basis functions, is a mapping shared by all experts. Our setup
is agnostic to the choice of fθ , which can be any arbitrary NN. We use Fourier Neural Operator
(FNO) (Li et al., 2021a;b), due to its popularity and promising results. Second, each expert performs
an iterative non-linear least squares solve to compute ωk , and the final output is the concatenated
outputs across experts. This leads to k independent non-linear least squares solves, which can be
parallelized across multiple GPUs.
At test time, the same domain decomposition and router is used. The number of sampled points, m,
and the parameters of the non-linear least squares solver may be changed (e.g., tolerance), but the
domain decomposition remains fixed.

Forward and backwards pass in Mixture-of-Experts. In PI-HC-MoE, the forward pass is a
domain decomposition in the spatiotemporal grid (see §B for an example forward pass). The domain
of each basis function is partitioned according to the MoE router. During the backward pass, each
expert needs to perform localized implicit differentiation. We extend this formulation from the single
                                                                             ∗
hard constraint to the MoE case. Each expert individually computes ∂z∂θ(b) over Ωk . The MoE
router reconstructs the overall Jacobian, given individual Jacobians from each expert. To illustrate
this, consider a decomposition along only one axis (e.g., spatial as in Fig. 1). The backward pass
must reconstruct the Jacobian across all experts:
                         ∂θ z ∗ (b) = [∂θ z1∗ (b) ∂θ z2∗ (b) . . . ∂θ zK
                                                                       ∗
                                                                         (b)] .                    (2)
The realization of the reconstruction operation is performed using an indicator function and sum-
ming across Jacobians:
                                             k=1 ∂θ zi (b(x)) · 1x∈Ωk .
                               ∂θ z ∗ (b) = ΣK        ∗
                                                                                                   (3)
Here, x is a point in the domain of expert k (i.e., any spatiotemporal coordinate in Ωk ). Afterwards,
the reassembled Jacobian may be used in auto-differentiation as usual.

4 R ESULTS
We demonstrate our method on two challenging non-linear PDEs: 1D diffusion-sorption (§4.1)
and 2D turbulent Navier-Stokes (§4.2). For all problem settings, we use a base FNO architecture.


                                                            5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Relative L2 error on the diffusion-sorption test set. (Left) The L2 relative error on the
test set over training iterations. (Right) The final L2 relative error on the test set using the trained
models. PI-HC-MoE converges faster and has greater accuracy than the other settings.
We train this model using our method (Physics-Informed Hard Constraint Mixture-of-Experts, or
PI-HC-MoE), and compare to training via a physics-informed soft constraint (PI-SC) and physics-
informed hard constraint (PI-HC). For PI-HC and PI-HC-MoE, we use Levenberg-Marquardt as our
non-linear least squares solver. For details, see §C.1 and §C.2.
Data-constrained setting. In both problems, we exclusively look at a data-constrained setting
where we assume that at training time, we have no numerical solver solution data available (i.e., no
solution data on the interior of the domain). We do so to mimic real-world settings, where it can be
expensive to generate datasets for new problem settings (see §C for further discussion).

Evaluation details. The training and test sets contain initial conditions drawn from the same dis-
tribution, but the test set initial conditions are distinct from the training set. To evaluate all models,
we compute numerical solver solutions to compare relative L2 errors on ML predictions using the
test set initial conditions. The PDE residual over training on the validation set for diffusion-sorption
and Navier-Stokes is included in §F.For measuring scalability, we use the best trained model for
both PI-HC-MoE and PI-HC to avoid ill-conditioning during the non-linear least squares solve. The
training step includes the cost to backpropagate and update the model weights. All measurements
are taken across 64 training or inference steps on NVIDIA A100 GPUs, and each step includes one
batch. We report average per-batch speedup of PI-HC-MoE compared to PI-HC.

4.1 1D D IFFUSION - SORPTION
We study the 1D non-linear diffusion-sorption equation. The diffusion-sorption system describes
absorption, adsorption, and diffusion of a liquid through a solid. The governing PDE is defined as:
            ∂u(x, t)         D        ∂ 2 u(x, t)
                     =              ·             ,                  x ∈ (0, 1), t ∈ (0, 500],
               ∂t       R(u(x, t))        ∂x2
                             1−ϕ
          R(u(x, t)) = 1 +         · ρs · k · nf · u(x, t)nf −1 ,
                               ϕ
                                      ∂u(1, t)
        u(0, t) = 1, u(1, t) = D ·              ,                    (Boundary Conditions)
                                          ∂x
where ϕ, ρs , D, k and nf are constants defining physical quantities. We use the same physical
constants as PDEBench (Takamoto et al., 2022) (see §C.1 for further details). For both classical
numerical methods and ML methods, the singularity at u = 0 poses a hard challenge. The solution
trajectory and differential operator are highly non-linear. A standard finite volume solver requires
approximately 60 seconds to compute a solution for a 1024×101 grid (Takamoto et al., 2022).
Problem Setup. We use initial conditions from PDEBench. Each solution instance is a scalar-field
over 1024 spatial and 101 temporal points, where T = 500 seconds (see §C.1 for further details).
For PI-HC-MoE, we use K = 4 experts and do a spatial decomposition with N = 16 basis functions
(see §B for details on inference). Each expert enforces the constraint on a domain of 256 (spatial)
× 101 (temporal). Over the 256 × 101 domain, each expert samples 20k points, leading to a total of
80k points where the PDE constraint is enforced on the domain. PI-HC uses an identical model with


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: Predicted solution for the diffusion-sorption equation. (Top) Visualizations of the
numerical solver solution and ML predictions for the soft constraint (PI-SC), hard constraint (PI-
HC), and PI-HC-MoE. (Bottom) Difference plots of the ML predicted solutions compared to the
numerical solver solution. White denotes zero. PI-SC is unable to recover the dynamics or scale
of the solution. PI-HC is able to recover some information, but fails to capture the full dynamics.
PI-HC-MoE is able to recover almost all of the solution and has the lowest error.
20k sampled points in the hard constraint. This represents the maximum number of points that we
can sample with PI-HC without running out of memory, with a stable batch size. In order to sample
more points, a reduction in batch size is required. Our final batch size for PI-HC is 6, and we find
that any reduction produces significant training instability, with a higher runtime (see Fig. 4). Thus,
our baseline PI-HC model uses the maximum number of sampled points that gives the best training
stability. All models are trained with a fixed computational budget of 4000 training iterations.

Results. We summarize our results in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3. In Fig. 2 (left), we plot the L2 relative
percent error on the test set over training steps for PI-SC, PI-HC, and PI-HC-MoE. On the right,
we plot the trained model L2 relative percent error on the test set of the final trained models. PI-
SC is unable to converge to a reasonable solution, reflected in the high L2 relative percent error
(85.93% ± 5.07%). While PI-HC is able to achieve lower error than PI-SC at 7.55% ± 8.10%, it
does worse than PI-HC-MoE (3.60% ± 2.93%). In Fig. 3, we show the predicted ML solutions for
PI-SC, PI-HC, and PI-HC-MoE, and the difference between the predicted solution and the numer-
ical solver solution (white indicates zero difference). PI-SC is unable to converge to a reasonable
solution, and PI-HC, while closer, is unable to capture the proper dynamics of diffusion-sorption.
PI-HC-MoE has the closest correspondence to the numerical solution. Additionally, we explore PI-
HC-MoE ’s generalization to unseen timesteps (§D) and assess the quality of basis functions (§E).
Scalability. We compare the scalability of PI-HC-MoE to PI-HC. For evaluation, we plot the num-
ber of sampled points on the interior of the domain against the execution time during training and
inference, in Fig. 4. PI-HC-MoE maintains near constant execution time as the number of points
increases, while PI-HC becomes significantly slower as the number of sampled points crosses 50k


Figure 4: Runtime of PI-HC and PI-HC-MoE on diffusion-sorption. The time to perform a single
training (left) and inference (right) step as the number of constrained sampled points increases.
                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: Predicted solution for 2D Navier-Stokes. From top to bottom: (Row 1) Initial vorticity
and its evolution as T increases, computed via a numerical solver. The errors of PI-HC-MoE (Row
2), PI-HC (Row 3), and PI-SC (Row 4) are visualized for corresponding T , where the difference in
the predicted solution is shown with respect to the numerical solver. Darker colors indicate higher
error. Both PI-SC and PI-HC exhibit greater error compared to PI-HC-MoE, especially at later T .
points. PI-HC-MoE provides a training speedup of 1.613× (102 sampled points) to 3.189× (105
sampled points). Notably, PI-HC has a higher standard deviation as the number of sampled points
increases. Because PI-HC-MoE partitions the number of sampled points, the individual constraint
solved by each expert converges faster. As a result, PI-HC-MoE is more consistent across different
data batches and has a much lower variation in runtime.
Note that a standard finite volume solver takes about 60 seconds to solve for a solution (Takamoto
et al., 2022), and so PI-HC and PI-HC-MoE both have inference times faster than a numerical solver.
However, PI-HC-MoE is 2.030× (102 sampled points) to 3.048× (105 sampled points) faster at
inference than PI-HC, while also having significantly lower error.

4.2 2D NAVIER -S TOKES
The Navier-Stokes equations describe the evolution of a fluid with a given viscosity. We study the
vorticity form of the 2D periodic Navier-Stokes equation, where the learning objective is to learn
the scalar field vorticity w.
    ∂w(t, x, y)
                + u(t, x, y) · ∇w(t, x, y) = ν∆w(t, x, y),        t ∈ [0, T ],   (x, y) ∈ (0, 1)2   (4)
       ∂t
                                w = ∇ × u, ∇ · u = 0,
                                    w(0, x, y) = w0 (x, y),             (Boundary Conditions)
where u is the velocity vector field, and ν is the viscosity. Similar to Li et al. (2021b) and Raissi
et al. (2019), we study the vorticity form of Navier-Stokes to reduce the problem to a scalar field
prediction, instead of predicting the vector field u. In our setting, we use a Reynolds number of
1e4 (ν = 1e − 4), representing turbulent flow. Turbulent flow is an interesting and challenging
problem due to the complicated evolution of the fluid, which undergoes irregular fluctuations. Many
engineering and scientific problems are interested in the turbulent flow case (e.g., rapid currents,
wind tunnels, and weather simulations (Nieuwstadt et al., 2016)).

Problem setup. The training set has a resolution of 64 (x) × 64 (y) × 64 (t). Both the training
and test sets have a trajectory length of T = 5 seconds. The test set has a resolution of 256 (x)
× 256 (y) × 64 (t). For both PI-HC and PI-HC-MoE, we use 64 basis functions. We use K = 4
experts and perform a 2 (x) ×2 (y) ×1 (t) spatiotemporal decomposition. Each expert receives the
full temporal grid with 14 of the spatial grid (i.e., 32 × 32 × 64 input), and samples 20k points during
the constraint step. For the full data generation parameters and architecture details, see §C.2.


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Results. We visualize representative examples from the 643 test set in Fig. 5, comparing PI-SC,
PI-HC, and PI-HC-MoE . In Fig. 5, grey represents zero error. PI-SC is the worst performing model,
with significant errors appearing by T = 2. While PI-HC captures most of the dynamics at earlier
time steps (T = 1, T = 2), especially compared to PI-SC, PI-HC struggles to adequately capture
the behavior of later time steps. In particular, PI-HC fails to capture the evolution of fine features at
T = 5. On the 256 × 256 × 64 test set, PI-SC attains a relative L2 error of 18.081% ± 3.740%.
PI-HC (11.754% ± 2.951%) and PI-HC-MoE (8.298% ± 2.345%) both achieve a lower relative
L2 error. PI-HC-MoE consistently attains the lowest error across all three resolutions and has lower
variance in prediction quality (box plots visualized in appendix §C.3).

Scalability. Similar       to      the
diffusion-sorption case, we eval-
uate the scalability of our approach.
We compare the scalability of PI-
HC-MoE to standard differentiable
optimization (i.e., PI-HC) for both
the training and test steps across a
different number of sampled points
in Fig. 6. The training and inference
steps are performed with a batch size
of 2. At training time, PI-HC scales
quadratically with respect to the
number of sampled points, and has Figure 6: Runtime of PI-HC and PI-HC-MoE on 2D
high variance in per batch training Navier-Stokes. We plot the time for a single training (left)
and inference time. PI-HC has a and inference (right) iteration. PI-HC-MoE is significantly
harder constraint system to solve, faster for both, and scales sublinearly. PI-HC has much
reflected in the increase in training higher execution times and a large standard deviation.
time. Across both training and inference steps, PI-HC-MoE scales sublinearly and, in practice,
remains constant with respect to the number of sampled points. For training, PI-HC-MoE provides a
2.117× (102 sampled points) to 12.838× (104 sampled points) speedup over PI-HC. At inference
time we see speedups of 2.538× (102 sampled points) to 12.864× (104 sampled points).

4.3 F INAL TAKEAWAYS
PI-HC-MoE has lower L2 relative error on the diffusion-sorption and Navier-Stokes equations, when
compared to both PI-SC and PI-HC. Enabled by the MoE setup, PI-HC-MoE is better able to capture
the features for both diffusion-sorption and Navier-Stokes. PI-HC-MoE is also more scalable than
the standard differentiable optimization setting represented by PI-HC. Each expert locally computes
ωk , allowing for greater flexibility when weighting the basis functions. The experts are better able to
use the local dynamics, while satisfying the PDE globally. PI-HC is limited to a linear combination
of the basis functions, whereas PI-HC-MoE is able to express piece-wise linear combinations.
Another reason we find PI-HC-MoE to outperform PI-HC is through the stability of training. This
manifests in two different ways. First, because PI-HC-MoE is more scalable, we are able to use
a larger batch size, which stabilizes the individual gradient steps taken. Second, for a given total
number of sampled points, the non-linear least square solves performed by PI-HC-MoE are smaller
than the global non-linear least squares performed by the hard constraint. Specifically, the size of
                                1
the constraint for K experts is K  that of PI-HC. This results in an easier optimization problem, and
PI-HC-MoE converges quicker and with greater accuracy.


5   C ONCLUSION

We present the physics-informed hard constraint mixture-of-experts (PI-HC-MoE) framework, a
new approach to scale hard constraints corresponding to physical laws through an embedded differ-
entiable optimization layer. Our approach deconstructs a differentiable physics hard constraint into
smaller experts, which leads to better convergence and faster run times. On two challenging, highly
non-linear systems, 1D diffusion-sorption and 2D Navier-Stokes equations, PI-HC-MoE achieves
significantly lower errors than standard differentiable optimization using a single hard constraint, as
well as soft constraint penalty methods.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Acknowledgements. This work was initially supported by Laboratory Directed Research and De-
velopment (LDRD) funding under Contract Number DE-AC02-05CH11231. It was then supported
by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Re-
search, Scientific Discovery through Advanced Computing (SciDAC) program under contract No.
DE-AC02-05CH11231, and in part by the Office of Naval Research (ONR) under grant N00014-
23-1-2587. This research used resources of the National Energy Research Scientific Computing
Center (NERSC), a U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science User Facility located at Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory, operated under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231. We also thank
Geoffrey Négiar, Sanjeev Raja, and Rasmus Malik Høegh Lindrup for their valuable feedback and
discussions.

R EFERENCES
Brandon Amos and J. Zico Kolter. OptNet: Differentiable Optimization as a Layer in Neural Net-
  works. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 70 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 136–145. PMLR, 2017.
Brandon Amos, Lei Xu, and J. Zico Kolter. Input convex neural networks. In Proceedings of the 34th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 146–155. PMLR, 2017.
Albert S. Berahas, Frank E. Curtis, Daniel Robinson, and Baoyu Zhou. Sequential quadratic opti-
  mization for nonlinear equality constrained stochastic optimization. SIAM Journal on Optimiza-
  tion, 31(2):1352–1379, 2021.
Mathieu Blondel, Quentin Berthet, Marco Cuturi, Roy Frostig, Stephan Hoyer, Felipe Llinares-
 Lopez, Fabian Pedregosa, and Jean-Philippe Vert. Efficient and Modular Implicit Differentiation.
 In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 5230–5242. Curran As-
 sociates, Inc., 2022.
James Bradbury, Roy Frostig, Peter Hawkins, Matthew James Johnson, Chris Leary, Dougal
  Maclaurin, George Necula, Adam Paszke, Jake VanderPlas, Skye Wanderman-Milne, and Qiao
  Zhang. JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs, 2018. URL http:
  //github.com/google/jax.
Ulisses Braga-Neto. Characteristics-informed neural networks for forward and inverse hyperbolic
  problems, 2023.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel
  Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler,
  Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray,
  Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever,
  and Dario Amodei. Language Models are Few-Shot Learners. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 1877–1901. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020.
Ricky T. Q. Chen, Yulia Rubanova, Jesse Bettencourt, and David K Duvenaud. Neural ordinary
  differential equations. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 31. Curran
  Associates, Inc., 2018.
Filipe de Avila Belbute-Peres, Kevin Smith, Kelsey Allen, Josh Tenenbaum, and J. Zico Kolter.
   End-to-end differentiable physics for learning and control. In Advances in Neural Information
   Processing Systems, volume 31, pp. 7178–7189. Curran Associates Inc., 2018.
Priya L. Donti, David Rolnick, and J. Zico Kolter. DC3: A learning method for optimization with
  hard constraints. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Yiheng Du, Nithin Chalapathi, and Aditi Krishnapriyan. Neural spectral methods: Self-supervised
  learning in the spectral domain. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.05225, 2023.
Yuchen Fang, Sen Na, Michael W. Mahoney, and Mladen Kolar. Fully stochastic trust-region se-
  quential quadratic programming for equality-constrained optimization problems. 2024.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Isom H. Herron and Michael R. Foster. Partial Differential Equations in Fluid Dynamics. Cambridge
   University Press, 2008.

Zhichun Huang, Shaojie Bai, and J. Zico Kolter. (implicit)2 : Implicit layers for implicit representa-
  tions. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 9639–9650. Curran
  Associates, Inc., 2021.

Jacob Kelly, Jesse Bettencourt, Matthew J Johnson, and David K Duvenaud. Learning Differen-
  tial Equations that are Easy to Solve. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 33, pp. 4370–4380. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020.

Nitish Shirish Keskar, Dheevatsa Mudigere, Jorge Nocedal, Mikhail Smelyanskiy, and Ping Tak Pe-
  ter Tang. On large-batch training for deep learning: Generalization gap and sharp minima. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1609.04836, 2016.

Patrick Kidger and Cristian Garcia. Equinox: neural networks in JAX via callable PyTrees and
  filtered transformations. Differentiable Programming workshop at Neural Information Processing
  Systems 2021, 2021.

James Kotary, Ferdinando Fioretto, Pascal Van Hentenryck, and Bryan Wilder. End-to-end con-
  strained optimization learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.16378, 2021.

Aditi Krishnapriyan, Amir Gholami, Shandian Zhe, Robert Kirby, and Michael W Mahoney. Char-
  acterizing possible failure modes in physics-informed neural networks. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 26548–26560. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021.

Zongyi Li, Nikola Kovachki, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Burigede Liu, Kaushik Bhattacharya, An-
  drew Stuart, and Anima Anandkumar. Fourier Neural Operator for Parametric Partial Differential
  Equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.08895, 2021a.

Zongyi Li, Hongkai Zheng, Nikola Kovachki, David Jin, Haoxuan Chen, Burigede Liu, Kamyar
  Azizzadenesheli, and Anima Anandkumar. Physics-informed neural operator for learning partial
  differential equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.03794, 2021b.

Björn List, Li-Wei Chen, and Nils Thuerey. Learned turbulence modelling with differentiable fluid
  solvers: physics-based loss functions and optimisation horizons. Journal of Fluid Mechanics,
  949, 2022.

Lu Lu, Raphael Pestourie, Wenjie Yao, Zhicheng Wang, Francesc Verdugo, and Steven G Johnson.
  Physics-informed neural networks with hard constraints for inverse design. SIAM Journal on
  Scientific Computing, 43(6):B1105–B1132, 2021.

Pingchuan Ma, Peter Yichen Chen, Bolei Deng, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Tao Du, Chuang Gan, and
  Wojciech Matusik. Learning neural constitutive laws from motion observations for generalizable
  pde dynamics. In International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2023.

Andreas Mayr, Sebastian Lehner, Arno Mayrhofer, Christoph Kloss, Sepp Hochreiter, and Johannes
  Brandstetter. Boundary Graph Neural Networks for 3D Simulations. Proceedings of the AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 37(8):9099–9107, 2023.

Takeru Miyato, Toshiki Kataoka, Masanori Koyama, and Yuichi Yoshida. Spectral Normalization
  for Generative Adversarial Networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.05957, 2018.

Sen Na, Sungho Shin, Mihai Anitescu, and Victor M. Zavala. On the convergence of overlapping
  schwarz decomposition for nonlinear optimal control. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control,
  67(11):5996–6011, 2022.

Hans Bruun Nielsen and Kaj Madsen. Introduction to Optimization and Data Fitting. Informatics
  and Mathematical Modelling, Technical University of Denmark, DTU, 2010.

Frans T.M. Nieuwstadt, Jerry Westerweel, and Bendiks J. Boersma. Introduction to Theory and
  Applications of Turbulent Flows. Springer, 2016.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Evgenii Nikishin, Romina Abachi, Rishabh Agarwal, and Pierre-Luc Bacon. Control-oriented
  model-based reinforcement learning with implicit differentiation. In Proceedings of the AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 7886–7894, 2022.

Geoffrey Négiar, Michael W. Mahoney, and Aditi Krishnapriyan. Learning differentiable solvers for
  systems with hard constraints. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2023.

Raphaël Pestourie, Youssef Mroueh, Chris Rackauckas, Payel Das, and Steven G. Johnson. Physics-
  enhanced deep surrogates for partial differential equations. Nature Machine Intelligence, 2023.

Luis Pineda, Taosha Fan, Maurizio Monge, Shobha Venkataraman, Paloma Sodhi, Ricky T. Q. Chen,
  Joseph Ortiz, Daniel DeTone, Austin Wang, Stuart Anderson, Jing Dong, Brandon Amos, and
  Mustafa Mukadam. Theseus: A Library for Differentiable Nonlinear Optimization. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 3801–3818. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2022.

Yi-Ling Qiao, Junbang Liang, Vladlen Koltun, and Ming C. Lin. Scalable Differentiable Physics for
  Learning and Control. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2020.

Jason Rader and Patrick Kidger.              Optimistix.       URL https://github.com/
  patrick-kidger/optimistix.

Maziar Raissi, Paris Perdikaris, and George E Karniadakis. Physics-informed neural networks: A
 deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial
 differential equations. Journal of Computational Physics, 378:686–707, 2019.

Bharath Ramsundar, Dilip Krishnamurthy, and Venkatasubramanian Viswanathan. Differentiable
  Physics: A Position Piece. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.07573, 2021.

Jack Richter-Powell, Yaron Lipman, and Ricky T. Q. Chen. Neural conservation laws: A divergence-
  free perspective. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.

Carlos Riquelme Ruiz, Joan Puigcerver, Basil Mustafa, Maxim Neumann, Rodolphe Jenatton,
  André Susano Pinto, Daniel Keysers, and Neil Houlsby. Scaling Vision with Sparse Mixture
  of Experts. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.

Nadim Saad, Gaurav Gupta, Shima Alizadeh, and Danielle C. Maddix. Guiding continuous operator
  learning through Physics-based boundary constraints. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2023.

Noam Shazeer, Azalia Mirhoseini, Krzysztof Maziarz, Andy Davis, Quoc Le, Geoffrey Hinton, and
  Jeff Dean. Outrageously large neural networks: The sparsely-gated mixture-of-experts layer. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.

Sam Smith, Pieter-jan Kindermans, Chris Ying, and Quoc V. Le. Don’t decay the learning rate,
  increase the batch size. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.

Natarajan Sukumar and Ankit Srivastava. Exact imposition of boundary conditions with distance
  functions in physics-informed deep neural networks. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics
  and Engineering, 389:114333, 2022. ISSN 0045-7825.

Tetsuya Takahashi, Junbang Liang, Yi-Ling Qiao, and Ming C. Lin. Differentiable fluids with solid
  coupling for learning and control. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  35(7):6138–6146, 2021.

Makoto Takamoto, Timothy Praditia, Raphael Leiteritz, Daniel MacKinlay, Francesco Alesiani,
 Dirk Pflüger, and Mathias Niepert. PDEBench: An Extensive Benchmark for Scientific Machine
 Learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 1596–1611.
 Curran Associates, Inc., 2022.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Pauli Virtanen, Ralf Gommers, Travis E. Oliphant, Matt Haberland, Tyler Reddy, David Courna-
  peau, Evgeni Burovski, Pearu Peterson, Warren Weckesser, Jonathan Bright, Stéfan J. van der
  Walt, Matthew Brett, Joshua Wilson, K. Jarrod Millman, Nikolay Mayorov, Andrew R. J. Nel-
  son, Eric Jones, Robert Kern, Eric Larson, C J Carey, İlhan Polat, Yu Feng, Eric W. Moore,
  Jake VanderPlas, Denis Laxalde, Josef Perktold, Robert Cimrman, Ian Henriksen, E. A. Quintero,
  Charles R. Harris, Anne M. Archibald, Antônio H. Ribeiro, Fabian Pedregosa, Paul van Mul-
  bregt, and SciPy 1.0 Contributors. SciPy 1.0: Fundamental Algorithms for Scientific Computing
  in Python. Nature Methods, 17:261–272, 2020.
Sifan Wang, Yujun Teng, and Paris Perdikaris. Understanding and mitigating gradient flow patholo-
   gies in physics-informed neural networks. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 43(5):A3055–
   A3081, 2021.
Zhou Xian, Bo Zhu, Zhenjia Xu, Hsiao-Yu Tung, Antonio Torralba, Katerina Fragkiadaki, and
  Chuang Gan. Fluidlab: A differentiable environment for benchmarking complex fluid manipula-
  tion. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Kailai Xu and Eric Darve. Physics Constrained Learning for Data-driven Inverse Modeling from
  Sparse Observations. Journal of Computational Physics, 453:110938, 2022.
Fangcheng Zhong, Kyle Thomas Fogarty, Param Hanji, Tianhao Walter Wu, Alejandro Sztrajman,
  Andrew Everett Spielberg, Andrea Tagliasacchi, Petra Bosilj, and Cengiz Oztireli. Neural fields
  with hard constraints of arbitrary differential order. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural In-
  formation Processing Systems, 2023.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    IFT: BACKWARD PASS
We expand on the training procedure described in §3, and additional details on training the model
using the implicit function theorem.
Recall that for basis functions b = [b0 , b1 , . . . bN ] and bi : Ω → R, the non-linear least squares
solver finds ω ∈ RN such that Fϕ (b · ω T ) = 0. If the Jacobian ∂b Fϕ (b · ω T ) is non-singular, then
the implicit function theorem holds. There exists open sets Sb ⊆ Rm×N , Sω ⊆ RN , and function
z ∗ : Sb → Sω . Sb and Sω contain b and ω. z ∗ has the following properties:


                                      ω = z ∗ (b).                                          Property (1)
                                      Fϕ (b · z ∗ (b)T ) = 0.                               Property (2)
                                      z ∗ is differentiable on Sb .                         Property (3)
                                                                      ∗
During gradient descent, by the chain rule, we need to know ∂z∂θ(b) , which is not readily available
by auto-differentiation. By differentiating property (2), we get Eq. 1:


            ∂Fϕ (b · z ∗ (b)T )   ∂Fϕ (b · ω T ) ∂b ∂Fϕ (b · z ∗ (b)T ) ∂z ∗ (b)
                                =               ·    +                 ·         = 0.                (1)
                  ∂θ                  ∂b          ∂θ    ∂z ∗ (b)          ∂θ

Rearranging Eq. 1, we can produce a new system of equations.


           ∂Fϕ (b · z ∗ (b)T ) ∂z ∗ (b)      ∂Fϕ (b · ω T ) ∂b
                              ·          = −                 ·
               ∂z ∗ (b)           ∂θ              ∂b           ∂θ
                                                                  −1
                                ∂z ∗ (b)     ∂Fϕ (b · z ∗ (b)T )        ∂Fϕ (b · ω T ) ∂b

                                         =          ∗
                                                                     ·−               ·              (5)
                                  ∂θ             ∂z (b)                     ∂b          ∂θ
                                                                          ∗
The unknown that we need to solve for now is the desired quantity, ∂z∂θ(b) . The expressions on the
                 ∂F (b·ω T )           ∂F (b·z ∗ (b)T )
right-hand side, ϕ ∂b        · ∂b
                               ∂θ and
                                          ϕ
                                            ∂z ∗ (b) , can be computed via auto-differentiation. This
then gives us a system of equations which involves a matrix inverse. If matrix inversion was compu-
                                                      ∗
tationally tractable, we could explicitly solve for ∂z∂θ(b) . Instead, the system of equations is solved
using the same non-linear least squares solver as in the forward pass, allowing us to approximate
                                   ∗
                                                                    ∂Fϕ (b·ω T )
the matrix inverse, and yields ∂z∂θ(b) . Now, we can compute             ∂θ      and train the full model
end-to-end.

B    E XAMPLE INFERENCE PROCEDURE
To demonstrate the inference procedure of PI-HC-MoE, we walk through the forward pass of the 1D
diffusion-sorption problem setting, starting from PI-HC and generalizing to the PI-HC-MoE case.

Model Input and Output. In both PI-HC and PI-HC-MoE, the underlying FNO model is pro-
vided with both the initial condition and underlying spatiotemporal grid. Each initial condition is
a 1024 dimensional vector (the chosen discretization), representing the spatial coordinates, and is
broadcasted across time (t = 500 s), leading to an input of 1024 × 101 for the initial condition. The
broadcasted initial condition is concatenated with the spatiotemporal grid with shape 1024×101×2,
for a final input spanning the entire grid with 3 channels (1024 × 101 × 3). The inference procedure
of the underlying base NN achitecture is unchanged. In our case, the base NN architecture produces
a 1024 × 101 × N tensor representing N basis functions evaluated over the spatiotemporal domain.

PI-HC (Single Constraint). Each constraint samples M points and solves the PDE equations.
Additionally, the input initial condition (1024) and initial condition of the basis functions (1024×N )


                                                     14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


are provided to the solver. Similarly, the boundary conditions are provided and diffusion-sorption
has two boundary conditions at x = 0 and x = 1, which leads to a boundary condition tensor of
2 × 101 × N . The optimal ω (N ) computed by the non-linear least squares solver satisfies the PDE
equations on the M sampled points, as well as the initial and boundary conditions. Finally, ω is used
to compute the entire scalar field by performing a matrix multiply between the basis functions and
ω (1024 × 101 × N · N = 1024 × 101 predicted scalar field).

PI-HC-MoE (Multiple Constraints). The MoE router performs a domain decomposition. As-
suming K = 4 spatial experts, the 1024 × 101 × N basis function evaluation is deconstructed into
four 256 × 101 × N tensors. Each expert performs a similar computation as PI-HC, and notably,
the global initial (1024 × N ) and boundary (2 × 101 × N ) conditions are provided to each expert’s
non-linear least squares solve. After computing a localized weighting ωk , each expert returns a
256 × 101 scalar field representing the local predicted solution field. Finally, the MoE router re-
verses the domain decomposition, assembling the four 256 × 101 matrices into a final 1024 × 101
prediction. This final prediction represents the complete constrained output.


C     P ROBLEM SETTING DETAILS

We use Jax (Bradbury et al., 2018) with Equinox (Kidger & Garcia, 2021) to implement our models.
For diffusion-sorption, we use Optimisix’s (Rader & Kidger) Levenberg-Marquardt solver and for
Navier-Stokes, we use JaxOpt’s (Blondel et al., 2022) Levenberg-Marquardt solver. In both the
PI-HC and PI-HC-MoE cases, we limit the number of iterations to 50.

Data-constrained setting. We exclusively look at the data-starved regime. As a motivating ex-
ample, in the 1D diffusion-sorption, PDEBench (Takamoto et al., 2022) provides a dataset of 10k
solution trajectories. For a difficult problem like diffusion-sorption, the numerical solver used in
PDEBench takes over one minute to solve for a solution trajectory. A dataset of 10k would re-
quire almost a week of sequential compute time. Additionally, PDEBench only provides a dataset
using one set of physical constants (e.g., porosity). Different diffusion mediums require different
physical constants, making the problem of generating a comprehensive dataset very computationally
expensive. For these reasons, we focus on only training the NN via the PDE residual loss function.

C.1   A DDITIONAL DETAILS : D IFFUSION - SORPTION

Physical Constants and Dataset Details. ϕ = 0.29 is the porosity of the diffusion medium.
ρs = 2880 is the bulk density. nf = 0.874 is Freundlich’s exponent. Finally, D = 5 · 10−4 is the
effective diffusion coefficient.
The training set has 8000 unique initial conditions and the test set has 1000 initial conditions, dis-
tinctly separate from the training set. We use the same initial conditions from PDEBench (Takamoto
et al., 2022).

Architecture and Training Details. The base model we use is an FNO (Li et al., 2021a) archi-
tecture with 5 Fourier layers, each with 8 modes and 64 hidden feature representation. We use a
learning rate of 1e−3 with an exponential decay over 4000 training iterations. The tolerance of the
Levenberg-Marquardt is set to 1e−4 .

C.2   A DDITIONAL DETAILS : 2D NAVIER -S TOKES

Data generation. All initial conditions for the training and test set are are generated from a 2D
Gaussian random field with a periodic kernel and a length scale of 0.8. The training set has 4000
initial conditions with resolution of 64 (x) × 64 (y) × 64 (t). Both the training and test sets have
a trajectory length of T = 5 seconds. We generate a test set of 100 solutions with a resolution of
256 × 256 (spatial) and 64 time steps. The error is measured on the original resolution solutions, as
well as spatially subsampled versions (128 × 128, 64 × 64).


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 7: Final L2 relative error % on 3 test sets for 2D Navier-Stokes. Both PI-HC and PI-HC-
MoE train on a 64 × 64 × 64 spatiotemporal grid. PI-HC-MoE generalizes to spatial resolutions
better than PI-HC with lower variance.


Architecture details. We use an FNO with 8 Fourier layers and 8 modes as the base NN architec-
ture. The Levenberg-Marquardt solver tolerance is set to 1e−7 and we use a learning rate of 1e−3
with an exponential decay over 20 epochs and a final learning rate of 1e−4 .

C.3   A DDITIONAL RESULTS : 2D NAVIER -S TOKES

In Fig. 7, we include a box plot showing the test set errors on three different spatial resolutions
(2562 , 1282 , 642 ). The 642 and 1282 solutions are subsampled from the 2562 solution. PI-HC-MoE
outperforms PI-HC on all test sets.

C.4   A DDITIONAL DETAILS : S CALABILITY R ESULTS

When conducting our scalability analysis, we measure the per-batch time across 64 training and test
steps. We observe large standard deviations in our speedup numbers and provide a short discussion
here. In Fig. 4 and Fig. 6, we plot our measured runtimes as a function of the number interior
points constrained. In both the diffusion-sorption and Navier-Stokes settings, we observe that PI-
HC has large standard deviations at a fixed number of sampled points. We attribute this variation to
the difficulty of the constraint performed by PI-HC, which causes high fluctuations in the number
of non-linear least squares iterations performed. As a result, when we calculate speedup values, the
speedup values also have high std deviations. In the main text, we report the mean speedup across all
batches for a fixed number of sampled points; for completeness we include the standard deviations
here.
In the 1D diffusion-sorption setting, we see standard deviations at inference from 0.587 (102 sam-
pled points) to 1.890 (104 sampled points). For training, the standard deviations vary from 0.481
(102 sampled points) to 1.388 (104 sampled points). Analogously, in 2D Navier-Stokes, we see
standard deviations from 3.478 (102 sampled points) to 35.917 (104 sampled points) for inference.
For training, we measure standard deviations from 2.571 (102 sampled points) to 47.948 (104 sam-
pled points). The large standard deviations are a reflection of the standard deviations of the runtime
numbers for PI-HC for both problems.

D     A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENT: T EMPORAL G ENERALIZATION
We explore PI-HC-MoE’s generalization to temporal values not in the training set, for the diffusion-
sorption case.

Problem Setup. In our original problem setting, we predict diffusion-sorption from t = 0 seconds
to t = 500 seconds. Here, in order to test generalization to unseen temporal values, we truncate


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the training spatiotemporal grids to t < 400 (s), i.e., we only train on t ∈ [0, 400]. After training,
PI-SC, PI-HC, and PI-HC-MoE all predict the solution up to t = 500 seconds. We compute the L2
relative error error in prediction for t > 400 (s) (the domain that was unseen during training). The
parameters for all 3 models are identical to §4.1. PI-HC-MoE uses K = 4 spatial experts.

Results.     Fig. 8 shows the L2 relative error for t > 400 (s) on the validation set.
Both PI-HC (48.047% ± 1.23%) and PI-HC-MoE (14.79% ± 3.00%) outperform PI-SC
(805.58% ± 19.06%). While PI-HC is able to do better than PI-SC, PI-HC-MoE is able to gener-
alize the best to future time steps, even without any training instances.
We hypothesize that one reason for the performance improvement of PI-HC and PI-HC-MoE comes
from test-time constraint enforcement, demonstrating the benefit of hard constraints at inference
time. Similar to the results in §4.1, PI-HC-MoE is able better generalize much better to the unseen
temporal domain than PI-HC, while also being much more efficient at both training and inference
time.


Figure 8: Relative L2 error on unseen temporal values (t > 400 (s)) for diffusion-sorption. All
models are trained on t ∈ [0, 400], and then predict the solution up to t = 500 seconds. The relative
L2 error is plotted for t > 400 seconds. PI-SC is unable to generalize to out-of-distribution temporal
values. PI-HC is able to do better, but still has high error, while PI-HC-MoE has the lowest error.



E    A BLATION : E VALUATING THE QUALITY OF THE LEARNED BASIS
     F UNCTIONS

In order to explore the usefulness of our learned basis functions, we conduct an ablation study
comparing the result of PI-HC-MoE to a standard cubic interpolation.

Problem setup. We use the same PI-HC-MoE model from the diffusion-sorption experiments
in §4.1, where each expert constrains 20k sampled points (K = 4 experts, 80k total sampled points).
The 20k constrained points represents a candidate solution to the PDE where, by the non-linear
least squares solve, the PDE equations must be satisfied. Using the 20k points, we perform an
interpolation using SciPy’s (Virtanen et al., 2020) 2D Clough-Tocher piecewise cubic interpolation.
The interpolated solution is assembled in an identical manner to PI-HC-MoE, representing K = 4
interpolations, and corresponds to the number of experts.

Results. Fig. 9 compares the relative L2 error on the test set between PI-HC-MoE ’s learned basis
functions and the interpolated solution. PI-HC-MoE outperforms the interpolation scheme, show-
ing that the learned basis functions provide an advantage over interpolation, and encode additional
unique information. We also note that it is likely that with fewer sampled points, the performance
gap between PI-HC-MoE and interpolation is likely to be higher.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 9: Relative L2 error on 1D diffusion-sorption’s test set for PI-HC-MoE and an inter-
polated solution. The learned basis functions by PI-HC-MoE represent a more accurate solution
compared to interpolating the constrained points. The error plot shows that even for unconstrained
points, PI-HC-MoE is a closer approximation to the numerical solver solution.


F    PDE R ESIDUALS FOR D IFFUSION -S ORPTION AND NAVIER -S TOKES
We add additional PDE residual loss plots that correspond to the results in §4.1 and §4.2. During the
training of all three models (PI-SC, PI-HC, and PI-HC-MoE ), we track the mean PDE residual value
across the validation set, plotted in Fig. 10. Across both problem instances, PI-HC-MoE attains the
lowest PDE residual, and also has the lowest L2 relative error (see §4.1). For 1D diffusion-sorption,
PI-SC initially starts with low PDE residual before increasing near the end of training. The reason
for this is that at the beginning of training, when PI-SC is first initialized, the predicted solution is
                                                                                           ∂2u
close to the zero function and trivially satisfies the PDE equations, i.e., both ∂u∂t and ∂x2 are zero.
However, the overall loss function includes adherence to the initial and boundary conditions and
PI-SC is unable to find a parameterization that satisfies the initial condition, boundary conditions,
and PDE equations.


Figure 10: PDE residual on validation set during training. The mean PDE residual over the
validation set over training for both 1D diffusion-sorption (left) and 2D Navier-Stokes (right). PI-
HC-MoE has the lowest PDE residual.



                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G    L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE W ORK
PI-HC-MoE, though a promising framework for scaling hard constraints, has some limitations.

Hyperparameters. Both PI-HC-MoE and PI-HC are sensitive to hyperparameters. It is not al-
ways clear what the correct number of basis functions, sampled points, number of experts, and
expert distribution is best suited for a given problem. However, our results show that with only
minor hyperparameter tweaking, we were able to attain low error on two challenging dynamical
systems. As with many ML methods, hyperparameter optimization is a non-trivial task, and one
future direction could be better ways to find the optimal parameters.

Choice of domain decomposition. Currently, PI-HC-MoE performs a spatiotemporal domain de-
composition to assign points to experts. A possible future direction is trying new domain decompo-
sitions, and methods for allocating experts. It may be the case that different ways of creating expert
domains are better suited for different problem settings.

Base NN architecture. In this work, we use FNO as our base architecture for PI-HC-MoE and in
the future, it may prove fruitful to try new architectures. To some extent, PI-HC-MoE is limited by
the expressivity of the underlying NN architecture which learns and predicts the basis functions. PI-
HC-MoE may perform better on certain tasks that we have not yet explored (e.g., super-resolution,
auto-regressive training), and future work could explore the application of PI-HC-MoE to new kinds
of tasks.


                                                 19
