Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


O N -P OLICY P OLICY G RADIENT R EINFORCEMENT
L EARNING W ITHOUT O N -P OLICY S AMPLING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         On-policy reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms perform policy updates using
         i.i.d. trajectories collected by the current policy. However, after observing only
         a finite number of trajectories, on-policy sampling may produce data that fails
         to match the expected on-policy data distribution. This sampling error leads to
         noisy updates and data inefficient on-policy learning. Recent work in the policy
         evaluation setting has shown that non-i.i.d., off-policy sampling can produce data
         with lower sampling error than on-policy sampling can produce (Zhong et al.,
         2022). Motivated by this observation, we introduce an adaptive, off-policy sampling
         method to improve the data efficiency of on-policy policy gradient algorithms. Our
         method, Proximal Robust On-Policy Sampling (PROPS), reduces sampling error
         by collecting data with a behavior policy that increases the probability of sampling
         actions that are under-sampled with respect to the current policy. Rather than
         discarding data from old policies – as is commonly done in on-policy algorithms –
         PROPS uses data collection to adjust the distribution of previously collected data to
         be approximately on-policy. We empirically evaluate PROPS on both continuous-
         action MuJoCo benchmark tasks as well discrete-action tasks and demonstrate
         that (1) PROPS decreases sampling error throughout training and (2) improves the
         data efficiency of on-policy policy gradient algorithms. Our work improves the RL
         community’s understanding of a nuance in the on-policy vs off-policy dichotomy:
         on-policy learning requires on-policy data, not on-policy sampling.


1   I NTRODUCTION
One of the most widely used classes of on-policy methods is the class of on-policy policy gradient
algorithms. These algorithms use gradient ascent on the parameters of a parameterized policy so as
to increase the probability of observed actions with high expected returns under the current policy.
The gradients are commonly estimated using the Monte Carlo estimator, an average computed over
i.i.d. samples of trajectories from the current policy. The Monte Carlo estimator is consistent and
unbiased; as the number of sampled trajectories increases, the empirical distribution of trajectories
converges to the true distribution under the current policy, and thus the empirical gradient converges
to the true gradient. However, the expense of environment interactions forces us to work with finite
samples. Thus, the empirical distribution of the trajectories often differs from the on-policy sampling
distribution. We refer to the mismatch between the empirical distribution of trajectories and the true
on-policy trajectory distribution as sampling error. This sampling error produces inaccurate gradient
estimates, resulting in noisy policy updates and slower learning.
With i.i.d. on-policy sampling, the only way to reduce sampling error is to collect more data. However,
on-policy sampling is not explicitly required for on-policy learning; on-policy learning requires on-
policy data – data whose state-conditioned empirical distribution of actions matches that of the
current policy. On-policy sampling is a straightforward way to acquire on-policy data, though we
can obtain such data more efficiently without on-policy sampling. To better illustrate this concept,
consider an MDP with two discrete actions A and B, and suppose the current policy π places equal
probability on both actions in some state s. When following π, after 10 visits to s, we may observe
A 2 times and B 8 times rather than the expected 5 times. Alternatively, if we adaptively select the
most under-sampled action upon every visit to s, we will observe each action an equal number of
times. The first scenario illustrates on-policy sampling but not on-policy data; the second scenario
uses off-policy sampling yet produces on-policy data.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: (Left) Under on-policy sampling, an agent samples i.i.d. trajectories from its current policy,
i.e. the data collection policy is simply the current policy. After a policy update, the agent discards
these trajectories, since they are now off-policy with respect to the agent’s new policy. (Right) With
PROPS , we retain historic data and adapt the data collection policy so that, when the agent collects
new data, the combined dataset matches the expected on-policy distribution.

These observations raise the following question: can on-policy policy gradient algorithms learn more
efficiently using on-policy data acquired without on-policy sampling? Recently, Zhong et al. (2022)
showed that adaptive, off-policy sampling can yield data that more closely matches the on-policy
distribution than data produced by i.i.d. on-policy sampling. However, this work was limited to the
policy evaluation setting in which the on-policy distribution remains fixed. Turning from evaluation
to control poses the challenge of a continually changing current policy.
In this work, we address this challenge and show for the first time that on-policy policy gradient
algorithms are more data-efficient learners when they use on-policy data instead of on-policy sampling.
Our method, Proximal Robust On-Policy Sampling (PROPS)1 , adaptively corrects sampling error in
previously collected data by increasing the probability of sampling actions that are under-sampled
with respect to the current policy. As an added bonus, our approach retains historic data from recent
older policies for further data efficiency gains. Rather than discarding off-policy data from old
policies – as is commonly done in on-policy algorithms – PROPS uses additional data collection to
add to the historic data so that the distribution of all data is approximately on-policy. Doing so allows
PROPS to leverage off-policy data without requiring off-policy corrections. We provide an overview
of our method in Fig. 1. We empirically evaluate PROPS on continuous-action MuJoCo benchmark
tasks as well as discrete action tasks and show that (1) PROPS reduces sampling error throughout
training and (2) improves the data efficiency of on-policy policy gradient algorithms. In summary,
our contributions are

          1. We introduce a practical adaptive-sampling-based algorithm that reduces sampling error and
             permits the reuse of historic data in on-policy algorithms.
          2. We demonstrate empirically that our method improves the data efficiency of on-policy policy
             gradient algorithms.
          3. Building off of the theoretical foundation laid by Zhong et al. (2022), this work improves
             the RL community’s understanding of a nuance in the on-policy vs off-policy dichotomy:
             on-policy learning requires on-policy data, not on-policy sampling.


2       R ELATED W ORK

Our work focuses on data collection in RL. In RL, data collection is often framed as an exploration
problem, focusing on how an agent should explore its environment to efficiently learn an optimal
policy. Prior RL works have proposed several exploration-promoting methods such as intrinsic
motivation (Pathak et al., 2017; Sukhbaatar et al., 2018), count-based exploration (Tang et al., 2017;
Ostrovski et al., 2017), and Thompson sampling (Osband et al., 2013; Sutton and Barto, 2018). In
contrast, our objective is to learn from the on-policy data distribution; we use adaptive data collection
to more efficiently obtain this data distribution.
Prior works have used adaptive off-policy sampling to reduce sampling error in the policy evaluation
subfield of RL. Most closely related is the work of Zhong et al. (2022) who first proposed that
    1
        We include our codebase in the supplemental material.


                                                        2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


adaptive off-policy sampling could produce data that more closely matches the on-policy distribution
than on-policy sampling could produce. Mukherjee et al. (2022) use a deterministic sampling rule to
take actions in a particular proportion. Other bandit works use a non-adapative exploration policy to
collect additional data conditioned on previously collected data (Tucker and Joachims, 2022; Wan
et al., 2022; Konyushova et al., 2021). As these works only focus on policy evaluation they do not
have to contend with a changing on-policy distribution as our work does for the control setting.
Several prior works propose importance sampling methods (Precup, 2000) to reduce sampling error
without further data collection. In the RL setting, Hanna et al. (2021) showed that reweighting
off-policy data according to an estimated behavior policy can correct sampling error and improve
policy evaluation. Similar methods have been studied for temporal difference learning (Pavse et al.,
2020) and policy evaluation in the bandit setting (Li et al., 2015; Narita et al., 2019). Conservative
Data Sharing (CDS) (Yu et al., 2021) reduces sampling error by selectively integrating offline data
from multiple tasks. Our work instead focuses on additional data collection to reduce sampling error.
The method we introduce permits data collected in one iteration of policy optimization to be re-used
in future iterations rather than discarded as typically done by on-policy algorithms. Prior work has
attempted to avoid discarding data by combining off-policy and on-policy updates with separate loss
functions or by using alternative gradient estimates (Wang et al., 2016; Gu et al., 2016; 2017; Fakoor
et al., 2020; O’Donoghue et al., 2016; Queeney et al., 2021). In contrast, our method modifies the
sampling distribution at each iteration so that the entire data set of past and newly collected data
matches the expected distribution under the current policy.

3     P RELIMINARIES
3.1   R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

We formalize the RL environment as a finite horizon Markov decision process (MDP) (Puterman, 2014)
(S, A, p, r, d0 , γ) with state space S, action space A, transition dynamics p : S × A × S → [0, 1],
reward function r : S ×A → R, initial state distribution d0 , and reward discount factor γ ∈ [0, 1). The
state and action spaces may be discrete or continuous. We write p(· | s, a) to denote the distribution
of next states after taking action a in state s. We consider stochastic policies πθ : S × A → [0, 1]
parameterized by θ, and we write πθ (a|s) to denote the probability of sampling action a in state s
and πθ (·|s) to denote the probability distribution over actions in state s. The RL objective is to find a
policy that maximizes the expected sum of discounted rewards, defined as:
                                                                        X
                                                                         H
                                                                            t
                     J(θ) = Es0 ∼d0 ,at ∼πθ (·|st ),st+1 ∼p(·|st ,at )     γ r(st , at ) ,             (1)
                                                                     t=0

where H is the random variable representing the time-step when an episode ends. Throughout this
paper, we refer to the policy used for data collection as the behavior policy and the policy trained to
maximize its expected return as the target policy.

3.2   O N -P OLICY P OLICY G RADIENT A LGORITHMS

Policy gradient algorithms are one of the most widely used methods in RL. These methods perform
gradient ascent over policy parameters to maximize an agent’s expected return J(θ) (Eq. 1). The
gradient of the J(θ) with respect to θ, or policy gradient, is often given as:
                     ∇θ J(θ) = Es0 ∼dπθ ,a∼πθ (·|s) [Aπθ (s, a)∇θ log πθ (a|s)] ,                      (2)
where Aπθ (s, a) is the advantage of choosing action a in state s and following πθ thereafter. In
practice, the expectation in Eq. 2 is approximated with Monte Carlo samples collected from πθ and
an estimate of Aπθ used in place of the true advantages (Schulman et al., 2016). After updating the
policy parameters with this estimated gradient, the previously collected trajectories D become off-
policy with respect to the updated policy. To ensure gradient estimation remains unbiased, on-policy
algorithms discard historic data after each update and collect new trajectories with the updated policy.
If we look at the fundamentals of policy evaluation in dynamic programming we see a very clear
picture of the ideal update (i.e. using the probabilities of the state distribution and policies directly),
but at the cost of knowing the transition probabilities and having to sweep over all states and actions


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


for a single update. When improving the policy we go between a policy improvement step (i.e.
maximize the learned value function) and the policy evaluation step. Generalized policy iteration
made this update more general by enabling the ability to improve a policy without running policy
evaluation for every state and action. From generalized policy iteration we can get to many of our
on-policy algorithms such as TD, sarsa, on-policy actor-critic algorithms, and many others with the
inclusion of sampling from distributions instead of knowing the distributions ahead of time. This type
of on-policy learning uses a transition and throws it away, meaning any policy improvement done
will always appear in the data and there is no stale buffer of data. From this trajectory of literature it
is clear, on-policy algorithms are designed and work well with data that is distributed according to
the target policy. The easiest way to get this data is through sampling according to the behavior.
This foundational idea of policy learning via stochastic gradient ascent was first proposed by
Williams (Williams, 1992) under the name REINFORCE. Since then, a large body of research has
focused on developing more scalable policy gradient methods (Kakade, 2001; Schulman et al., 2015;
Mnih et al., 2016; Espeholt et al., 2018; Lillicrap et al., 2015; Haarnoja et al., 2018). Arguably, the
most successful variant of policy gradient learning is proximal policy optimization (PPO) (Schulman
et al., 2017), the algorithm of choice in several high-profile success stories (Berner et al., 2019;
Akkaya et al., 2019; Vinyals et al., 2019). Rather than maximizing the standard RL objective (Eq. 1),
PPO maximizes a surrogate objective:

             LPPO (s, a, θ, θold ) = min(g(s, a, θ, θold )Aπθold (s, a),
                                                                                                      (3)
                                            clip(g(s, a, θ, θold ), 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ)Aπθold (s, a)),
where θold denotes the policy parameters prior to the update, g(s, a, θ, θold ) is the policy ratio
g(s, a, θ, θold ) = ππθθ (a|s)
                           (a|s) , and the clip function with hyperparameter ϵ clips g(s, a, θ, θold ) to
                       old
the interval [1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ]. The first term inside the minimum of LPPO is the conservative policy
iteration (CPI) objective (Kakade and Langford, 2002). The second term clips the CPI objective
to disincentivizes large changes to πθ (a|s). In contrast to other policy gradient algorithms which
perform a single gradient update per data sample to avoid destructively large weight updates, PPO’s
clipping mechanism allows the agent to perform multiple epochs of minibatch policy updates.

4    C ORRECTING S AMPLING E RROR IN R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
In this section, we describe two potential sources of sampling error that arise when computing policy
gradient estimates and then describe how adaptive, off-policy sampling can reduce such sampling
error. The first source arises from the fact that some actions will almost inevitably be under-sampled
during on-policy sampling and thus contribute less to the gradient estimate than they should in
expectation. The second source arises when collected data is not discarded after each policy update.
While most on-policy algorithms bypass this second source by simply discarding data, we include its
mention here as we will show that adjusting for this source of sampling error with additional data
collection – instead of discarding data – further increases data efficiency.
As a motivating example, consider training an
agent to walk using an on-policy policy gradient
algorithm. For exposition’s sake, we assume
that trajectories can be categorized into three
types: successful walking, standing in place,
and falling over. We show a portion of the task’s
MDP in Fig. 2, including the agent’s probabil-
ity of experiencing each outcome following its
initial policy as well as each outcome’s return.
From an initial standing state, the agent chooses
either to attempt to move or to remain stand-
                                                  Figure 2: A portion of an MDP for a walking task
ing in place. If the agent moves, it has a large
                                                  with three possible outcomes: walking, standing,
probability of falling and a small probability of
                                                  and falling.
successfully walking; if it stays stationary then
                                                2
it will always end with the standing outcome.
  2
    This example is intentionally simplified for the purpose of illustration. In reality, the agent could experience
many different outcomes and the trajectories we describe would contain possibly hundreds of smaller actions.


                                                         4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Walking yields a much larger return than standing or falling but is unlikely under the current policy
because the probability of attempting to move at sL is low; after sampling 100 trajectories, this
critical action may be entirely absent from the observed data. Having never attempted to move at
sL , the agent will believe that moving at s0 always leads to a return of −1 while not moving leads
to a return of +1. Thus, a Monte Carlo estimate of the policy gradient reduces the probability of
attempting to move at s0 , making the agent even less likely to observe walking and more likely to
converge to a suboptimal standing policy.
For the agent in our example to learn to walk, all actions must be observed closer to their true
probabilities under the current policy. The crux of this issue is that randomness in the i.i.d sampling
of on-policy trajectories leads to a mismatch in the empirical distribution over actions and the true
on-policy distribution. As such, low probability actions that lead to high return can be under-sampled.
We refer to this mismatch as sampling error. Sampling error is an inherent feature of i.i.d. on-policy
sampling; only in the limit of infinite data will such sampling achieve zero sampling error, but the
expense of environment interaction forces us to use finite samples during RL training. In principle,
we can increase the data available at each iteration of policy improvement by reusing data collected
during earlier iterations. However, such data is off-policy and its inclusion would generally increase
sampling error and bias gradient estimates. One can introduce off-policy corrections to reduce
gradient bias (Wang et al., 2016; Gu et al., 2016; 2017; Queeney et al., 2021), but such approaches
may increase the variance of gradient estimates.
Adaptive sampling provides an alternative means of producing on-policy data without an infinite
sample size. In terms of our example, suppose the agent in Fig. 2 observes 49 falling and 50 standing
trajectories such that the “attempt to move” action is under-sampled at s0 and sL with respect to the
true distribution of actions under the agent’s policy. If the agent samples an additional trajectory
from the on-policy distribution, it has a low probability of sampling this action at both s0 and sL and
thus a low probability of observing walking. However, if instead the agent increases the probability
of attempting to move in states s0 and sL , then it is more likely to observe these under-sampled
actions and hence have low sampling error in the entire dataset of 100 trajectories. While the adaptive
method uses off-policy sampling, it produces data that is more on-policy than the data produced from
on-policy sampling. In the following section, we leverage this concept to develop a new adaptive
sampling algorithm that reduces sampling error in on-policy policy gradient algorithms.



5    P ROXIMAL ROBUST O N -P OLICY S AMPLING FOR P OLICY G RADIENT
     A LGORITHMS

Our goal is to develop an adaptive, off- Algorithm 1 On-policy policy gradient algorithm with
policy sampling algorithm that reduces adaptive sampling
sampling error in on-policy policy gradi-
ent estimates. We outline a general frame- 1: Inputs: Target batch size n, behavior batch size m,
work for on-policy learning with an adap-           buffer size b.
tive behavior policy in Algorithm 1. In this     2: Output: Target policy parameters θ.
framework, the behavior policy πϕ and tar-       3: Initialize target policy parameters θ.
get policy πθ are initially the same. The 4: Initialize behavior policy parameters ϕ ← θ.
behavior policy collects a batch of m tran- 5: Initialize empty replay buffer D with capacity bn.
sitions, adds the batch to a replay buffer D, 6: for target update i = 1, 2, . . . do
and then updates its weights such that the 7:          for behavior update j = 1, . . . , ⌊n/m⌋ do
next batch it collects reduces sampling er- 8:            Collect batch of data B by running πϕ .
ror in D with respect to the target policy πθ    9:       Append B to replay buffer D.
(Lines 7-10). Every n steps (with n > m),       10:       Update πϕ with D using Algorithm 2.
the agent updates its target policy with data   11:    Update   πθ with D.
from D (Line 11). We refer to m and n as 12: return θ
the behavior batch size and the target batch size, respectively. The replay buffer can hold up to b
target batches (bn transitions), and we call b the buffer size. Regardless of how b is set, the role of the
behavior policy is to continually adjust action probabilities for new samples so that the aggregate data
distribution of D mathces the expected on-policy distribution of the current target policy (Line 10).
Implementing Line 10 is the core challenge we address in the remainder of this section.


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To ensure that the empirical distribution of D matches the expected on-policy distribution, updates
to πϕ should attempt to increase the probability of actions which are currently under-sampled with
respect to πθ . Zhong et al. (2022) recently developed a simple method called Robust
                                                                              P      On-policy Sam-
pling (ROS) for making such updates. In particular, the gradient ∇ϕ L := −∇ϕ (s,a)∈D log πϕ (a|s)
when evaluated at ϕ = θ provides a direction to change ϕ such that under-sampled actions have
their probabilities increased. Thus a single step of gradient ascent will increase the probability of
under-sampled actions.3 In theory and in simple RL policy evaluation tasks, this update was shown
to improve the rate at which the empirical data distribution converges to the on-policy distribution.
Unfortunately, there are two main challenges that render ROS unsuitable for Line 10 in Algorithm 1.
Destructively large policy updates. Since the replay buffer D may contain data collected from
older target policies, some samples in D may be very off-policy with respect to the current target
policy such that log πϕ (a|s) is large and negative. Since ∇ϕ log πϕ (a|s) increases in magnitude
as πϕ (a|s) tends towards zero, ROS incentivizes the agent to continually decrease the probability
of these actions despite being extremely unlikely under the current target policy. Thus, off-policy
samples can produce destructively large policy updates.
Improper handling of continuous actions. In a continuous-action task, ROS may produce behavior
policies that increase sampling error. A continuous-action task policy πθ (a|s) is typically parame-
terized as a Gaussian N (µ(s), Σ(s)) with mean µ(s) and diagonal covariance matrix Σ(s). Since
actions in the tail of the Gaussian far from the mean will always be under-sampled, the ROS update
will continually push the components of µ(s) towards ±∞ and the diagonal components of Σ(s)
towards 0 to increase the probability of sampling these actions. The result is a degenerate behavior
policy that is so far from the target policy that sampling from it increases sampling error. We illustrate
this scenario with 1-dimensional continuous actions in Fig. 6 of Appendix A.
To resolve these issues, we propose a new behavior policy update. Since the gradient of the ROS loss
∇ϕ L = ∇ϕ log πϕ (a|s)|ϕ=θ resembles the policy gradient (Eq. 2) with Aπθ (s, a) = −1, ∀(s, a),
we draw inspiration from PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) to address these challenges. Rather than using
the ROS objective to update ϕ, we use a clipped surrogate objective:

                                       πϕ (a|s)           πϕ (a|s)
   LCLIP (s, a, ϕ, θ, ϵPROPS ) = min −          , −clip            , 1 − ϵPROPS , 1 + ϵPROPS . (4)
                                       πθ (a|s)           πθ (a|s)

Intuitively, this objective incentivizes the agent to decrease the probability of observed actions by
                                                       π (a|s)
at most a factor of 1 − ϵPROPS . Let g(s, a, ϕ, θ) = πϕθ (a|s) . When g(s, a, ϕ, θ) < 1 − ϵPROPS , this
objective is clipped at −(1 − ϵPROPS ). The loss gradient ∇ϕ LCLIP becomes zero, and the (s, a) pair
has no effect on the policy update. When g(s, a, ϕ, θ) > 1 − ϵPROPS , clipping does not apply, and the
(non-zero) gradient ∇ϕ LCLIP points in a direction that decreases the probability of πϕ (a|s). As in
the PPO update, this clipping mechanism avoids destructively large policy updates and permits us to
perform many epochs of minibatch updates with the same batch of data.
To address the second challenge and prevent degenerate behavior policies, we introduce an auxiliary
loss that incentivizes the agent to minimize the KL divergence between the behavior policy and target
policy at states in the observed data. The full PROPS objective is then:
              LPROPS (s, a, ϕ, θ, ϵPROPS , λ) = LCLIP (s, a, ϕ, θ) − λDKL (πθ (·|s)||πϕ (·|s))      (5)
where λ is a regularization coefficient quantifying a trade-off between maximizing LPROPS and
minimizing DKL . We provide full pseudocode for the PROPS update in Algorithm 2. Like ROS, we
set the behavior policy parameters ϕ equal to the target policy parameters, and then make a local
adjustment to ϕ to increase the probabilities of under-sampled actions. We stop the PROPS update
when DKL (πθ ||πϕ ) reaches a chosen threshold δPROPS . This technique further safeguards against large
policy updates and is used in widely adopted implementations of PPO (Raffin et al., 2021; Liang et al.,
2018). The PROPS update allows us to efficiently learn a behavior policy that keeps the distribution of
data in the replay buffer close to the expected distribution of the target policy.

6    E XPERIMENTS
    3
      To add further intuition for this update, note that it is the opposite of a gradient ascent step on the log
likelihood of D. When starting at θ, gradient ascent on the data log likelihood will increase the probability of
actions that are over-sampled relative to πθ . Hence, the ROS update changes ϕ in the opposite direction.


                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The central goal of our work is to un-
                                             Algorithm 2 PROPS Update
derstand whether on-policy data or on-
policy sampling is critical to on-policy 1: Inputs: Target policy parameters θ, replay buffer D,
policy gradient learning. Towards this           target KL δ, clipping coefficient ϵPROPS , regularizer
goal, we design experiments to answer the        coefficient λ, n_epoch, n_minibatch.
two questions: (Q1) Does PROPS achieve 2: Output: Behavior policy parameters ϕ.
lower sampling error than on-policy sam- 3: ϕ ← θ
pling during policy gradient learning (i.e., 4: for epoch i = 1, 2, . . . , n_epoch do
does PROPS produces data that is more on- 5:        for minibatch j = 1, 2, . . . , n_minibatch do
policy than on-policy sampling produces)? 6:          Sample minibatch Dj ∼ D
(Q2) Does PROPS improve the data ef- 7:               Compute the loss (Eq. 5)
ficiency of on-policy algorithms? Our                         1       X
empirical analysis focuses on continuous-             L←                     LPROPS (s, a, ϕ, θ, ϵPROPS , λ)
action MuJoCo benchmark tasks and                            |Dj |
                                                                   (s,a)∈Dj
three discrete-action tasks: CartPole-v1,
LunarLander-v2, and Discrete2D100-v0 8:               Update ϕ with a step of gradient ascent on L
– a 2D navigation task with 100 discrete 9:           if DKL (πθ ||πϕ ) > δPROPS then
actions. We include results for discrete 10:             return ϕ
action tasks in Appendix E.                  11: return   ϕ


6.1   C ORRECTING S AMPLING E RROR FOR A F IXED TARGET P OLICY

We first study how quickly PROPS decreases sampling error in MuJoCo benchmark tasks when the
target policy is fixed. This setting is similar to the policy evaluation setting considered by Zhong et al.
(2022). As such, we provide two baselines for comparison: on-policy sampling and ROS. We follow
Zhong et al. (2022) and measure sampling error using the KL-divergence DKL (πD ||πθ ) between the
empirical policy πD and the target policy πθ . We estimate πD as the maximum likelihood estimate
under data in the replay buffer via stochastic gradient ascent. Further details on how we compute πD
are in Appendix B.
In all tasks, we set the behavior batch size to m = 256, use a replay
buffer with capacity of 64m samples, and collect a total of 128m
samples. Thus, we expect sampling error to decrease over the first
64m samples and then remain roughly constant afterwards. We tune
ROS and PROPS separately for each task using a hyperparameter
sweep described in Appendix C and report results for hyperparam-
eters yielding the lowest sampling error.
As shown in Fig. 3, PROPS decreases sampling error faster than
on-policy sampling and ROS. In fact, ROS shows little to no improve-
ment over on-policy sampling in every task. This limitation of ROS
is unsurprising, as Zhong et al. (2022) showed that ROS struggled Figure 3: PROPS reduces sam-
to reduce sampling error even in low-dimensional continuous-action pling error faster than on-
tasks. Moreover, PROPS decreases sampling error without clipping policy sampling and ROS. The
and regularization, emphasizing how adaptive off-policy sampling ROS and on-policy sampling
alone decreases sampling error. Due to space constraints, we include curves overlap. Solid curves
results for the remaining environments in Appendix C. We addition- denote means over 5 seeds.
ally include experiments using a fixed, randomly initialized target Shaded regions denote 95%
policy as well as ablation studies isolating the effects of PROPS’s confidence intervals.
objective clipping and regularization in Appendix C. Results with a
random target policy are qualitatively similar to those in Fig. 3, and we observe that clipping and
regularization both individually help reduce sampling error.

6.2   C ORRECTING S AMPLING E RROR D URING RL T RAINING

We are ultimately interested in understanding how replacing on-policy sampling with PROPS affects
the data efficiency of on-policy learning, where the target policy is continually updated. In the
following experiments, we train RL agents with PROPS and on-policy sampling to evaluate (1) the
data efficiency of training and (2) the sampling error DKL (πD ||πθ ) throughout training. We measure


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


data efficiency as the return achieved within a fixed training budget. Since ROS (Zhong et al., 2022)
is expensive and fails to reduce sampling error even with a fixed policy, we omit it from this analysis.
We use PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) to update the target policy. We consider two baseline methods for
providing data to compute PPO updates: (1) vanilla PPO with on-policy sampling, and (2) PPO with
on-policy sampling and a replay buffer of size b (PPO - BUFFER). PPO - BUFFER is a naive method for
improving data efficiency of on-policy algorithms by reusing off-policy data collected by old target
policies as if it were on-policy data. Although PPO - BUFFER will have biased gradients, it has been
successfully applied in difficult learning tasks (Berner et al., 2019).
In these experiments, we use a buffer size of b = 2 such that agents
retain a batch of data for one extra iteration before discarding it.
Since PROPS and PPO - BUFFER compute target policy updates with
b times as much learning data as PPO, we integrate this extra data by
increasing the minibatch size for target and behavior policy updates
by a factor of b. To ensure a fair comparison between algorithms,
we tune each algorithm separately using a hyperparameter sweep
described in Appendix F. We report results for the hyperparameters
yielding the largest final return. For each algorithm and task, we plot
the interquartile mean (IQM) return throughout training as well as
the distribution of returns achieved at the end of training (i.e., the
performance profile) (Agarwal et al., 2021).
                                                                          Figure 4: PROPS achieves
As shown in Fig. 5a, PROPS achieves higher return than both PPO and       lower sampling error than
PPO - BUFFER throughout training in all tasks except Ant-v4 where         on-policy sampling duringRL
PROPS dips slightly below PPO ’s return near the end of training.         training. Curves denote aver-
Moreover, in Fig. 5b, the performance profile of PROPS almost             ages over 50 seeds. Shaded re-
always lies above the performance profiles of PPO and PPO - BUFFER.       gions denote 95% confidence
Thus, we affirmatively answer Q2 posed at the start of this section:      intervals.
PROPS increases data efficiency.

In Appendix E, we provide additional experiments demonstrating that PROPS improves data efficiency
in discrete-action tasks. We additionally ablate the buffer size b in Appendix D. We find that data
efficiency may decrease with a larger buffer size. Intuitively, the more historic data kept around, the
more data that must be collected to impact the aggregate data distribution.
Having established that PROPS improves data efficiency, we now investigate if PROPS is appropriately
adjusting the data distribution of the replay buffer by comparing the sampling error achieved through-
out training with PROPS and PPO - BUFFER. Training with PROPS produces a different sequence of
target policies than training with PPO - BUFFER produces. To provide a fair comparison, we com-
pute sampling error for PPO - BUFFER using the target policy sequence produced by PROPS. More
concretely, we fill a second replay buffer with on-policy samples collected by the target policies
produced while training with PROPS and then compute the sampling error using data in this buffer.
As shown in Fig. 4, PROPS achieves lower sampling error than on-policy sampling with a replay
buffer. Due to space constraints, we provide sampling error curves for the remaining environments in
Appendix D. We ablate the effects of the clipping coefficient ϵPROPS and regularization coefficient λ
in Appendix D. Without clipping or without regularization, PROPS often achieves greater sampling
error than on-policy sampling, indicating that both help to keep sampling error low. Moreover, data
efficiency generally decreases when we remove clipping or regularization, showing both are essential
to PROPS. Thus, we affirmatively answer Q1 posed at the start of this section: PROPS achieves lower
sampling error than on-policy sampling when the target policy is fixed and during RL training.


7    D ISCUSSION

This work has shown that adaptive, off-policy sampling can be used to reduce sampling error in
data collected throughout RL training and improve the data efficiency of on-policy policy gradient
algorithms. We have introduced an algorithm that scales adaptive off-policy sampling to continuous
control RL benchmarks and enables tracking of the changing on-policy distribution. By integrating
this data collection procedure into the popular PPO algorithm, the main conclusion of our analysis is


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                (a) Training curves.                              (b) Performance profiles.

Figure 5: (a) IQM returns over 50 seeds. Shaded regions denote 95% bootstrapped confidence
intervals. (b) Performance profiles over 50 seeds. The return τ for which the profiles intersect
y = 0.5 is the median, and the area under the performance profile corresponds to the mean. Shaded
regions denote 95% bootstrapped confidence intervals.

that on-policy learning algorithms learn most efficiently with on-policy data, not on-policy sampling.
In this section, we discuss limitations of our work and present opportunities for future research.
PROPS builds upon the ROS algorithm of Zhong et al. (2022). While Zhong et al. (2022) focused on
theoretical analysis and policy evaluation in small scale domains, we chose to focus on empirical
analysis with policy learning in standard RL benchmarks. An important direction for future work
would be theoretical analysis of PROPS, in particular whether PROPS also enjoys the same faster
convergence rate that was shown for ROS relative to on-policy sampling.
A limitation of PROPS is that the update indiscriminately increases the probability of under-sampled
actions without considering their importance in gradient computation. For instance, if an under-
sampled action has zero advantage, it has no impact on the gradient and need not be sampled. An
interesting direction for future work could be to prioritize correcting sampling error for (s, a) that
have the largest influence on the gradient estimate, i.e., large advantage (positive or negative).
Beyond these more immediate directions, our work opens up other opportunities for future research. A
less obvious feature of the PROPS behavior policy update is that it can be used track the empirical data
distribution of any desired policy, not only that of the current policy. This feature means PROPS has
the potential to be integrated into off-policy RL algorithms and used so that the empirical distribution
more closely matches a desired exploration distribution. Thus, PROPS could be used to perform
focused exploration without explicitly tracking state and action counts.

8   C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we ask whether on-policy policy gradient methods are more data efficient using on-
policy sampling or on-policy data acquired without on-policy sampling. To answer this question, we
introduce an adaptive, off-policy sampling method for on-policy policy gradient learning that collects
data such that the empirical distribution of sampled actions closely matches the expected on-policy
data distribution at observed states. Our method, Proximal Robust On-policy Sampling (PROPS),
periodically updates the data collecting behavior policy so as to increase the probability of sampling
actions that are currently under-sampled with respect to the on-policy distribution. Furthermore,
rather than discarding collected data after every policy update, PROPS permits more data efficient
on-policy learning by using data collection to adjust the distribution of previously collected data to
be approximately on-policy. We replace on-policy sampling with PROPS to generate data for the
widely-used PPO algorithm and empirically demonstrate that PROPS produces data that more closely
matches the expected on-policy distribution and yields more data efficient learning compared to
on-policy sampling.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Rishabh Agarwal, Max Schwarzer, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aaron Courville, and Marc G Bellemare.
  Deep reinforcement learning at the edge of the statistical precipice. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2021.
Ilge Akkaya, Marcin Andrychowicz, Maciek Chociej, Mateusz Litwin, Bob McGrew, Arthur Petron,
   Alex Paino, Matthias Plappert, Glenn Powell, Raphael Ribas, et al. Solving rubik’s cube with a
   robot hand. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.07113, 2019.
Christopher Berner, Greg Brockman, Brooke Chan, Vicki Cheung, Przemysław D˛ebiak, Christy
  Dennison, David Farhi, Quirin Fischer, Shariq Hashme, Chris Hesse, et al. Dota 2 with large scale
  deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.06680, 2019.
Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
  Wojciech Zaremba. Openai gym. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01540, 2016.
Lasse Espeholt, Hubert Soyer, Remi Munos, Karen Simonyan, Vlad Mnih, Tom Ward, Yotam Doron,
  Vlad Firoiu, Tim Harley, Iain Dunning, et al. Impala: Scalable distributed deep-rl with importance
  weighted actor-learner architectures. In International conference on machine learning, pages
  1407–1416. PMLR, 2018.
Rasool Fakoor, Pratik Chaudhari, and Alexander J Smola. P3o: Policy-on policy-off policy optimiza-
  tion. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pages 1017–1027. PMLR, 2020.
Shixiang Gu, Timothy Lillicrap, Zoubin Ghahramani, Richard E Turner, and Sergey Levine. Q-prop:
  Sample-efficient policy gradient with an off-policy critic. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.02247, 2016.
Shixiang Shane Gu, Timothy Lillicrap, Richard E Turner, Zoubin Ghahramani, Bernhard Schölkopf,
  and Sergey Levine. Interpolated policy gradient: Merging on-policy and off-policy gradient
  estimation for deep reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  30, 2017.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Kristian Hartikainen, George Tucker, Sehoon Ha, Jie Tan, Vikash
  Kumar, Henry Zhu, Abhishek Gupta, Pieter Abbeel, et al. Soft actor-critic algorithms and
  applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.05905, 2018.
Josiah P Hanna, Scott Niekum, and Peter Stone. Importance sampling in reinforcement learning with
  an estimated behavior policy. Machine Learning, 110(6):1267–1317, 2021.
Shengyi Huang, Rousslan Fernand Julien Dossa, Chang Ye, Jeff Braga, Dipam Chakraborty, Kinal
  Mehta, and João G.M. Araújo. Cleanrl: High-quality single-file implementations of deep rein-
  forcement learning algorithms. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23(274):1–18, 2022. URL
  http://jmlr.org/papers/v23/21-1342.html.
Sham M Kakade. A natural policy gradient. Advances in neural information processing systems, 14,
  2001.
Sham M. Kakade and John Langford. Approximately optimal approximate reinforcement learning.
  In Claude Sammut and Achim G. Hoffmann, editors, Machine Learning, Proceedings of the Nine-
  teenth International Conference (ICML 2002), University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia,
  July 8-12, 2002, pages 267–274. Morgan Kaufmann, 2002.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In Yoshua
  Bengio and Yann LeCun, editors, 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations,
  ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Conference Track Proceedings, 2015. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980.
Ksenia Konyushova, Yutian Chen, Thomas Paine, Caglar Gulcehre, Cosmin Paduraru, Daniel J
  Mankowitz, Misha Denil, and Nando de Freitas. Active offline policy selection. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:24631–24644, 2021.
Lihong Li, Rémi Munos, and Csaba Szepesvári. Toward minimax off-policy value estimation. In
  Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pages 608–616. PMLR, 2015.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Eric Liang, Richard Liaw, Robert Nishihara, Philipp Moritz, Roy Fox, Ken Goldberg, Joseph
  Gonzalez, Michael Jordan, and Ion Stoica. Rllib: Abstractions for distributed reinforcement
  learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 3053–3062. PMLR, 2018.

Timothy P Lillicrap, Jonathan J Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa,
  David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1509.02971, 2015.

Volodymyr Mnih, Adria Puigdomenech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy Lillicrap, Tim
  Harley, David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement
  learning. In International conference on machine learning, pages 1928–1937. PMLR, 2016.

Subhojyoti Mukherjee, Josiah P Hanna, and Robert D Nowak. Revar: Strengthening policy evaluation
  via reduced variance sampling. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pages 1413–1422. PMLR,
  2022.

Yusuke Narita, Shota Yasui, and Kohei Yata. Efficient counterfactual learning from bandit feedback.
  In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 33, pages 4634–4641,
  2019.

Brendan O’Donoghue, Rémi Munos, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Volodymyr Mnih. Pgq: Combining
  policy gradient and q-learning. ArXiv, abs/1611.01626, 2016.

Ian Osband, Daniel Russo, and Benjamin Van Roy. (more) efficient reinforcement learning via
  posterior sampling. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 26, 2013.

Georg Ostrovski, Marc G Bellemare, Aäron Oord, and Rémi Munos. Count-based exploration with
  neural density models. In International conference on machine learning, pages 2721–2730. PMLR,
  2017.

Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, Alexei A Efros, and Trevor Darrell. Curiosity-driven exploration by
  self-supervised prediction. In International conference on machine learning, pages 2778–2787.
  PMLR, 2017.

Brahma S. Pavse, Ishan Durugkar, Josiah P. Hanna, and Peter Stone. Reducing sampling error in
  batch temporal difference learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.

Doina Precup. Eligibility traces for off-policy policy evaluation. Computer Science Department
 Faculty Publication Series, page 80, 2000.

Martin L Puterman. Markov decision processes: discrete stochastic dynamic programming. John
 Wiley & Sons, 2014.

James Queeney, Ioannis Ch. Paschalidis, and Christos G. Cassandras. Generalized proximal policy
  optimization with sample reuse. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34.
  Curran Associates, Inc., 2021.

Antonin Raffin, Ashley Hill, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Maximilian Ernestus, and Noah
  Dormann. Stable-baselines3: Reliable reinforcement learning implementations. Journal of
 Machine Learning Research, 22(268):1–8, 2021. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v22/
  20-1364.html.

John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region
  policy optimization. In International conference on machine learning, pages 1889–1897. PMLR,
  2015.

John Schulman, Philipp Moritz, Sergey Levine, Michael Jordan, and Pieter Abbeel. High-dimensional
  continuous control using generalized advantage estimation. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), 2016.

John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Zeming Lin, Ilya Kostrikov, Gabriel Synnaeve, Arthur Szlam, and Rob
  Fergus. Intrinsic motivation and automatic curricula via asymmetric self-play. In 6th International
  Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2018, Vancouver, BC, Canada, April 30 - May 3,
  2018, Conference Track Proceedings. OpenReview.net, 2018. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=SkT5Yg-RZ.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Haoran Tang, Rein Houthooft, Davis Foote, Adam Stooke, OpenAI Xi Chen, Yan Duan, John
  Schulman, Filip DeTurck, and Pieter Abbeel. # exploration: A study of count-based exploration
  for deep reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Aaron David Tucker and Thorsten Joachims. Variance-optimal augmentation logging for counterfac-
  tual evaluation in contextual bandits. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.01721, 2022.
Oriol Vinyals, Igor Babuschkin, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Michaël Mathieu, Andrew Dudzik, Junyoung
  Chung, David H Choi, Richard Powell, Timo Ewalds, Petko Georgiev, et al. Grandmaster level in
  starcraft ii using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature, 575(7782):350–354, 2019.
Runzhe Wan, Branislav Kveton, and Rui Song. Safe exploration for efficient policy evaluation and
  comparison. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 22491–22511. PMLR,
  2022.
Ziyu Wang, Victor Bapst, Nicolas Heess, Volodymyr Mnih, Remi Munos, Koray Kavukcuoglu,
  and Nando de Freitas. Sample efficient actor-critic with experience replay. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1611.01224, 2016.
Ronald J Williams. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement
  learning. Reinforcement learning, pages 5–32, 1992.
Tianhe Yu, Aviral Kumar, Yevgen Chebotar, Karol Hausman, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn.
  Conservative data sharing for multi-task offline reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 34:11501–11516, 2021.
Rujie Zhong, Duohan Zhang, Lukas Schäfer, Stefano Albrecht, and Josiah Hanna. Robust on-policy
  sampling for data-efficient policy evaluation in reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 35:37376–37388, 2022.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 g(s a, ϕ, θ) > 0                            Is the objective clipped?   Return value of min      Gradient
 g(s a, ϕ, θ) ∈ [1 − ϵPROPS , 1 + ϵPROPS ]              No                 −g(s, a, ϕ, θ)         ∇ϕ LCLIP
 g(s, a, ϕ, θ) > 1 + ϵPROPS                             No                 −g(s, a, ϕ, θ)         ∇ϕ LCLIP
 g(s, a, ϕ, θ) < 1 − ϵPROPS                             Yes                 −(1 − ϵPROPS )           0

                 Table 1: Behavior of PROPS’s clipped surrogate objective (Eq. 4).


A    PROPS I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
In this appendix, we describe two relevant implementa-
tion details for the PROPS update (Algorithm 2). We ad-
ditionally summarize the behavior of PROPS’s clipping
mechanism in Table 1.

      1. PROPS update: The PROPS update adapts the
         behavior policy to reduce sampling error in the
         replay buffer D. When performing this update
         with a full replay buffer, we exclude the oldest
         batch of data collected by the behavior policy
         (i.e., the m oldest transitions in D); this data
         will be evicted from the replay buffer before the
         next behavior policy update and thus does not
         contribute to sampling error in D.
      2. Behavior policy class: We compute behavior
         policies from the same policy class used for tar-
         get policies. In particular, we consider Gaussian     Figure 6: In this example, π(·|s) =
         policies which output a mean µ(s) and a variance      N (0, 1). After several visits to s, all
         σ 2 (s) and then sample actions a ∼ π(·|s) ≡          sampled actions (blue) satisfy a > 0 so
         N (µ(s), σ 2 (s)). In principle, the target and be-   that actions a < 0 are under-sampled.
         havior policy classes can be different. However,      Without regularization, PROPS will at-
         using the same class for both policies allows us      tempt to increase the probabilities of
         to easily initialize the behavior policy equal to     under-sampled action in the tail of target
         the target policy at the start of each update. This   policy distribution (green). The regular-
         initialization is necessary to ensure the PROPS up-   ization term in the PROPS objective en-
         date increases the probability of sampling actions    sures the behavior policy remains close
         that are currently under-sampled with respect to      to target policy.
         the target policy.


B    C OMPUTING S AMPLING E RROR
We claim that PROPS improves the data efficiency of on-policy learning by reducing sampling error
in the agent’s replay buffer D with respect to the agent’s current (target) policy. To measure sampling
error, we use the KL-divergence DKL (πD ||πθ ) between the empirical policy πD and the target policy
πθ which is the primary metric Zhong et al. (2022) used to show ROS reduces sampling error:

                                                                   πD (a|s)
                        DKL (πD ||πθ ) = Es∼D,a∼πD (·|s) log                     .                   (6)
                                                                   πθ (a|s)
We compute a parametric estimate of πD by maximizing the log-likelihood of D over the same policy
class used for πθ . More concretely, we let θ ′ be the parameters of neural network with the same
architecture as πθ train and then compute:
                                                     X
                                θMLE = arg max             log πθ′ (a|s)                             (7)
                                             θ′
                                                   (s,a)∈D
using stochastic gradient ascent. After computing θMLE , we then estimate sampling error using the
Monte Carlo estimator:                  X
                     DKL (πD ||πθ ) ≈        (log πθMLE (a|s) − log πθ (a|s)) .                (8)
                                        (s,a)∈D



                                                   13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 7: Sampling error with a fixed, expert target policy. Solid curves denote the mean over 5 seeds.
Shaded regions denote 95% confidence belts.


Figure 8: Sampling error with a fixed, randomly initialized target policy. Solid curves denote the
mean over 5 seeds. Shaded regions denote 95% confidence belts.


Figure 9: Sampling error ablations with a fixed, expert target policy. Here, “no clipping” refers to
setting ϵPROPS = ∞, and “no regularization” refers to setting λ = 0. Solid curves denote the mean
over 5 seeds, and shaded regions denote ± one standard error.


C    C ORRECTING S AMPLING E RROR FOR A F IXED TARGET P OLICY

In this appendix, we expand upon results presented in Section 6.1 of the main paper and provide
additional experiments investigating the degree to which PROPS reduces sampling error with respect
to a fixed target policy. We include empirical results for all six MuJoCo benchmark tasks as well as
ablation studies investigating the effects of clipping and regularization.
We tune PROPS and ROS using a hyperparameter sweep. For PROPS, we consider learning rates in
{10−3 , 10−4 }, regularization coefficients λ ∈ {0.01, 0.1, 0.3}, and PROPS target KLs in δPROPS ∈
{0.05, 0.1}. We fix ϵPROPS = 0.3 across all experiments. For ROS, we consider learning rates in
{10−3 , 10−4 , 10−5 }. We report results for the hyperparameters yielding the lowest sampling error.
Fig. 7 and 8 show sampling error computed with a fixed expert and randomly initialized target policy,
respectively. We see that PROPS achieves lower sampling error than both ROS and on-policy sampling
across all tasks. ROS shows little to no improvement over on-policy sampling, highlighting the
difficulty of applying ROS to higher dimensional tasks with continuous actions.
Fig. 9 ablates the effects of PROPS’s clipping mechanism and regularization on sampling error
reduction. We ablate clipping by setting ϵPROPS = ∞, and we ablate regularization by setting λ = 0.
We use a fixed expert target policy and use the same tuning procedure described earlier in this
appendix. In all tasks, PROPS achieves higher sampling error without clipping nor regularization than
it does with clipping and regularization. However, it nevertheless outperforms on-policy sampling in


                                                 14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


all tasks except Hopper where it matches the performance of on-policy sampling. Only including
regularization slightly decreases sampling error, whereas clipping alone produces sampling error only
slightly higher than that achieved by PROPS with both regularization and clipping. These observations
indicate that while regularization in is helpful, clipping has a stronger effect on sampling error
reduction than regularization when the target policy is fixed.


Figure 10: Sampling error throughoutRL training. Solid curves denote the mean over 5 seeds. Shaded
regions denote 95% confidence belts.


Figure 11: Sampling error throughoutRL training without clipping the PROPS objective. Solid curves
denote the mean over 5 seeds. Shaded regions denote 95% confidence belts.


Figure 12: Sampling error throughoutRL training without regularizing the PROPS objective. Solid
curves denote the mean over 5 seeds. Shaded regions denote 95% confidence belts.


D    C ORRECTING S AMPLING E RROR D URING RL T RAINING
In this appendix, we include additional experiments investigating the degree to which PROPS reduces
sampling error during RL training, expanding upon results presented in Section 6.2 of the main paper.
We include sampling error curves for all six MuJoCo benchmark tasks and additionally provide
ablation studies investigating the effects of clipping and regularization on sampling error reduction
and data efficiency in the RL setting.
As shown in Fig 10, PROPS achieves lower sampling error than on-policy sampling throughout training
in 5 out of 6 tasks. We observe that PROPS increases sampling error but nevertheless improves data
efficiency in HalfCheetah as shown in Fig. 5a. This result likely arises from our tuning procedure
in which we selected hyperparameters yielding the largest return. Although lower sampling error
intuitively correlates with increased data efficiency, it is nevertheless possible to achieve high return
without reducing sampling error.
In our next set of experiments, we ablate the effects of PROPS’s clipping mechanism and regularization
on sampling error reduction and data efficiency. We ablate clipping by tuningRL agents with


                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ϵPROPS = ∞, and we ablate regularization by tuning RL agents with λ = 0. Fig. 11 and Fig. 12 show
sampling error curves without clipping and without regularization, respectively. Without clipping,
PROPS achieves larger sampling than on-policy sampling in all tasks except Humanoid. Without
regularization, PROPS achieves larger sampling error in 3 out of 6 tasks. These observations indicate
that while clipping and regularization both help reduce sampling during RL training, clipping has a
stronger effect on sampling error reduction. As shown in Fig. 13 PROPS data efficiency generally
decreases when we remove clipping or regularization.
Lastly, we consider training with larger buffer sizes b in Fig. 14. We find that data efficiency may
decrease with a larger buffer size. Intuitively, the more historic data kept around, the more data that
must be collected to impact the aggregate data distribution.


Figure 13: IQM return over 50 seeds of PROPS with and without clipping or regularizing the PROPS
objective. Shaded regions denote 95% bootstrapped confidence intervals.


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 14: IQM return over 50 seeds for PROPS with different buffer sizes. We exclude b = 8 for
Humanoid-v4 due to the expense of training and tuning. Shaded regions denote 95% bootstrapped
confidence intervals.


                                              17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 15: IQM return for discrete action tasks over 50 seeds. Shaded regions denote 95% boot-
strapped confidence intervals.


Figure 16: Performance profiles for discrete-action tasks over 50 seeds. The return τ for which the
profiles intersect y = 0.5 is the median, and the area under the performance profile corresponds to
the mean. Shaded regions denote 95% bootstrapped confidence intervals.


E    D ISCRETE -ACTION TASKS
We include 3 additional discrete-action domains of varying complexity. The first two are the widely
used OpenAI gym domains CartPole-v1 and LunarLander-v2 (Brockman et al., 2016). The third
is a 2D navigation task, Discrete2D100-v0, in which the agent must reach a randomly sampled
goal. There are 100 actions, each action corresponding to different directions in which the agent can
move. From Fig. 15 and 16 we observe that PROPS with b = 2 achieves larger returns than PPO and
PPO - BUFFER all throughout training in all three tasks. PROPS with b = 1 (no historic data) achieves
larger returns than PPO all throughout training in all three tasks and even outperforms PPO - BUFFER in
CartPole-v1 and Discrete2D100-v0 even though PPO - BUFFER learns from twice as much data. Thus,
PROPS can improve data efficiency without historic data.


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         PPO learning rate                  10−3 , 10−4 , linearly annealed to 0 over training
         PPO batch size n                   1024, 2048, 4096, 8192
         PROPS learning rate                10−3 , 10−4 (and 10−5 for Swimmer)
         PROPS behavior batch size m        256, 512, 1024, 2048, 4096 satisfying m ≤ n
         PROPS KL cutoff δPROPS             0.03, 0.05, 0.1
         PROPS regularizer coefficient λ    0.01, 0.1, 0.3

           Table 2: Hyperparameters used in our hyperparameter sweep for RL training.

 PPO number of update epochs                                10
 PROPS number of update epochs                              16
 Replay buffer size b                                       2 target batches (also 3, 4, and 8 in Fig. 14)
 PPO minibatch size for PPO update                          bn/16
 PROPS minibatch size for ROS update                        bn/16
 PPO and PROPS networks                                     Multi-layer perceptron
                                                            with hidden layers (64,64)
 PPO and PROPS optimizers                                   Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2015)
 PPO discount factor γ                                      0.99
 PPO generalized advantage estimation (GAE)                 0.95
 PPO advantage normalization                                Yes
 PPO loss clip coefficient                                  0.2
 PPO entropy coefficient                                    0.01
 PPO value function coefficient                             0.5
 PPO and PROPS gradient clipping (max gradient norm)        0.5
 PPO KL cut-off                                             0.03
 Evaluation frequency                                       Every 10 target policy updates
 Number of evaluation episodes                              20

Table 3: Hyperparameters fixed across all experiments. We use the PPO implementation provided by
CleanRL (Huang et al., 2022).


F    H YPERPARAMETER T UNING FOR RL T RAINING
For all RL experiments in Section 6.2 and Appendix D), we tune PROPS, PPO - BUFFER, and PPO
separately using a hyperparameter sweep over parameters listed in Table 2 and fix the hyperparameters
in Table 3 across all experiments. Since we consider a wide range of hyperparameter values, we ran
10 independent training runs for each hyperparameter setting. We then performed 50 independent
training runs for the hyperparameters settings yielding the largest returns at the end of RL training.
We report results for these hyperparameters in the main paper. Fig. 17 shows training curves obtained
from a subset of our hyperparameter sweep.


                                                 19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                    (a) PROPS KL cutoff values δPROPS .


                                    (b) Regularization coefficients λ.


          (c) Behavior batch sizes m (i.e. the number of steps between behavior policy updates).

Figure 17: A subset of results obtained from our hyperparameter sweep. Default hyperparameter
values are as follows: PROPS KL cutoff δPROPS = 0.03; regularization coefficient λ = 0.1; behavior
batch size m = 256. Darker colors indicate larger hyperparameter values. Solid and dashed lines
have the PROPS learning rate set to 1 · 10−3 and 1 · 10−4 , respectively. Curves denote averages over
10 seeds, and shaded regions denote 95% confidence intervals.


                                                    20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 18: Runtimes for PROPS, PPO - BUFFER, and PPO. We report means and standard errors over 3
independent runs.


G    RUNTIME C OMPARISONS
Figure 18 shows runtimes for PROPS, PPO - BUFFER, and PPO averaged over 3 runs. We trained all
agents on a MacBook Air with an M1 CPU, use the same tuned hyperparameters used in throughout
the paper. PROPS takes at most twice as long as PPO - BUFFER. These results agree with the intuition
we shared in our initial response: Both PROPS and PPO - BUFFER learn from the same amount of data
but PROPS learns two policies.
We note that PPO - BUFFER is faster than PPO is HalfCheetah-v4 because, with our tuned hyperpa-
rameters, PPO - BUFFER performs fewer target policy updates than PPO. In particular, PPO - BUFFER
is updating its target policy every 4096 steps, whereas PPO is updating the target policy every 1024
steps.

H    C OMPARISON TO SAC
To help visualize the differences in data efficiency between PROPS and an off-policy algorithm, we
compare against SAC, a state-of-the-art off-policy algorithm. We tune SAC by sweeping over the
following batch sizes in {64, 128, 256}, actor learning rates in {1e − 3, 3e − 4} and critic learning
rates in {1e − 3, 3e − 4}. We report results for the best hyperparameters in Fig. 19. In all tasks
except Swimmer-v4, SAC is more data efficient than PROPS. PROPS greatly outperforms SAC in
Swimmer-v4. In Hopper-v4, PROPS is competitive with SAC and appears more stable.
To estimate the runtime of SAC agents, we record the time required to train SAC agents for 20k
timesteps and then extrapolate out to the full training budget. Runtimes estimates for SAC as well as
runtimes for PROPS, PPO - BUFFER, and PPO shown in Fig. 20 in log scale. Although SAC generally
outperforms PROPS in terms of data efficiency, PROPS is subsantially faster in terms of wallclock
time.


                                                 21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 19: IQM returns over 50 seeds. Shaded regions denote 95% bootstrapped confidence intervals.


Figure 20: Runtimes for PROPS, PPO - BUFFER, PPO, and SAC. We report means and standard errors
over 3 independent runs. Note that the vertical axis is log scale.


                                               22
