Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


P ROVABLE B ENEFITS OF M ULTI - TASK RL UNDER N ON -
M ARKOVIAN D ECISION M AKING P ROCESSES
 Ruiquan HuangвҲ—вҖ                                 Yuan ChengвҲ—вҖЎ                               Jing YangвҖ 

 Vincent TanвҖЎ                                       Yingbin LiangВ§



                                             A BSTRACT

          In multi-task reinforcement learning (RL) under Markov decision processes
          (MDPs), the presence of shared latent structures among multiple MDPs has been
          shown to yield significant benefits to the sample efficiency compared to single-task
          RL. In this paper, we investigate whether such a benefit can extend to more gen-
          eral sequential decision making problems such as predictive state representations
          (PSRs). The main challenge here is that the large and complex model space makes
          it hard to identify what types of common latent structure of multi-task PSRs can
          reduce the model complexity and improve sample efficiency. To this end, we posit
          a joint model class for tasks and use the notion of О·-bracketing number to quantify
          its complexity; this number also serves as a general metric to capture the similarity
          of tasks and thus determines the benefit of multi-task over single-task RL. We
          first study upstream multi-task learning over PSRs, in which all tasks share the
          same observation and action spaces. We propose a provably efficient algorithm
          UMT-PSR for finding near-optimal policies for all PSRs, and demonstrate that the
          advantage of multi-task learning manifests if the joint model class of PSRs has a
          smaller О·-bracketing number compared to that of individual single-task learning.
          We further investigate downstream learning, in which the agent needs to learn
          a new target task that shares some commonalities with the upstream tasks via a
          similarity constraint. By exploiting the learned PSRs from the upstream, we de-
          velop a sample-efficient algorithm that provably finds a near-optimal policy. Upon
          specialization to some examples with small О·-bracketing numbers, our results
          further highlight the benefit compared to directly learning a single-task PSR.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Multi-task sequential decision making, or multi-task reinforcement learning (MTRL) is a subfield of
reinforcement learning (RL) that extends the learning process across multiple tasks. Many real-world
applications can be modeled by MTRL. For instance, in robotics and autonomous driving, different
types of robots and vehicles in a shared environment can have different observational capabilities
based on their sensors and learning goals. Other applications include personalized healthcare, weather
forecasting across different regions, and manufacturing quality control on different types of products.
The fundamental idea behind MTRL is to leverage the inherent similarities among a set of tasks in
order to improve the overall learning efficiency and performance. For Markov decision processes
(MDPs), a line of works (Pathak et al., 2017; Tang et al., 2017; Oord et al., 2018; Laskin et al.,
2020; Lu et al., 2021; Cheng et al., 2022; Agarwal et al., 2022; Pacchiano et al., 2022) have explored
multi-task representation learning and shown its benefit both practically and theoretically.
However, it is still an open question whether such a benefit can extend to more general sequential
decision making problems, even in partially observable MDPs (POMDPs), let alone more general
predictive state representations (PSRs). In this context, it is even unclear:
    вҲ—
      Equal contribution.
    вҖ 
      Penn State University, State College, PA 16801, USA. {rzh514,yangjing}@psu.edu
    вҖЎ
      National University of Singapore, 119077, Singapore. yuan.cheng@u.nus.edu, vtan@nus.edu.sg
    В§
      Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. liang.889@osu.edu.


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    When can latent similarity structure encompassed by multiple PSRs be potentially beneficial?

The challenges mainly emanate from two aspects. First, the large and complex model space makes
it hard to identify what types of common latent structure of multi-task PSRs can reduce the model
complexity. The non-Markovian property of these problems implies that the sufficient statistics or
belief about the current environmental state encompasses all the observations and actions from past
interactions with the environment. This dramatically increases the statistical complexity. Even for a
finite observation space and action space, model complexity can be exponentially large in the number
of observations and actions. Such a complex parameter space makes it difficult to identify what
types of latent similarity structure of multi-task PSRs reduce the model complexity. Second, reduced
model complexity does not necessarily result in benefit in statistical efficiency gain of RL. In RL,
model learning and data collection are intertwined. The agent has to choose an exploration policy
in each iteration based on the model learned in the past. Such iterative process introduces temporal
dependence to the collected data, which makes the analysis of multi-task PSRs complicated.
In this paper, we answer the question above with upstream multi-task learning and downstream
transfer learning. We summarize our contributions below.
1. To deal with the first challenge, we propose a unified approach to characterize the effect of task
   similarity on model complexity by introducing the notion of the О·-bracketing number for the
   joint model space of multiple tasks. Regardless of whether the concrete form of task similarity is
   implicit or explicit, desirable task similarity should contribute to reduce the О·-bracketing number
   compared to that without similarity structures. This significantly generalizes existing studies of
   multi-task MDPs that considered only specific task similarity structures.
2. We deal with the second challenge in both upstream and downstream learning. For the former, we
   propose a novel multi-task PSRs algorithm called UMT-PSR, which features a pairwise additive
   distance-based optimistic planning and exploration as well as confidence set construction based
   on the bracketing number of the joint model class. We then prove that if the bracketing number
   of the multi-task model class normalized by the number of tasks is lower than that of a single
   task, UMT-PSR benefits from multi-task learning with these novel designs. We then provide
   several specific multi-task POMDP/PSR examples with low bracketing number to demonstrate
   that UMT-PSR is often more efficient than single-task learning.
3. We further employ the upstream learning to downstream learning by connecting upstream and
   downstream models via similarity constraints. We show that the downstream learning can identify
   a near-accurate model and find a near-optimal policy. Upon specialization to the examples used
   to elucidate the О·-bracketing numbers, our downstream results further highlight the benefit in
   comparison to directly learning parameters of PSRs without upstream information. Our analysis
   here features a novel technique of using ReМҒnyi divergence to measure the approximation error
   which guarantees the sub-optimality bound without requiring the realizability condition.
Our work is the first theoretical study that characterizes the benefits of multi-task RL with
PSRs/POMDPs over its single-task counterpart.

2    R ELATED W ORK
MTRL under MDPs: Multitask representation learning and transfer learning have been extensively
studied in RL, particularly under MDPs. Arora et al. (2020) demonstrated that representation learning
can reduce sample complexity for imitation learning. Hu et al. (2021) analyzed MTRL with low
inherent Bellman error (Zanette et al., 2020) and known representation. Zhang & Wang (2021)
studied multi-task learning under similar transition kernels. In contrast, Brunskill & Li (2013) studied
the benefit of MTRL when each task is independently sampled from a distribution over a finite set of
MDPs. Recent studies have also considered the case where all tasks share a common representation,
including DвҖҷEramo et al. (2020) which demonstrated the convergence rate benefit on value iteration,
and Lu et al. (2021) which proved the sample efficiency gain of MTRL under low-rank MDPs. Some
recent work further took the impact of sequential exploration and temporal dependence in data into
account. Considering sequential exploration with shared unknown representation, Cheng et al. (2022);
Agarwal et al. (2022) studied reward free MTRL under low-rank MDPs as upstream learning and
applied the learned representation from upstream to downstream RL. Pacchiano et al. (2022) focused
on a common low-dimensional linear representation and investigated MTRL under linearly-factored


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


MDPs. Lu et al. (2022) explored MTRL with general function approximation. There also exist a few
papers studying multi-task POMDPs from theoretical (Li et al., 2009) and practical (Omidshafiei
et al., 2017) side. Note that all the above studies considered specific common model structures shared
among tasks, whereas our paper proposes a unified way to characterize the similarity among tasks.
Further, none of the existing studies considered model-based multi-task PSRs, which is the focus of
our paper.
Single-task RL with PSRs and general sequential decision making problems: A general decision
making framework PSR (Littman & Sutton, 2001) was proposed to generalize MDPs and POMDPs.
Since then, various approaches have been studied to make the problem tractable with polynomial
sample efficiency. These methods include spectral type of techniques (Boots et al., 2011; Hefny et al.,
2015; Jiang et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2022), methods based on optimistic planning and maximum
log-likelihood estimators together with confidence set-based design (Zhan et al., 2022; Liu et al.,
2022), the bonus-based approaches (Huang et al., 2023), value-based actor-critic approaches (Uehara
et al., 2022), posterior sampling methods (Zhong et al., 2022). Chen et al. (2022) further improved
the sample efficiency for previous work including OMLE (Liu et al., 2022), MOPS (Agarwal &
Zhang, 2022), and E2D (Foster et al., 2021).


3     P RELIMINARIES

Notations. For any positive integer N , we use [N ] to denote the set {1, В· В· В· , N }. For any vector x,
the i-th coordinate of x is represented as [x]i . For a set X , the Cartesian product of N copies of X
is denoted by X N . For probability distributions PP  and Q supported on a countable set X , the total
variation distance between them is DTV (P, Q) = x |P(x) вҲ’ Q(x)|, and the ReМҒnyi divergence of
                                                        1
order Оұ, for Оұ > 1, between them is DR,Оұ (P, Q) = ОұвҲ’1      log EP [(dP/dQ)ОұвҲ’1 ].

3.1    T HE N ON - MARKOVIAN DECISION MAKING PROBLEM

We consider an episodic decision making process, which is generally non-Markovian, with an
observation space O and a finite action space A. We assume that the process is episodic and each
episode contains H steps, i.e., with horizon H. At each step, the evolution of the process is controlled
by an underlying distribution P, where P(oh |o1 , . . . , ohвҲ’1 , a1 , . . . , ahвҲ’1 ) is the probability of visiting
oh at step h given that the learning agent has observed ot вҲҲ O and taken action at вҲҲ A for previous
steps t вҲҲ [h вҲ’ 1]. And the learning agent receives a reward at each episode determined by the reward
function R : (O Г— A)H вҶ’ [0, 1]. We denote such a process compactly as P = (O, A, H, P, R).
For each step h, we denote historical trajectory as П„h := (o1 , a1 , . . . , oh , ah ), the set of all possible
historical trajectories as Hh = (O Г— A)h , the future trajectory as Пүh := (oh+1 , ah+1 , . . . , oH , aH ),
and the set of all possible future trajectories as в„Ұh = (O Г— A)HвҲ’h .
The agent interacts with the environment in each episode as follows. At step 1, a fixed initial
observation o1 is drawn. At each step h вҲҲ [H], due to the non-Markovian nature, the action selection
and environment transitions are based on whole history information. Specifically, the agent can choose
an action ah based on the history П„hвҲ’1 and the current observation oh with a strategy (probability)
ПҖh (ah |П„hвҲ’1 , oh ). We denote such a strategy as a policy, and collect the policies over H steps into
ПҖ = {ПҖh }H h=1 , and denote the set of all feasible policies as О . Then the environment takes a transition
to oh+1 based on P(oh+1 |П„h ). The episode terminates after H steps.
For any historical trajectory П„h , we further divided it into П„ho = (o1 , . . . , oh ) and П„ha = (a1 , . . . , ah )
which is observation and action sequences contained in П„h , respectively. Similar to П„h , for the future
trajectories Пүh , we denote Пүho as the observation sequence in Пүh , and Пүha as the action sequence
in Пүh . For simplicity, we write ПҖ(П„h ) = ПҖ(ah |oh , П„hвҲ’1 ) В· В· В· ПҖ(a1 |o1 ) to denote the probability of
choosing the sequence of actions П„ha given the observations П„ho under the policy ПҖ. We denote PПҖ as
the distribution of the trajectories induced by the policy ПҖ under the dynamics P. The value function
                                                          ПҖ
of a policy ПҖ under P and the reward R is denoted by VP,R     = EП„H вҲјPПҖ [R(П„H )]. The primary learning
                                                                                ПҖ        ПҖМ„
goal is to find an Пө-optimal policy ПҖМ„, which is one that satisfies maxПҖ VP,R       вҲ’ VP,R   вүӨ Пө.
Given that addressing a general decision-making problem entails an exponentially large sample
complexity in the worst case, this paper focuses on the low-rank class of problems as in Zhan et al.
(2022); Liu et al. (2022); Chen et al. (2022). Before formal definition of the low-rank problem, we


                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


introduce the dynamics matrix Dh вҲҲ R|Hh |Г—|в„Ұh | for each h, where we use П„h вҲҲ Hh and Пүh вҲҲ в„Ұh to
index the rows and columns of the matrix Dh , respectively, and the entry at the П„h -th row and Пүh -th
column of Dh equals to the conditional probability P(Пүho , П„ho |П„ha , Пүha ).
Definition 1 (Rank-r sequential decision making problem). A sequential decision making problem is
rank r if for any h, the model dynamics matrix Dh has rank at most r.

As a result, for each h, the probability of observing Пүho can be represented by a linear combination of
probabilities on a set of future trajectories known to the agent called core tests Qh = {q1h , . . . , qdhh } вҠӮ
в„Ұh , where dh вүҘ r. Specifically, there exist functions m : в„Ұh вҶ’ Rdh , ПҲ : Hh вҶ’ Rdh such that (i)
the value of the в„“-th coordinate of ПҲ(П„h ) equals to the conditional probability P(oв„“h , П„ho |aв„“h , П„ha ) on
(qв„“h , П„h ), where oв„“h and aв„“h to denote the observation and the action sequences of qв„“h , and (ii) for any
Пүh вҲҲ в„Ұh , П„h вҲҲ Hh , the conditional probability can be factorized as
                                    P(Пүho , П„ho |П„ha , Пүha ) = m(Пүh )вҠӨ ПҲ(П„h ).                                  (1)

Predictive State Representation. Following from Theorem C.1 in Liu et al. (2022), given core tests
{Qh }Hh=1 , any low rank decision making problem admits a (self-consistent) predictive state repre-
                                  H
sentation (PSR) Оё = {(П•h , Mh )}h=1 , such that Eq. 1 can be reparameterized by Оё. Mathematically,
For any h вҲҲ [H], П„h вҲҲ Hh , Пүh вҲҲ в„Ұh :
 m(Пүh )вҠӨ = П•вҠӨ H MH (oH , aH ) В· В· В· Mh+1 (oh+1 , ah+1 ), ПҲ(П„h ) = Mh (oh , ah ) В· В· В· M1 (o1 , a1 )ПҲ0 ,
and (oh ,ah )вҲҲOГ—A П•вҠӨ                      вҠӨ                                                             1
   P
                   h+1 Mh (oh , ah ) = П•h . For ease of the presentation, we assume ПҲ0 is known.

The following assumption is standard in the literature (Liu et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022).
Assumption 1 (Оі-well-conditioned PSR). We assume any PSR Оё = {(П•h , Mh )}H          h=1 considered in
this paper is Оі-well-conditioned for some Оі > 0, i.e.
       вҲҖh вҲҲ [H], maxxвҲҲRdh :вҲҘxвҲҘ1 вүӨ1 maxПҖвҲҲО  maxП„h вҲҲHh Пүh вҲҲв„Ұh ПҖ(Пүh |П„h )|m(Пүh )вҠӨ x| вүӨ Оі1 .
                                                         P
                                                                                                  (2)

In the following context, we use PОё to indicate the model determined by the PSR Оё. For simplicity,
                                                   в„“ dh
we denote VPПҖОё ,R as VОё,R
                       ПҖ
                          . Moreover, let QAh = {ah }в„“=1 be the action sequence set from core tests
which is constructed by eliminating any repeated action sequence. The set QA h is also known as the
core action sequence set. The set of all rank-r and Оі-well-conditioned PSRs is denoted by Оҳ.

3.2    U PSTREAM M ULTI - TASK L EARNING

In upstream multi-task learning, the agent needs to solve N low-rank decision making problems
(also known as source tasks) at the same time instead of only one single problem (task). The set of N
                                                                                вҲ—
source tasks is denoted by {Pn }Nn=1 , where Pn = (O, A, H, PОёn вҲ— , Rn ), and Оё
                                                                                      2
                                                                                n вҲҲ Оҳ. In other words,
                                                               вҲ—          n,вҲ—     n,вҲ— H
all N tasks are identical except for their model parameters Оёn = {(П•h , Mh )}h=1 , and reward
functions Rn . Moreover, we denote the model class of multi-task PSRs as Оҳu (the subscript stands
for upstream), a subset of ОҳN .
The goal of the upstream learning consists of two parts: (i) Finding near-optimal policies for all
N tasks on average. Mathematically, given an accuracy level Пө, the set of N policies that are
                                                                  PN                           n
produced by the algorithm {ПҖМ„ 1 , . . . , ПҖМ„ N } should satisfy N1 n=1 (maxПҖ VОёПҖnвҲ— ,Rn вҲ’ VОёПҖМ„nвҲ— ,Rn ) вүӨ Пө; (ii)
Characterizing the theoretical benefit of multi-task PSRs learning in terms of the sample complexity,
compared to learning each task individually.

3.3    B RACKETING N UMBER OF J OINT PARAMETER S PACE

One critical factor that affects the efficiency of multi-task learning compared to separate task learning
is the presence of shared latent structure among the tasks, which yields a reduced model space in
   1
      The sample complexity of learning ПҲ0 if it is unknown is relatively small compared to the learning of the
other parameters (Liu et al., 2022).
    2
      For simplicity, we assume all tasks have the same rank and Оі, but have different core test sets. The extension
to different ranks and ОівҖҷs is straightforward.


                                                         4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


multi-task PSRs learning, as compared to separately learning single tasks over the Cartesian product
of N model spaces (see Figure 1 for an illustration in 2 dimensions). Consequently, this reduction in
model complexity can ultimately lead to improved sample efficiency. Unlike the specific shared model
structures among multiple tasks that the previous works studied, such as shared representation in
Cheng et al. (2022) and similar transition kernels in Zhang & Wang (2021), here we focus on a general
shared model space and use the notion of the О·-bracketing number to quantify the complexity of
the joint model space. Such a notion plays a central role in capturing the benefit of multi-task PSR
learning over single-task learning.
We start with a domain X and a single task function class F,                                             P2
in which each element f : X вҶ’ R+ . For the multi-task case,
the function class is a subset F u of F N .
Definition 2 (О·-Bracketing number of vector-valued function                               P (вҲ—,1) , P (вҲ—,2)
                                                                                                              !



class F u w.r.t. вҲҘВ·вҲҘ). Given two vector-valued functions l and
g : X вҶ’ RN    + , the bracket [l, g] is the set of all functions
f вҲҲ F u satisfying l вүӨ f вүӨ g.3 An О·-bracket is a bracket [l, g]
with вҲҘg вҲ’ lвҲҘ < О·. The bracketing number NО· (F u , вҲҘВ·вҲҘ) is the
minimum number of О·-brackets needed to cover F u .4

In this paper, we are interested in the bracketing number of (a) Independent learning of each task
the joint model space, i.e., distribution spaces over (O Г— A)H where the joint model class is P 2
parameterized by Оҳu . For simplicity, we use NО· (Оҳu ) to de-
note the О·-bracketing number of {(PОё1 , . . . , PОёN )|Оё вҲҲ Оҳu }                                 Fu вҠҠ P 2
                                                    p
w.r.t. the в„“вҲһ policy weighted norm вҲҘВ·вҲҘвҲһ , where the в„“вҲһ
policy weighted norm between two vector-valued functions
                                                                   H
l = {l1 , . . . , lN } and g = {g1 , . . . , gN } defined
                                                        Pon (O Г—A)
                         p
is equal to вҲҘg вҲ’ lвҲҘвҲһ = maxiвҲҲ[N ] maxПҖi вҲҲО  П„H |li (П„H ) вҲ’                     P (вҲ—,1) , P (вҲ—,2)
                                                                                      пЈ«
                                                                                      пЈ¬
                                                                                      пЈӯ
                                                                                                          пЈ¶
                                                                                                          пЈ·
                                                                                                          пЈё



gi (П„H )|ПҖi (П„H ). As we will show later, a lower О·-bracketing
number of the joint model space results in a lower sample
complexity in multi-task PSR learning.
In practice, it is common tasks share certain common model
structures and hence their joint model space will have a much
lower О·-bracketing number compared to the product of model              (b) Joint learning of tasks with shared la-
spaces (i.e, treating the model of each task separately). We            tent model structure. The joint model class
provide several such examples of non-Markovian decision                 is Fu , a strict subset of P 2 .
processes in Section 4.3. We provide more examples of MDPs              Figure 1: Reduction in О·-bracketing
with their О·-bracketing numbers in Appx. F. Notably, there              number when Fu вҠҠ P 2
can be much richer scenarios beyond these examples.

3.4      D OWNSTREAM T RANSFER L EARNING

In downstream learning, the agent is assigned with a new target task P0 = (O, A, H, PОё0вҲ— , R0 ),
where Оё0вҲ— вҲҲ Оҳ, which shares some similarities with source tasks to benefit from upstream learning.
Here, we capture the shared structure between upstream and downstream tasks via the similarity
constraint C(Оё0 , Оё1вҲ— , . . . ОёN
                               вҲ—
                                 ) вүӨ 0 where C : ОҳN +1 вҶ’ Rnd , nd вҲҲ N. The similarity constraint
establishes the relationship between the downstream target task and the upstream source tasks. Hence,
the downstream model class is given by Оҳu0 = {Оё0 вҲҲ Оҳ|C(Оё0 , Оё1вҲ— , . . . ОёN    вҲ—
                                                                                ) вүӨ 0}. We note that
the similarity constraint is general enough to capture various relationships between upstream and
downstream tasks. For example, Cheng et al. (2022) consider the case when the downstream task
                                                                                                   вҲ—
shares the same representation as upstream tasks, which is equivalent to assuming [C(Оё0 , . . . , ОёN )]n =
   (вҲ—,n)                                 (вҲ—,n)
вҲҘП•       вҲ’ П•0 вҲҘ2 , where n вҲҲ [N ] and П•        is the representation of task n. However, the similarity
constraint allows much richer beyond the above example, for example, downstream tasks can have
similar but not the same representations as the upstream, or may share only some representation
features, but not all of them.

   3
       We write that two vectors a, b satisfy a вүӨ b if b вҲ’ a is coordinate-wise nonnegative.
   4
       We say that a collection of sets S1 . . . , Sn cover a set S if S вҠӮ вҲӘn
                                                                            i=1 Si .



                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The goal of the downstream learning is to find a near-optimal policy, by exploiting the constraint
similarity with upstream tasks and utilizing upstream knowledge to achieve better sample efficiency
compared with learning without upstream knowledge.


4     U PSTREAM LEARNING OVER MULTI - TASK PSR S

We present our upstream algorithm in Section 4.1, characterize its theoretical performance in Sec-
tion 4.2 and present examples to validate the benefit of upstream multi-task learning in Section 4.3.
We use bold symbol to represent the multi-task parameters or policy. Specifically, Оё = (Оё1 , . . . , ОёN ),
and ПҖ = (ПҖ1 , . . . , ПҖN ). We define QA = maxn maxh |Qn,A      h |, where Qh
                                                                               n,A
                                                                                    is the core action
                                                                  вҖІ
sequence set of task n at step h. The policy, denoted by ОҪh (ПҖ, ПҖ ), takes ПҖ at the initial h вҲ’ 1 steps
and switches to ПҖ вҖІ from the h-th step. Lastly, uX represents the uniform distribution over the set X .

4.1   A LGORITHM : U PSTREAM M ULTI -TASK PSR S (UMT-PSR)

We provide the pseudo-code of our upstream multi-task algorithm called Upstream Multi-Task PSRs
(UMT-PSR) in Algorithm 1. This iterative algorithm consists of three main steps as follows.

Algorithm 1 Upstream Multi-Task PSRs (UMT-PSR)
 1: Input: B1 = Оҳ model class, estimation margin ОІ (N ) , maximum iteration number K.
 2: for k = 1, . . . , K do                                                         n       n
          Set ПҖ k = arg maxПҖвҲҲО N maxОё,ОёвҖІ вҲҲBk                                      PПҖОёn , PПҖОёnвҖІ
                                                            P
 3:                                                              nвҲҲ[N ] DTV
 4:       for n, h вҲҲ [N ] Г— [H] do
                     n,k               n,k,h
 5:           Use ОҪhПҖ to collect data П„H     .
 6:       end for
 7:       Construct Bk+1 =
                                              n,t                                                   n,t

                                        ОҪПҖ                                                    ОҪПҖ
                        X                             n,t,h
                                                                              X                             n,t,h
          Оё вҲҲ Оҳu :                 log PОёnh         (П„H     )вүҘ   max                     log PОёhвҖІ         (П„H     )вҲ’ОІ (N )       вҲ© Bk .
                                                                 Оё вҖІ вҲҲОҳu                       n
                     tвҲҲ[k],hвҲҲ[H]                                           tвҲҲ[k],hвҲҲ[H]
                        nвҲҲ[N ]                                                nвҲҲ[N ]


 8: end for                                                                       n
 9: Output: Any Оё вҲҲ BK+1 , and a greedy multi-task policy ПҖ = arg maxПҖ nвҲҲ[N ] VОёМ„ПҖ ,R
                                                                      P
                                                                                                                         n       n


Pairwise additive distance based multi-task planning (Line 3): To promote joint planning among
tasks, a natural choice to measure the distance between two multi-task models is the distance between
the two product distributions PПҖОё11 Г—В· В· В·Г—PПҖОёNN and PПҖОёвҖІ1 Г—В· В· В·Г—PПҖОёвҖІN . However, such a вҖңdistance between
                                                        1            N
product distributionsвҖқ is not sufficient to guarantee the accuracy of the individual models of each task,
which is needed in the analysis of the sum of the individual value functions.P    Hence, we propose to use
                                                                                                  n    n
the вҖңpairwise additive distanceвҖқ for our planning, defined as DПҖ (Оё, Оё вҖІ ) вүң nвҲҲ[N ] DTV (PПҖОёn , PПҖОёnвҖІ ).

More specifically, at each iteration k, UMT-PSR selects a multi-task policy ПҖ k = (ПҖ 1,k , . . . , ПҖ N,k )
that maximizes the largest pairwise additive distance maxОё,ОёвҖІ DПҖ (Оё, Оё вҖІ ) within the confidence set Bk
(which will be specified later). An important property of Bk is that it contains the true model Оё вҲ— with
high probability. Using this property, the largest pairwise additive distance serves as an optimistic
value of the uncertainty DПҖ (Оё вҲ— , Оё) for any multi-task model Оё вҲҲ Bk .
Multi-task exploration (Line 5): Building upon the planning policy ПҖ k , for each task n and each
step h, UMT-PSR executes the policy ПҖ n,k for first h вҲ’ 1 steps, and then uniformly selects an action
sequence in A Г— Qn,A
                   h  for the following H вҲ’ h + 1 steps. In particular, at step h, UMT-PSR uniformly
takes an action in A, and then uniformly chooses a core action sequence ah such that regardless
of what the observation sequence is, UMT-PSR always plays the action in the sampled core action
sequence. In summary, for each (n, h) вҲҲ [N ] Г— [H], UMT-PSR adopts the policy ОҪh (ПҖ n,k , uAГ—Qn,A )
                                                                                                                                     h
                                n,k,h                                                                        n,k
to collect a sample trajectory П„H     . We abbreviate ОҪh (ПҖ n,k , uAГ—Qn,A ) as ОҪhПҖ                                 .
                                                                                            h


                                                                 6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Confidence set construction via bracketing number of joint model class (Line 7): Given the
sampled trajectories, UMT-PSR calls a maximum likelihood estimation oracle to construct the multi-
task confidence set. A novel element here is the use of the bracketing number of the joint model class
to characterize estimation margin ОІ (N ) , which is an upper bound of the gap between the maximum
log-likelihood within Оҳu and the log-likelihood of the true model. Such a design provides a unified
way for any MTRL problem and avoids individual design for each problem in a case-by-case manner.

4.2   M AIN T HEORETICAL R ESULT

The following theorem characterizes the guarantee of the model estimation and the sample complexity
to find a near-optimal multi-task policy.
Theorem 1. Under Assumption 1 , for any fixed Оҙ > 0, let Оҳu be the multi-task parameter space,
ОІ (N ) = c1 (log KHN
                   Оҙ  + log NО· (Оҳu )), where c1 > 0 and О· вүӨ KHN      1
                                                                         . Then with probability at least
1 вҲ’ Оҙ, UMT-PSR finds a multi-task model Оё = (ОёМ„1 , . . . , ОёМ„N ) such that
                                            n                   q
                     PN                     ПҖ   ПҖ n             QA     rH|A|N ОІ (N )
                      n=1 maxПҖ вҲҲО  DTV PОёМ„n , PОёn
                                n                вҲ—    вүӨ OМғ Оі                K          .

                      c r|A|Q2 HОІ (N )
In addition, if K = 2 N ОіA2 Пө2             for large enough c2 > 0, UMT-PSR produces a multi-task policy
ПҖ = (ПҖМ„ 1 , . . . , ПҖМ„ N ) such that the average sub-optimality gap is at most Пө, i.e.
                                    1
                                       PN                ПҖ              n

                                   N     n=1 maxПҖвҲҲО  VОёn   вҲ— ,R
                                                               n
                                                                 вҲ’ VОёПҖМ„вҲ— ,Rn вүӨ Пө.                    (3)

Benefits of multi-task learning:            Theorem 1 shows that with the sample complexity
    r|A|Q2A H 2 ОІ (N )
OМғ(     N Оі 2 Пө2       ), UMT-PSR identifies an Пө-optimal multi-task policy. As a comparison, the best
                                                                     r|A|Q2 H 2 ОІ
known sample complexity of a single-task PSR RL is given by O( Оі 2AПө2             ) in Chen et al. (2022),
         (1)            2       2
where ОІ = OМғ(r |O||A|H ) scales the logarithm of the bracketing number of a single-task PSR
with rank r. It is clear that as long as ОІ (N ) < N ОІ (1) , then UMT-PSR enjoys multi-task benefit in the
sample complexity. In Section 4.3, we will provide several example multi-task POMDPs/PSRs to
illustrate that such a condition can be satisfied broadly.
Next, we make a few comparisons concerning ОІ (N ) . (i) If N = 1, Theorem 1 matches the best
known sample complexity given in Chen et al. (2022). (ii) If none of tasks share any similarity,
i.e., Оҳu = ОҳN , we have ОІ (N ) = N ОІ (1) , and the sample complexity does not exhibit any benefit
compared to learning the tasks separately. This coincides with the intuition that in the worst case,
multi-task learning is not required. (iii) The benefits of multi-task learning are more evident when
ОІ (N ) /N decreases. An extreme example is that when all tasks also share the same dynamics, leading
to ОІ (N ) = ОІ (1) . In this case, multi-task learning reduces to the batch setting and as the batch size
increases, the iteration number decreases linearly in N .

4.3   I MPORTANT E XAMPLES OF M ULTI - TASK PSR S

As shown in Section 3.2 and Theorem 1, for multi-task models with low О·-bracketing number, i.e.,
satisfying ОІ (N ) < N ОІ (1) , UMT-PSR exhibits better sample complexity than single-task learning. In
this section, we provide example multi-task POMDPs and PSRs and show that their О·-bracketing
number satisfies the condition. Detailed proofs for these examples can be found in Appendix E.2.
Muli-task POMDPs. We consider tabular POMDPs, which is a classic subclass of PSRs. Specifically,
the dynamics in POMDPs consist of H transition distributions {Th : S Г— A Г— S вҶ’ [0, 1]}H          h=1 , and H
emission distributions {Oh : S Г— O вҶ’ [0, 1]}H    h=1  , where S is a finite state space. The   states capture
the entire system information, but are not directly observable. In POMDPs, at each step h, if the
current system state is sh , the agent observes oh with probability Oh (oh |sh ). Then, if the agent takes
an action ah based on previous observations oh , . . . , o1 and actions ahвҲ’1 , . . . , a1 , the system state
transits to sh+1 with probability Th (sh+1 |sh , ah ). We use the notation Ppo = (O, A, H, S, T, O, R)
to represent a POMDP instance. Note that the tuple (S, T, O) in POMDPs determine the general
dynamics P in PSRs. If all tasks share the same state, observation, and action spaces, then Pnpo =
(O, A, H, S, Tn , On , R) represents the model of task n.


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Example 1 (Multi-task POMDP with common transition kernels). All tasks (i.e., all POMDPs)
share the same transition kernel, i.e., there exists a set of transition distributions {TвҲ—h }H
                                                                                             h=1 such that
Tnh = TвҲ—h for all n вҲҲ [N ] and h вҲҲ [H]. The emission distributions can be different. Such a scenario
arises if the agent observes the same environment from different angles and hence receives different
observations. Then, ОІ (N ) is at most O(H(|S|2 |A| + |S||O|N ) log H|O||A||S|  О·    ), whereas the single
task ОІ (1) is given by O(H(|S|2 |A| + |S||O|) log H|O||A||S|
                                                      О·      ). Clearly, ОІ (N ) < N ОІ (1) .

Multi-task PSRs: We next provide two example multi-task PSRs, in which tasks do not share
common model parameters. In these examples, the similarities among tasks could alternatively be
established via implicit connections and correlations in latent spaces, which reduce the complexity
of the joint model class, hence the estimation margin and the sample complexity of algorithms
significantly compared with separately learning each single task.
Example 2 (Multi-task PSR with perturbed models). Suppose there exist a latent base task Pb , and a
finite noisy perturbation space вҲҶ. Each task n вҲҲ [N ] is a noisy perturbation of the latent base task
and can be parameterized into two parts: the base task plus a task-specified noise term. Specifically,
for each step h вҲҲ [H] and task n вҲҲ [N ], any (o, a) вҲҲ O Г— A, we have
                       Mnh (oh , ah ) = Mbh (oh , ah ) + вҲҶnh (oh , ah ),   вҲҶnh вҲҲ вҲҶ.
Such a multi-task PSR satisfies that ОІ (N ) = OМғ(r2 |O||A|H 2 + HN log |вҲҶ|), whereas ОІ (1) for a
single task is given by OМғ(r2 |O||A|H 2 ). Clearly, ОІ (N ) вүӘ N ОІ (1) holds if log |вҲҶ| вүӘ OМғ(r2 |O||A|H),
which can be easily satisfied for small-size perturbation environments. Hence, the multi-task PSR
benefits from a significantly reduced sample complexity compared to single-task learning.
Example 3 (Multi-task PSR: Linear combination of core tasks). Suppose that the multi-task PSR lies
in the linear span of m core tasks {P1 , . . . , Pm }. Specifically, for each task n вҲҲ [N ], there exists a
                                        n вҠӨ
coefficient vector Оұn = (Оұ1n , В· В· В· , Оұm ) вҲҲ Rm s.t. for any h вҲҲ [H] and (oh , ah ) вҲҲ O Г— A,
                             Pm                                         Pm
             П•nh (oh , ah ) = l=1 Оұln П•lh (oh , ah ), Mnh (oh , ah ) = l=1 Оұln Mlh (oh , ah ).
                                                                                    Pm
For regularization, we assume 0 вүӨ Оұln for all l вҲҲ [m] and n вҲҲ [N ], and l=1 Оұln = 1 for all
n вҲҲ [N ]. It can be shown that ОІ (N ) = O(m(r2 |O||A|H 2 + N )), whereas ОІ (1) = OМғ(r2 |O||A|H 2 ).
Clearly, ОІ (N ) вүӘ N ОІ (1) holds if m вүӨ min{N, r2 |O||A|H 2 }, which is satisfied in practice.

5     D OWNSTREAM LEARNING FOR PSR S
In downstream learning, the agent is assigned a new task P0 = (O, A, H, PОё0вҲ— , R0 ), where Оё0вҲ— вҲҲ Оҳu0 ,
and Оҳu0 is defined in Section 3.4. As explained in Section 3.4, upstream and downstream tasks are
connected via the similarity constraint C(Оё0 , Оё1вҲ— , . . . ОёN
                                                            вҲ—
                                                              ) вүӨ 0. Therefore, the agent can use the
estimated model parameter ОёМ„1 , . . . , ОёМ„N in the upstream to construct an empirical candidate model
class for the downstream task as Оҳ   b u = {Оё0 вҲҲ Оҳ|C(Оё0 , ОёМ„1 , . . . , ОёМ„N ) вүӨ 0}. Then for downstream
                                        0
learning, we adopt the standard OMLE (Liu et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022) for the model class ОҳМӮu0 .
The sample complexity of downstream learning will be determined by the bracketing number of
ОҳМӮu0 , which is nearly the same as that of the ground truth Оҳu0 . Since the similarity constraint will
significantly reduces the complexity of the model parameter space, the bracketing number of ОҳМӮu0
should be much smaller than that of the original parameter space Оҳ. In this way, the downstream can
benefit from the upstream learning with reduced sample complexity. In the following subsections,
we first characterize the performance guarantee for downstream learning in terms of the bracketing
number of ОҳМӮu0 , and then show that the similarity constraint reduces the bracketing number for the
examples given in Section 4.3.

5.1   T HEORETICAL G UARANTEE FOR D OWNSTREAM L EARNING

One main challenge in the downstream learning is that the true model may not lie in ОҳМӮu0 . To handle
this, we employ ReМҒnyi divergence to measure the вҖңdistanceвҖқ from the model class to the true model
as follows, mainly because its unique advantage under the MLE oracle: the ReМҒnyi divergence of order
Оұ with Оұ вүҘ 1 serves as an upper bound on the TV distance and the KL divergence, and thus has more
robust performance.


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Definition 3. Fix Оұ > 1. The approximation error of ОҳМӮu0 under Оұ-ReМҒnyi divergence is defined as
eОұ (ОҳМӮu0 ) = minОё0 вҲҲОҳМӮu maxПҖвҲҲО  DR,Оұ (PПҖОёвҲ— , PПҖОё0 ).
                     0                   0
                                                                                    1           KH
Theorem 2. Fix Оұ > 1. Let Пө0 = eОұ (ОҳМӮu0 ), ОІ0 = c0 (log NО· (ОҳМӮu0 ) + Пө0 KH + ( {Пө 0 Мё=0}
                                                                                 ОұвҲ’1 + 1) log Оҙ )
                               1
for some large c0 , where О· вүӨ KH . Under Assumption 1, with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, the output of
Algorithm 2 satisfies that
                                                      q
                                                                         вҲҡ
                       maxПҖвҲҲО  DTV PПҖОёМ„0 , PПҖОёвҲ— вүӨ OМғ QОіA r|A|HОІ  K
                                                                    0
                                                                      +    Пө 0 .
                                               0



Benefits of downstream transfer learning: Theorem 2 shows that when Пө0 < Пө2 /4, with sample
                       rQ2 |A|HОІ
complexity at most OМғ( AОі 2 Пө2 0 ), OMLE identifies an Пө-optimal policy for the downstream task.
As a comparison, the best known sample complexity for single-task PSR RL without transfer learning
      rQ2 |A|HОІ
is OМғ( AОі 2 Пө2 ), where ОІ = OМғ(log NО· (Оҳ)) (Chen et al., 2022). It is clear that as long as ОІ0 < ОІ,
then downstream learning enjoys transfer benefit in the sample complexity.
Notably, in the realizable case when Пө0 = 0, i.e. Оё0вҲ— вҲҲ ОҳМӮu0 , we must have ОІ0 = OМғ(log NО· (ОҳМӮu0 )) вүӨ ОІ,
since ОҳМӮu0 вҠӮ Оҳ. In the non-realizable case when Пө0 > 0,p          compared to the realizable case, the
                                                       вҲҡ
estimation error of ОёМ„0 has an additive factor of OМғ( Пө0 + 1/(K(Оұ вҲ’ 1))) after hiding system
parameters. We remark that this factor shrinks if the approximation error of ОҳМӮu0 decreases and the
order of ReМҒnyi divergence grows, which coincide with the intuition.

5.2   E XAMPLES IN D OWNSTREAM L EARNING TASKS

We revisit the examples presented in upstream multi-task learning, specifically Examples 1 to 3, and
subsequently extend their application in downstream tasks under the realizable setting. With the prior
knowledge obtained from upstream learning, these examples exhibit reduced О·-bracketing number,
and hence benefit in the sample efficiency. Detailed proofs are in Appx. E.3.
Example 1 (Multi-task POMDP with Common transition kernels). Suppose TМӮ is the output from
UMT-PSR. In this case, the downstream ОҳМӮu0 is constructed by combining TМӮ and all possible emission
distributions. Then ОІ0 = OМғ(H|S||O|). However, for POMDP without prior knowledge, ОІ =
OМғ(H(|S|2 |A| + |S||O|)). Clearly, ОІ0 вүӨ ОІ, indicating the benefit of downstream learning.

For PSRs without prior knowledge, we have ОІ PSR = OМғ(r2 |O||A|H 2 ).
Example 2 (Multi-task PSR with perturbed models). The downstream task P0 is a noisy perturbation
of a base task Pb . Specifically, for each step h вҲҲ [H], any (o, a) вҲҲ O Г— A, we have
                 П•0H = П•bH , M0h (oh , ah ) = Mbh (oh , ah ) + вҲҶ0h (oh , ah ),   вҲҶ0h вҲҲ вҲҶ.
Then, ОІ0 = OМғ(H log |вҲҶ|), which is much lower than ОІ PSR if log |вҲҶ| вүӘ OМғ(r2 |O||A|H).
Example 3 (Multi-task PSR: Linear combination of core tasks). The downstream task P0 lies in the
linear span of L upstream tasks (e.g. the firs L source tasks). Specifically, there exists a coefficient
                            0 вҠӨ
vector Оұ0 = (Оұ10 , В· В· В· , ОұL ) вҲҲ RL s.t. for any h вҲҲ [H] and (oh , ah ) вҲҲ O Г— A,
                              PL                            PL
                      П•0H = l=1 Оұl0 П•lH , M0h (oh , ah ) = l=1 Оұl0 Mlh (oh , ah ).
                                                            PL
For regularization, we assume 0 вүӨ Оұl0 for all l вҲҲ [L], and l=1 Оұl0 = 1. Then ОІ0 = OМғ(LH), which
is much smaller than ОІ PSR if L вүӨ min{N, r2 |O||A|H 2 }.

6     C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we study multi-task learning on general non-markovian low-rank decision making
problems. Given that all tasks share the same observation and action spaces, using the approach of
PSRs, we theoretically characterize that multi-task learning presents benefit over single-task learning
if the joint model class of PSRs has a smaller О·-bracketing number. We also provide specific example
multi-task PSRs with small О·-bracketing numbers. Then, with prior knowledge from the upstream,
we show that downstream learning is more efficient than learning from scratch.


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The work of R. Huang and J. Yang was supported in part by the U.S. National Science Foundation
under the grants CNS-1956276, CNS-2003131 and CNS-2030026. The work of Y. Liang was
supported in part by the U.S. National Science Foundation under the grants ECCS-2113860, DMS-
2134145, and CNS-2112471. The work of Y. Cheng and V. Tan was supported by the Singapore
Ministry of Education Academic Research Fund (AcRF) Tier 2 under grant number A-8000423-00-00
and the Singapore Ministry of Education (AcRF) Tier 1 under grant number A-8000189-01-00.

I MPACT S TATEMENT
This paper presents work whose goal is to advance the field of Machine Learning. There are many
potential societal consequences of our work, none which we feel must be specifically highlighted
here.

R EFERENCES
Alekh Agarwal and Tong Zhang. Model-based rl with optimistic posterior sampling: Structural
  conditions and sample complexity. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  35284вҖ“35297, 2022.
Alekh Agarwal, Yuda Song, Wen Sun, Kaiwen Wang, Mengdi Wang, and Xuezhou Zhang. Provable
  benefits of representational transfer in reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.14571,
  2022.
Sanjeev Arora, Simon S. Du, Sham M. Kakade, Yuping Luo, and Nikunj Saunshi. Provable rep-
  resentation learning for imitation learning via bi-level optimization. In Proceedings of the 37th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2020, 13-18 July 2020, Virtual Event,
  volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 367вҖ“376. PMLR, 2020. URL
  http://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/arora20a.html.
Byron Boots, Sajid M Siddiqi, and Geoffrey J Gordon. Closing the learning-planning loop with
  predictive state representations. The International Journal of Robotics Research, 30(7):954вҖ“966,
  2011.
Emma Brunskill and Lihong Li. Sample complexity of multi-task reinforcement learning. In Ann E.
  Nicholson and Padhraic Smyth (eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth Conference on Uncer-
  tainty in Artificial Intelligence, UAI 2013, Bellevue, WA, USA, August 11-15, 2013. AUAI Press,
  2013. URL https://dslpitt.org/uai/displayArticleDetails.jsp?mmnu=
 1&smnu=2&article_id=2373&proceeding_id=29.
Fan Chen, Yu Bai, and Song Mei. Partially observable rl with b-stability: Unified structural condition
  and sharp sample-efficient algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14990, 2022.
Yuan Cheng, Songtao Feng, Jing Yang, Hong Zhang, and Yingbin Liang. Provable benefit of multitask
  representation learning in reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, November 28 - December 9, 2022, New Orleans, USA, volume 35, 2022.
Carlo DвҖҷEramo, Davide Tateo, Andrea Bonarini, Marcello Restelli, and Jan Peters. Sharing knowl-
  edge in multi-task deep reinforcement learning. In 8th International Conference on Learning
  Representations, ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020. OpenReview.net, 2020.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=rkgpv2VFvr.
Dylan J Foster, Sham M Kakade, Jian Qian, and Alexander Rakhlin. The statistical complexity of
  interactive decision making. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.13487, 2021.
Ahmed Hefny, Carlton Downey, and Geoffrey J Gordon. Supervised learning for dynamical system
  learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 28, 2015.
Jiachen Hu, Xiaoyu Chen, Chi Jin, Lihong Li, and Liwei Wang. Near-optimal representation learning
   for linear bandits and linear RL. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the
   38th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2021, 18-24 July 2021, Virtual Event,


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 4349вҖ“4358. PMLR, 2021. URL
  http://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/hu21a.html.
Ruiquan Huang, Yingbin Liang, and Jing Yang. Provably efficient ucb-type algorithms for learning
  predictive state representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.00405, 2023.
Nan Jiang, Alex Kulesza, and Satinder Singh. Completing state representations using spectral
  learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
Michael Laskin, Aravind Srinivas, and Pieter Abbeel. Curl: Contrastive unsupervised representations
 for reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5639вҖ“5650.
 PMLR, 2020.
Hui Li, Xuejun Liao, and Lawrence Carin. Multi-task reinforcement learning in partially observable
  stochastic environments. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 10(5), 2009.
Michael Littman and Richard S Sutton. Predictive representations of state. Advances in neural
 information processing systems, 14, 2001.
Qinghua Liu, Praneeth Netrapalli, Csaba Szepesvari, and Chi Jin. Optimistic mleвҖ“a generic
  model-based algorithm for partially observable sequential decision making. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2209.14997, 2022.
Rui Lu, Gao Huang, and Simon S Du. On the power of multitask representation learning in linear
  mdp. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.08053, 2021.
Rui Lu, Andrew Zhao, Simon S Du, and Gao Huang. Provable general function class representation
  learning in multitask bandits and mdp. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  11507вҖ“11519, 2022.
Shayegan Omidshafiei, Jason Pazis, Christopher Amato, Jonathan P How, and John Vian. Deep decen-
  tralized multi-task multi-agent reinforcement learning under partial observability. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2681вҖ“2690. PMLR, 2017.
Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predictive
  coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748, 2018.
Aldo Pacchiano, Ofir Nachum, Nilseh Tripuraneni, and Peter Bartlett. Joint representation training in
  sequential tasks with shared structure. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.12441, 2022.
Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, Alexei A Efros, and Trevor Darrell. Curiosity-driven exploration
  by self-supervised prediction. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2778вҖ“2787.
  PMLR, 2017.
Haoran Tang, Rein Houthooft, Davis Foote, Adam Stooke, OpenAI Xi Chen, Yan Duan, John
  Schulman, Filip DeTurck, and Pieter Abbeel. # exploration: A study of count-based exploration
  for deep reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Masatoshi Uehara, Ayush Sekhari, Jason D Lee, Nathan Kallus, and Wen Sun. Provably efficient re-
 inforcement learning in partially observable dynamical systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.12020,
 2022.
Tim Van Erven and Peter Harremos. ReМҒnyi divergence and kullback-leibler divergence. IEEE
  Transactions on Information Theory, 60(7):3797вҖ“3820, 2014.
Roman Vershynin. Introduction to the non-asymptotic analysis of random matrices. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1011.3027, 2010.
Andrea Zanette, Alessandro Lazaric, Mykel Kochenderfer, and Emma Brunskill. Learning near
  optimal policies with low inherent bellman error. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 10978вҖ“10989. PMLR, 2020.
Wenhao Zhan, Masatoshi Uehara, Wen Sun, and Jason D Lee. Pac reinforcement learning for
 predictive state representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05738, 2022.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Chicheng Zhang and Zhi Wang. Provably efficient multi-task reinforcement learning with model
  transfer. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:19771вҖ“19783, 2021.
Zhi Zhang, Zhuoran Yang, Han Liu, Pratap Tokekar, and Furong Huang. Reinforcement learning
  under a multi-agent predictive state representation model: Method and theory. In The Tenth
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR 2022), 2022.
Han Zhong, Wei Xiong, Sirui Zheng, Liwei Wang, Zhaoran Wang, Zhuoran Yang, and Tong Zhang.
  A posterior sampling framework for interactive decision making. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01962,
  2022.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                            Supplementary Materials

A       M ULTI - TASK MLE A NALYSIS
The following lemma shows that the true model lies in the confidence set with high probability.
Proposition 1 (Confidence Set). For all k вҲҲ [K], and for any Оё = (Оё1 , . . . , ОёN ) вҲҲ Оҳ, let О· вүӨ
1/(N KH), ОІ (N ) = c log (NО· (Оҳ)N KH/Оҙ) for some c вүҘ 0. With probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, for any
k вҲҲ [K], we have
                                 n,t                                n,t
                              ОҪПҖ                                 ОҪПҖ
            XXX                      n,t,h
                                              XXX                        n,t,h
                         log PОёhвҲ— (П„H      )вүҘ               log PОёnh (П„H       ) вҲ’ ОІ (N ) .     (4)
                                                 n
              nвүӨN tвүӨk hвүӨH                                               nвүӨN tвүӨk hвүӨH


Proof. Consider a set of О·-brackets, denoted by ОҳО· , that covers Оҳ. For any Оё, we can find two
measures in ОҳО· parameterized by Оё and Оё such that
                                        вҲҖn, П„H , ПҖ, PПҖОё (П„H ) вүҘ PПҖОёn (П„H ) вүҘ PОёn (П„H ),                                                       (5)
                                                       n

                                              вҲҖn, DTV PОёПҖ (П„H ), PПҖОёn (П„H ) вүӨ О·.
                                                                        n


                                                                                 ПҖ                          ПҖ
                                                                        P                           P
Note that the above two inequalities imply that                              П„H PОё n (П„H ) вүӨ О· +        П„H PОё n (П„H ) вүӨ 1 + О·.

Then, we have
                                                              n,t
           пЈ®             пЈ«                                                       пЈ¶пЈ№
                              k X                       ОҪПҖ            n,t,h
                             XX                        PОёh          (П„H     ) пЈ·пЈә
                                                         n
             E пЈ°exp пЈӯ                            log
               пЈҜ    пЈ¬
                                                              n,t
                                                        ОҪПҖ
                                                                                 пЈёпЈ»
                                                                      n,t,h
                                n     t=1   h          PОёhвҲ—         (П„H     )
                                                         n

                                              ПҖ n,t                              ПҖ n,k
                        пЈ®  пЈ«                                    пЈ¶ пЈ®                               пЈ№пЈ№
                                kвҲ’1         ОҪh          n,t,h                  ОҪh         n,k,h
                             X  X   X      P        (П„ H      )      Y Y    P          (П„ H     )
                  = E пЈ°exp пЈӯ          log ОёnПҖn,t                               Оёn
                      пЈҜ    пЈ¬                                    пЈ· пЈҜ                               пЈәпЈә
                                            ОҪh
                                                                пЈёEпЈ°              ПҖ n,k
                                                                                                  пЈ»пЈ»
                                                        n,t,h                  ОҪh         n,k,h
                              n t=1 h      PОёвҲ— (П„H )                 n h P вҲ—
                                                                               Оё       (П„ H     )
                                              n                                 n

                                              ПҖ n,t
                      пЈ®    пЈ«                                    пЈ¶                                  пЈ№
                                kвҲ’1         ОҪ           n,t,h
                           пЈ¬X X X          P  h
                                                    (П„H ) пЈ· Y Y X ОҪ ПҖ                 n,k

                  = E пЈ°exp пЈӯ          log ОёnПҖn,t                               PОёh (П„H      n,k,h пЈә
                                                                                                  )пЈ»
                      пЈҜ
                                            ОҪh
                                                                пЈё
                                                        n,t,h                       n
                              n t=1 h      PОёвҲ— (П„H )               n h П„ n,k,h
                                                                        H
                                              n

                                                 ПҖ n,t
                      пЈ®    пЈ«              пЈ®                       пЈ№пЈ¶                             пЈ№
                                kвҲ’1            ОҪh         n,t,h
                             X  X   X        P         (П„H      )    Y Y
                                                                                          1

                  вүӨ E пЈ°exp пЈӯ          log пЈ° ОёnПҖn,t                            1+
                      пЈҜ    пЈ¬              пЈҜ                       пЈәпЈ·                             пЈә
                                                                                      N  KH
                                               ОҪh
                                                                  пЈ»пЈё                             пЈ»
                                                          n,t,h
                              n t=1 h        PОёвҲ— (П„H )               n h
                                                n
                                 N KH
                            1
                  вүӨ 1+                вүӨ e.
                         N KH

Therefore, by Chernoff type bound, we have
                                                                                 пЈ®    пЈ«                             n,t
                                                                                                                                      пЈ¶пЈ№
                                                                                                               ОҪПҖ           n,t,h
                                                                                          P                   P h         (П„H     )
                                                                                                               Оёn
    пЈ«
                         ОҪПҖ
                               n,t
                                       n,t,h
                                                                    пЈ¶        E пЈ°exp пЈӯ         tвүӨk,hвүӨH   log    ОҪПҖ
                                                                                                                    n,t
                                                                                                                                      пЈёпЈ»
                                                                                                nвүӨN                         n,t,h
 пЈ¬ X                    PОёh          (П„H     )                                                                  h
                                                                                                              PОёвҲ—
                                                                                                                n
                                                                                                                          (П„H     )
                  log     n
                                                 вүҘ log(1/Оҙ)пЈё вүӨ                                                                             вүӨ eОҙ.
                                                           пЈ·
PпЈӯ                             n,t
        tвүӨk,hвүӨH
                         ОҪПҖ
                        PОёhвҲ—           n,t,h
                                     (П„H     )                                                     1/Оҙ
          nвүӨN             n


Taking a union bound over all (Оё, k) вҲҲ ОҳМ„Пө Г— [K] and rescaling Оҙ, we have for any Оё вҲҲ Оҳ,
                                                 ПҖ n,t
          пЈ«                                                                       пЈ¶
                                                ОҪh       n,t,h
                                     X        P        (П„H )
        P пЈӯвҲҖОё вҲҲ ОҳО· , k вҲҲ [K],              log ОёnПҖn,t          вүҘ log(eKNО· (Оҳ)/Оҙ)пЈё вүӨ Оҙ.
          пЈ¬                                                                       пЈ·
                                                ОҪh       n,t,h
                                   tвүӨk,hвүӨH
                                     nвүӨN
                                              PОёвҲ— (П„H )
                                                                            n


The proof is finished by noting that Оё is an optimistic measure (see Equation (5)).


                                                                            13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The following lemma establishes the relationship between the Hellinger-squared distance and the
difference of log likelihood functions between true parameters and any possible parameters from the
model class.
Proposition 2. Let О· вүӨ 1/(N 2 K 2 H 2 ), ОІ (N ) = c log (NО· (Оҳ)N KH/Оҙ) for some c вүҘ 0. Then, with
probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, we have, for any Оё = (Оё1 , . . . , ОёN ) вҲҲ Оҳ, the following inequality holds.
                                                                                                        n,t
                                                                                                   ОҪПҖ           n,t,h
                                                                                               PОёhвҲ—           (П„H     )

                                        ПҖ n,t          ПҖ n,t
                                       ОҪh             ОҪh
                     X                                                          X
                            D2H P      Оёn       ,P     вҲ—
                                                      Оёn                вүӨ                log     n
                                                                                                 ПҖ n,t
                                                                                                                          + ОІ (N ) .
                                                                                                ОҪh              n,t,h
                tвүӨk,hвүӨH
                  nвүӨN
                                                                            tвүӨk,hвүӨH
                                                                              nвүӨN
                                                                                               PОёn            (П„H     )


Proof. By the definition of О·-bracket, for any multi-task parameter Оё, we can find Оё within a finite
set of О·-brackets such that П„H PПҖОёn (П„H ) вҲ’ PПҖОёМ„n (П„H ) вүӨ О·. Then, for any n and ПҖ, we have
                           P



            D2H (PПҖОёn , PПҖОёnвҲ— )
                          Xq
                 =1вҲ’            PПҖОёn (П„H )PПҖОёвҲ— (П„H )
                                                           n
                           П„H
                                r
                           X
               =1вҲ’                    PПҖОё (П„H )PПҖОёвҲ— (П„H ) + PПҖОёn (П„H ) вҲ’ PОёПҖ (П„H ) PПҖОёвҲ— (П„H )
                                        n                                                               n                 n
                           П„H
                                                                                     r
               (i)         Xq                                                   X
                вүӨ 1вҲ’                  PПҖОё (П„H )PПҖОёвҲ— (П„H ) +                              PПҖОёn (П„H ) вҲ’ PОёПҖ (П„H ) PПҖОёвҲ— (П„H )
                                         n        n                                                               n             n
                           П„H                                                   П„H
                                    v
                                    u ПҖ
               (ii)                 u PОё (П„H ) sX
                вүӨ вҲ’ log     E       t n
                                        ПҖ (П„ ) +      PПҖОёn (П„H ) вҲ’ PОёПҖ (П„H )
                        П„H вҲјPПҖвҲ— (В·)   P  вҲ—
                                        Оёn  H                         n
                             Оёn                    П„H
                                     v
                                     u ПҖ
               (iii)                 u PОё (П„H ) вҲҡ
                вүӨ вҲ’ log      EПҖ t ПҖn             + О·,                                                                                   (6)
                         П„H вҲјPОёвҲ— (В·)   PОёвҲ— (П„H )
                                            n                  n

                                    вҲҡ        p     p
where (i) follows from the fact that a + b вүӨ |a| + |b|, (ii) follows from the fact that 1 вҲ’ x вүӨ
log x for x вүҘ 0 (the first term) and the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality (the second term), and (iii)
follows from the definition of О·-bracket.
Then, for any fixed ОёМ„n , we have
                                        ПҖ n,t
        пЈ®     пЈ«                                                                  v              пЈ¶пЈ№
                                      ОҪh         n,t,h                           u ПҖ
              пЈ¬1   X      X   X      P        (П„ H     )   X X                   u P     (П„ H )
      E пЈ°exp пЈӯ                    log ОёnПҖn,t             вҲ’      log      EПҖ t ПҖn
                                                                                    Оё
        пЈҜ                                                                                       пЈ·пЈә
                 2                                                                       (П„   )
                                      ОҪh
                                                                                                пЈёпЈ»
                                                 n,t,h              П„   вҲјP   (В·)   P   вҲ—    H
                     nвүӨN tвүӨk hвүӨH     P        (П„       )
                                                       вҲ—
                                                      Оёh   n  k       H
                                                                        H
                                                                          ОёвҲ—         Оё    ПҖвҲҲО n                        n             n

             пЈ®                                       v n,t        пЈ№
                                                     u ОҪhПҖ
              Q            Q          Q              u PОё   (П„H )
            EпЈ°                                       t nn,t       пЈ»
                     nвүӨN        tвүӨk         hвүӨH                ОҪПҖ
                                                              h
                                                           PОё вҲ—         (П„H )
        =    пЈ®                                       v n n,t       пЈ№
                                                     u ОҪhПҖ
              Q            Q          Q              u PОё    (П„H )
            EпЈ°                                       t nn,t        пЈ»
                     nвүӨN        tвүӨk         hвүӨH                ОҪПҖ
                                                              h
                                                           PОё вҲ—         (П„H )
                                                               n

        = 1.                                                                                                                            (7)

Hence, by taking union bound over the finite set of О·-brackets and k вҲҲ [K], with probability at least
1 вҲ’ Оҙ, we have for any k вҲҲ [K]
                                      n,t            n,t
                                 ОҪПҖ             ОҪПҖ
         XXX
                         D2H (PОёnh          , PОёhвҲ—         )
                                                n
        nвүӨN tвүӨk hвүӨH


                                                                            14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                            v
                                                            u ОҪ ПҖn,t
                                                            u P h (П„H )
                        (i) X X X                           u Оё               вҲҡ
                        вүӨ               вҲ’ log      E n,t t ОҪnПҖn,t       + N KH О·
                                                   ОҪПҖ
                            nвүӨN tвүӨk hвүӨH             h
                                              П„H вҲјP вҲ—   (В·)   PОёвҲ— (П„H )
                                                                h
                                                         Оёn                      n

                                                                             ПҖ n,t
                                                                            ОҪh         n,t,h
                        (ii)           вҲҡ
                                    1 XXX     P                              вҲ—
                                                                            Оёn       (П„H     )           KNО· (Оҳ)
                         вүӨ N KH О· +       log                                ПҖ n,t
                                                                                                 + log
                                    2                                       ОҪh         n,t,h
                                                                                     (П„H     )             Оҙ
                                              PnвүӨN tвүӨk hвүӨH
                                                                            Оёn
                                                                   n,t
                                                             ОҪПҖ            n,t,h
                        (iii)       1 XXX                   PОёhвҲ—         (П„H
                                                                    KNО· (Оҳ)      )
                         вүӨ 1+             log ПҖn,t            n
                                                              + log         .
                                    2          ОҪh
                                                   (П„ n,t,h
                                                            )         Оҙ
                                       nвүӨN tвүӨk hвүӨH
                                             P                             H
                                                              Оёn

where (i) follows from Equation (6), (ii) follows from Equation (7), the ChernoffвҖҷs method and the
union bound, and (iii) follows from that О· вүӨ 1/(N 2 K 2 H 2 ).
The proof is finished by noting that Оёn is an optimistic measure.



B    P ROPERTIES OF PSR S

First, for any model Оё = {П•h , Mh (oh , ah )}, we have the following identity
                                 Mh (oh , ah )ПҲМ„(П„hвҲ’1 ) = PОё (oh |П„hвҲ’1 )ПҲМ„(П„h ).                                   (8)

The following proposition is adapted from Lemma C.3 in Liu et al. (2022) and Proposition 1 in Huang
et al. (2023).
Proposition 3 (TV-distance вүӨ Estimation error). For any task n вҲҲ [N ], policy ПҖ, and any two
parameters Оё, ОёвҖІ вҲҲ Оҳ, we have
                              H X
                              X
        DTV (PПҖОёвҖІ , PПҖОё ) вүӨ            mвҖІ (Пүh )вҠӨ (MвҖІh (oh , ah ) вҲ’ Mh (oh , ah )) ПҲ(П„hвҲ’1 ) ПҖ(П„H ).
                              h=1 П„H


C    P ROOFS FOR U PSTREAM LEARNING : P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

In this section, we first prove two lemmas, and then provide the proof for Theorem 1.
First, by the algorithm design and the construction of the confidence set, we have the following
estimation guarantee.
Lemma 1 (Estimation Guarantee in Upstream Learning). Let О· вүӨ 1/(N 2 K 2 H 2 ), ОІ (N ) =
c log (NО· (Оҳ)N KH/Оҙ) for some c вүҘ 0. With probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, for any k and any
ОёМӮ = (ОёМӮ1 . . . , ОёМӮn ) вҲҲ Bk , we have
                                 X X X   ОҪ ПҖn,t ОҪ ПҖn,t
                                       D2H PОёМӮh , PОёhвҲ—   вүӨ 2ОІ (N ) .
                                                        n            n
                                nвүӨN tвүӨkвҲ’1 hвүӨH


Proof. The proof follows directly by combining Proposition 1 and Proposition 2, and the optimality
of the confidence set Bk .

Then, we show that estimation error can be upper bounded by the norm of prediction features.
By Lemma G.3 in Liu et al. (2022), for any task n, and step h, we can find a projection Anh вҲҲ RdhвҲ’1 Г—r
such that

                   (i) : ПҲ n,вҲ— (П„hвҲ’1 ) = Anh (Anh )вҖ  ПҲ n,вҲ— (П„hвҲ’1 ),            (ii) : вҲҘAnh вҲҘ1 вүӨ 1.                 (9)


                                                       15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma 2. Let Anh вҲҲ RdhвҲ’1 Г—r be the projector satisfying Equation (9). Fix k вҲҲ [K]. For any
ОёМӮ k = (ОёМӮ1k . . . , ОёМӮnk ) вҲҲ Bk and any multi-task policy ПҖ = (ПҖ1 , . . . , ПҖn ), we have
                                        sX X                    h                                 i
               X
                               ПҖn  ПҖn                                                      2
                       DTV PОёМӮk , PОёвҲ— вүӨ                    E ПҖ     (Anh )вҖ  ПҲМ„ n,вҲ— (П„hвҲ’1 ) (U n )вҲ’1 ,
                                                 n
                                       n                                        П„hвҲ’1 вҲјPОёвҲ—n                                   k,h
                    nвүӨN                                           nвүӨN hвүӨH                  n


where
                                                          X
                       n
                           = О»I + (Anh )вҖ                                          ПҲМ„ (П„hвҲ’1 )ПҲМ„ n,вҲ— (П„hвҲ’1 )вҠӨ ((Anh )вҖ  )вҠӨ .
                                                                                   n,вҲ—
                      Uk,h                                              E
                                                                     ПҖ n,t
                                                          t<k П„hвҲ’1 вҲјPОёn
                                                                      вҲ—


Proof. By Proposition 3, we have
                     XH X
 DTV PПҖОёМӮkn , PПҖОёвҲ—n вүӨ     mМӮn,k (Пүh )вҠӨ MМӮn,k             n,вҲ—
                                         h (oh , ah ) вҲ’ Mh (oh , ah ) ПҲ
                                                                        n,вҲ—
                                                                            (П„hвҲ’1 ) ПҖn (П„H ).
                n         n
                                      h=1 П„H


                                                   П„hвҲ’1 by i, ПүhвҲ’1 by j. Denote (Anh )вҖ  ПҲМ„ n,вҲ— (П„hвҲ’1 )
                      we fix a task index n. Index
For ease of presentation,
by xni , mМӮn,k (Пүh )вҠӨ MМӮn,k             n,вҲ—           n                       n вҠӨ
                        h (oh , ah ) вҲ’ Mh (oh , ah ) Ah ПҖn (ПүhвҲ’1 |П„hвҲ’1 ) by (wj|i ) .

Then, we have
 X
      mМӮn,k (Пүh )вҠӨ MМӮn,k
                     h (oh , ah ) вҲ’ M
                                     n,вҲ—
                                         (oh , ah ) ПҲ n,вҲ— (П„hвҲ’1 ) ПҖn (П„H )
  П„H
     (i) X

       =             mМӮn,k (Пүh )вҠӨ MМӮn,k
                                    h   (o h , ah ) вҲ’ Mn,вҲ—
                                                           (o h , ah )  ПҲМ„ n,вҲ— (П„hвҲ’1 )ПҖn (ПүhвҲ’1 |П„hвҲ’1 ) PПҖОёвҲ—n (П„hвҲ’1 )
                                                                                                                                       n
            П„H
            X                     X
                                         n вҠӨ n
     =              PПҖОёвҲ—n (i)          (wj|i ) xi
                         n
            i                     j
                             пЈ®          пЈ«                                          пЈ¶пЈ№
                                            X
     = EiвҲјPПҖОёвҲ—n пЈ°(xni )вҠӨ пЈӯ                            n
                                                     wj|i       n вҠӨ n пЈёпЈ»
                                                          sgn((wj|i ) xi )
                      n
                                             j
                              пЈ®                                                                            пЈ№
     (ii)                                                     X
                                                                              n вҠӨ n
       вүӨ EiвҲјPПҖОёвҲ—n пЈ°вҲҘxni вҲҘ(U n                                       n
                                                                   wj|i sgn((wj|i ) xi )                   пЈ»,
                  пЈҜ                                                                                        пЈә
                                                     вҲ’1
                         n                 k,hвҲ’1 )
                                                              j                                    n
                                                                                                  Uk,hвҲ’1

where (i) follows from the property of the projection Anh and definition of the prediction feature
ПҲМ„ n,вҲ— , and (ii) is due to the CauchyвҖҷs inequality.
                                                                    вҠӨ n
                                             P n              n
Fix an index i = i0 . We aim to analyze         j wj|i0 sgn((wj|i0 ) xi0 ) U n . We have
                                                                                                                 k,hвҲ’1

                                                          2
       X
             n
            wj|i0
                        n
                  sgn((wj|i0
                             )вҠӨ xni0 )
        j                                                  n
                                                          Uk,hвҲ’1
                                                                    2                          пЈ«                                 пЈ¶2
                     X                                                      X                   X
        =О»                          n
                              sgn((wj|i 0
                                          )вҠӨ xni0 )wj|i
                                                    n
                                                        0
                                                                        +             E n,t    пЈӯ        n
                                                                                                  sgn((wj|i )вҠӨ xni )(wj|i
                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                      n
                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                          )вҠӨ xni пЈё .
                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                       ПҖ
                      j                                                     t<k iвҲјPОҪвҲ—
                                                                                    h             j
                                                                    2                 Оёn
            |                           {z                          }       |                               {z                             }
                                        I1
                                                                                                            I2

For the first term I1 , we have
 p              вҲҡ                            X
     I1 =            О»           max
                                 r
                                                            n
                                                      sgn((wj|i 0
                                                                  )вҠӨ xni0 )(wj|i
                                                                             n
                                                                                 0
                                                                                   )вҠӨ x
                         xвҲҲR :вҲҘxвҲҘ2 =1
                                                 j
                вҲҡ                            X
            вүӨ        О»           max
                                 r
                                                      ПҖn (ПүhвҲ’1 |i0 ) mМӮn,k (Пүh )вҠӨ MМӮn,k             n,вҲ—           n
                                                                                    h (oh , ah ) вҲ’ Mh (oh , ah ) Ah x
                         xвҲҲR :вҲҘxвҲҘ2 =1
                                             ПүhвҲ’1


                                                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                вҲҡ                               X
          вүӨ         О»         max
                              r
                                                       ПҖn (ПүhвҲ’1 |i0 ) mМӮn,k (ПүhвҲ’1 )вҠӨ Anh x
                        xвҲҲR :вҲҘxвҲҘ2 =1
                                                ПүhвҲ’1
                    вҲҡ                                X
                +       О»        max
                                 r
                                                            ПҖn (ПүhвҲ’1 |i0 ) mМӮn,k (Пүh )вҠӨ Mn,вҲ—          n
                                                                                         h (oh , ah )Ah x
                            xвҲҲR :вҲҘxвҲҘ2 =1
                                                    ПүhвҲ’1
                вҲҡ                         вҲҡ
          (i)   О»                           О»               X
                                  n
           вүӨ         max       вҲҘA h xвҲҘ1 +       max             ПҖn (ah |oh , i0 ) вҲҘMn,вҲ— (oh , ah )Anh xвҲҘ1
               Оі xвҲҲRr :вҲҘxвҲҘ2 =1             Оі xвҲҲRr :вҲҘxвҲҘ2 =1 o ,a
                                                            h h
                вҲҡ
          (ii) 2 О»rQ
                     A
           вүӨ            ,
                  Оі2

where (i) follows from Assumption 1, and (ii) follows from the property of Anh stated before
Lemma 2.
For the second term I2 , we have
                    пЈ«                                                                                 пЈ¶2
      X                 X
I2 вүӨ          E     пЈӯ       ПҖn (ПүhвҲ’1 |i0 ) mМӮn,k (Пүh )вҠӨ MМӮn,k             n,вҲ—
                                                          h (oh , ah ) вҲ’ Mh (oh , ah ) ПҲМ„
                                                                                          n,вҲ—
                                                                                              (П„hвҲ’1 ) пЈё
                            ПҖ n,t
         t<k П„hвҲ’1 вҲјPОёn
                     вҲ—                    ПүhвҲ’1
                                     пЈ«
                                                                                                                ВҜ
       X                                  X
   вүӨ                    E            пЈӯ           ПҖn (ПүhвҲ’1 |i0 ) mМӮn,k (Пүh )вҠӨ MМӮn,k (oh , ah ) ПҲМ„ n,вҲ— (П„hвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ ПҲМӮ n,k (П„hвҲ’1 )
                            ПҖ n,t
         t<k П„hвҲ’1 вҲјPОёn
                     вҲ—                    ПүhвҲ’1
                                                                                                                                                пЈ¶2
                                                                                                 ВҜ
                        X
                +             ПҖn (ПүhвҲ’1 |i0 ) mМӮn,k (Пүh )вҠӨ                       MМӮn,k (oh , ah )ПҲМӮ n,k (П„hвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ Mn,вҲ— (oh , ah )ПҲМ„ n,вҲ— (П„hвҲ’1 ) пЈё
                     ПүhвҲ’1

   (a)

         1 X                                                            ВҜ
   вүӨ              E n,t                               ПҲМ„ n,вҲ— (П„hвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ ПҲМӮ n,k (П„hвҲ’1 )
         Оі2  П„hвҲ’1 вҲјPПҖвҲ—                                                                              1
                t<k                  Оёn

                                                                                                                              !2 пЈ№
                        X                                           ВҜ
                +                ПҖn (ah |oh , i0 ) PОёМӮk (oh |П„hвҲ’1 )ПҲМӮ n,k (П„h ) вҲ’ PОёnвҲ— (oh |П„hвҲ’1 )ПҲМ„ n,вҲ— (П„h )                  пЈ»
                                                                   n                                                      1
                        oh ,ah

     2 X                                                                            2
                                                     n,вҲ—              ВҜ
   вүӨ 2          E n,t                           ПҲМ„         (П„hвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ ПҲМӮ n,k (П„hвҲ’1 )
    Оі             ПҖ                                                                         1
       t<k П„hвҲ’1 вҲјPОёn
                   вҲ—
           |                                                 {z                                 }
                                                             I21
                                                пЈ®                                                                                                  !2 пЈ№
            2 X                                        X                                          ВҜ
       +                          E             пЈ°              ПҖn (ah |oh , i0 ) PОёМӮk (oh |П„hвҲ’1 )ПҲМӮ n,k (П„h ) вҲ’ PОёnвҲ— (oh |П„hвҲ’1 )ПҲМ„ n,вҲ— (П„h )         пЈ»,
           Оі2                  ПҖ n,t                                                    n                                                      1
                    t<k П„hвҲ’1 вҲјPОёn
                                вҲ—                     oh ,ah
                          |                                                                             {z                                            }
                                                                                                        I22

where (a) is due to Equation (8) and Assumption 1.
Recall that the в„“-th coordinate of a prediction feature ПҲМ„(П„hвҲ’1 ) is the conditional probability of core
test oв„“hвҲ’1 . Hence, for the term I21 , we have
                         пЈ®пЈ«                                                            пЈ¶2 пЈ№
                             dn
                              hвҲ’1
                              X
      I21 =                       PОёМӮk (on,в„“          n,в„“           n,в„“          n,в„“
                                         hвҲ’1 |П„hвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ PОёn (ohвҲ’1 |П„hвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 )
                         пЈҜ                                      вҲ—                      пЈё пЈә
                 E n,t пЈ°пЈӯ             n
                                                                                          пЈ»
                    П„hвҲ’1 вҲјPПҖ
                           ОёвҲ—                   в„“=1
                                 n
                                                пЈ®пЈ«                                                         пЈ¶2 пЈ№
                                                           X
            вүӨ Q2A                                            PОёМӮk (ohвҲ’1 |П„hвҲ’1 , a) вҲ’ PОёnвҲ— (ohвҲ’1 |П„hвҲ’1 , a) пЈё пЈ»
                                                пЈҜпЈӯ                                                            пЈә
                                    E     n,t
                                                пЈ° EaвҲјu n,A     Q                   n
                            П„hвҲ’1 вҲјPПҖ
                                   ОёвҲ—
                                                                   hвҲ’1
                                                                         ohвҲ’1
                                          n
                                                      u n,A                   u n,A
                                                        Q                      Q
            = Q2A                   E           D2TV PОёМӮk hвҲ’1 (ПүhвҲ’1 |П„hвҲ’1 ), PОёвҲ— hвҲ’1 (ПүhвҲ’1 |П„hвҲ’1 )
                                          n,t                 n                                 n
                            П„hвҲ’1 вҲјPПҖ
                                   ОёвҲ—     n


                                                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           (a)
                                                                                        u n,A                   u n,A
                                                                                          Q                      Q
              вүӨ Q2A |A|                       E                        E        D2H    PОёМӮk hвҲ’1
                                                                                                (ПүhвҲ’1 |П„hвҲ’1 ), PОёвҲ— hвҲ’1
                                                                                                                       (ПүhвҲ’1 |П„hвҲ’1 )
                                                           n,t ahвҲ’1 вҲјuA                        n                            n
                              П„hвҲ’2 ,ohвҲ’1 вҲјPПҖ
                                           ОёвҲ—              n

           (b)
                         ПҖn,t           ПҖ n,t

                         ОҪ             ОҪhвҲ’1
           вүӨ Q2A |A|D2H PОёМӮhвҲ’1
                           k
                               (П„H ), PОёвҲ—     (П„H )  ,
                                              n                        n


where (a) and (b) follow from Lemma 7.
In addition, we can bound I22 as follows.

                                                                                                                                                     !2
                                            X                                                                    ВҜ
     I22 вүӨ 2              E                            ПҖn (ah |oh , П„hвҲ’1 ) PОёМӮk (oh |П„hвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ PОёnвҲ— (oh |П„hвҲ’1 ) вҲҘПҲМӮ n,k (П„h )вҲҘ1
                              n,t                                                          n
                 П„hвҲ’1 вҲјPПҖ
                        ОёвҲ—                  oh ,ah
                              n
                                                                                                                                              !2
                                                  X                                             ВҜ
               +2             E                            ПҖn (ah |oh , П„hвҲ’1 )PОёnвҲ— (oh |П„hвҲ’1 ) ПҲМӮ n,k (П„h ) вҲ’ ПҲМ„ n,вҲ— (П„h )
                     П„hвҲ’1 вҲјPПҖ
                                      n,t                                                                                                 1
                            ОёвҲ—    n
                                              oh ,ah

         (i)
         вүӨ 2Q2A                   E           D2TV PОёМӮk (oh |П„hвҲ’1 ), PОёвҲ— (oh |П„hвҲ’1 )
                                        n,t                       n
                      П„hвҲ’1 вҲјPПҖ
                             ОёвҲ—        n
                                                                                              u                 u n,A

                                                                                                  n,A
                                                                                                Q                Q
               + 2Q2A                 E                           E             E       D2TV PОёМӮk h (Пүh |П„h ), PОёвҲ— h (Пүh |П„h )
                                                                                                                            n
                                                            hвҲ’1 ) ah вҲјПҖn
                                            n,t o вҲјP вҲ— (В·|П„                                               n
                          П„hвҲ’1 вҲјPПҖ
                                 Оё
                                                 h  Оёn

         (ii)
         вүӨ 2Q2A |A|                           E                        E        D2H PОёМӮk (oh |П„hвҲ’1 ), PОёвҲ— (oh |П„hвҲ’1 )
                                                           n,t ahвҲ’1 вҲјuA                    n
                              П„hвҲ’2 ,ohвҲ’1 вҲјPПҖ
                                           ОёвҲ—              n
                                                                                                           u               u n,A

                                                                                                               n,A
                                                                                                             Q              Q
               + 2Q2A |A|                   E                         E                E           D2H    PОёМӮk (Пүh |П„h ), PОёвҲ—
                                                                                                               h              h
                                                                                                                                 (Пүh |П„h )
                                                                                                                                n
                                  П„hвҲ’1 вҲјPПҖ
                                                      n,t o        вҲ— (В·|П„hвҲ’1 ) ah вҲјuA
                                                              h вҲјPОёn                                           n
                                         Оё

         (iii)
                        ПҖn,t              ПҖ n,t
                                                               n,t
                          ОҪ             ОҪhвҲ’1                      ПҖ            ПҖ n,t
                                                               ОҪh            ОҪh
          вүӨ 2Q2A |A| D2H PОёМӮhвҲ’1
                            k
                                (П„H ), PОё вҲ—     (П„H )  + D 2
                                                           H  PОёМӮ k
                                                                    (П„ H ), PОё вҲ—     (П„H )    ,
                                                      n                     n                                       n           n


where (i) follows from that the coordinate of ПҲМ„ takes the value on the conditional probability over
core test, (ii) and (iii) follow from Lemma 7.
Substituting the upper bounds of I21 and I22 into I2 , we obtain that
            6Q2A |A| X 2
                             ПҖn,t               ПҖ n,t
                                                                     n,t
                                ОҪhвҲ’1           ОҪhвҲ’1                    ПҖ          ПҖ n,t
                                                                 2   ОҪh          ОҪh
     I2 вүӨ                 D H  P      (П„H ), P  вҲ—
                                               Оёn     (П„H )   + DH  P    (П„H ), P вҲ—
                                                                                 Оёn     (П„H )   .
               Оі2                 k
                                ОёМӮn                                    k
                                                                     ОёМӮn
                                  t<k
            n,t             n,t

            ОҪПҖ           ОҪПҖ
Denote D2H PОёМӮhk (П„H ), PОёhвҲ— (П„H ) by О¶t,h
                                       n
                                           . Therefore,
                      n                           n

                                                       пЈ®                                                        пЈ№
                              X                         s     X          X
DTV PОёМӮПҖkn , PПҖОёвҲ—n вүӨ                      EП„hвҲ’1 вҲјPПҖОёвҲ—n пЈ° CО» +    n
                                                                О¶t,hвҲ’1 +    n
                                                                           О¶t,h (Anh )вҖ  ПҲМ„ n,вҲ— (П„hвҲ’1 ) (U n )вҲ’1 пЈ» .
          n                                                   n                                                                                k,h
                                  h                                              t<k                          t<k


Summing over n, we have
X
  DTV PОёМӮПҖkn , PПҖОёвҲ—n
                 n
 n
       XXs     X          X                 h                             i
                  n          n E                 n вҖ  n,вҲ—
     вүӨ    CО» +   О¶t,hвҲ’1 +   О¶t,h П„hвҲ’1 вҲјPПҖ
                                        ОёвҲ—
                                          n   (A h ) ПҲМ„  (П„hвҲ’1 ) (U n )вҲ’1
                                                                                                    n                               k,h
          n      h                        t<k                         t<k
         s                                s                                                 i 2
                      XXX                  XX              h
     вүӨ        N HCО» +      n        n
                         (О¶t,hвҲ’1 + О¶t,h )      EП„hвҲ’1 вҲјPПҖОёвҲ—n (Anh )вҖ  ПҲМ„ n,вҲ— (П„hвҲ’1 ) (U n )вҲ’1
                                                                                                                        n                             k,h
                                  n         h t<k                                          n         h
                 p         s
     (i) Q
          A       |A|ОІ (N ) X X               h                                i 2
     вүӨ                            EП„hвҲ’1 вҲјPПҖОёвҲ—n (Anh )вҖ  ПҲМ„ n,вҲ— (П„hвҲ’1 ) (U n )вҲ’1     ,
                   Оі         n
                                            n                           k,h
                                                       h


                                                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where (i) is due to the estimation guarantee Lemma 1.



Theorem 3 (Restatement of Theorem 1). For any fixed Оҙ вүҘ 0, let Оҳ be the multi-task parameter
space, ОІ (N ) = c1 (log KHN
                          Оҙ
                                                                    1
                              + log NО· (Оҳ)), where c1 вүҘ 0 and О· вүӨ KHN    . Then, under Assumption 1,
with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, UMT-PSR finds a multi-task model Оё = (ОёМ„1 , . . . , ОёМ„N ) such that
                        N
                                                           r                 !
                                      n        n
                                                       Q     rH|A|N   ОІ (N )
                                                         A
                       X
                           max DTV PОёМ„ПҖn , PПҖОёnвҲ— вүӨ OМғ                           .                    (10)
                       n=1
                            ПҖn                          Оі         K

                          c r|A|Q2 HОІ (N )
In addition, if K = 2 N ОіA2 Пө2             for some c2 , UMT-PSR produces a multi-task policy ПҖ =
   1            N
(ПҖМ„ , . . . , ПҖМ„ ) such that the average sub-optimality gap is at most Пө, i.e.
                                                 N
                                         1 X                        n

                                               max VОёПҖnвҲ— ,Rn вҲ’ VОёПҖМ„вҲ— ,Rn вүӨ Пө.                           (11)
                                         N n=1 ПҖ


Proof. Note that ОёМ„ вҲҲ Bk for all k вҲҲ [K + 1]. Therefore, by Lemma 2, we have
       X
     K    DTV PПҖОёМ„ n , PПҖОёвҲ—n
                      n       n
         n
             (i) X        X                           n,k        n,k

             вүӨ                     max           DTV PПҖОёМӮk , PПҖОёМғk
                                k ,ОёМғ k вҲҲB
                              ОёМӮn                           n         n
                                     n     k
                 kвүӨK nвүӨN
                  XX                     n,k       n,k

             вүӨ2                 max DTV PПҖОёМӮk , PПҖОёn вҲ—
                              k                        n
                  k       n ОёМӮn вҲҲBk
                           p
                 X 8QA |A|ОІ (N ) s X X                   h
                                                                                2
                                                                                          i
             вүӨ                                 EП„ вҲјPПҖn,k (Anh )вҖ  ПҲМ„ n,вҲ— (П„hвҲ’1 ) (U n )вҲ’1
                            Оі                    h  ОёnвҲ—                           k,h
                 kвүӨK                  nвүӨN hвүӨH
                       p           s
             (ii) 8Q
                     A   K|A|ОІ (N ) X X X                  h
                                                                                    2
                                                                                            i
              вүӨ                                   EП„ вҲјPПҖn,k (Anh )вҖ  ПҲМ„ n,вҲ— (П„hвҲ’1 ) (U n )вҲ’1
                          Оі                         h    вҲ—
                                                        Оёn                            k,h
                                     kвүӨK nвүӨN hвүӨH
                       p
             (iii) 8Q     K|A|ОІ p
                     A
              вүӨ                    rN H log(1 + rK/О»),
                         Оі

where (i) follows from the fact that ОёМ„n вҲҲ Bk for all k вҲҲ [K], (ii) is due to the CauchyвҖҷs inequality,
and (iii) follows from Lemma 9.
Hence,
                                                                     p                            !
                 X                                              QA    r|A|N HОІ (N ) log(1 + rK/О»)
                      DTV       PПҖОёМ„ n , PПҖОёвҲ—n       вүӨ OМғ                     вҲҡ                     .
                  n
                                    n       n
                                                                             Оі K


D    D OWNSTREAM LEARNING : P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

In this section, we first provide the full algorithm of OMLE. Then, we prove a new estimation
guarantee under the presence of approximation error of ОҳМӮu0 . Finally, we provide the proof of
Theorem 2.


                                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.1    O PTIMISTIC MODEL - BASED ALGORITHM

In this section, we provide the full algorithm of OMLE (Liu et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022) given a
model class ОҳМӮ and an estimation margin ОІ0 , for the completeness of the paper.
First, OMLE seeks a exploration policy ПҖ k that maximizes the largest total variation distance between
any two model parameters Оё and ОёвҖІ within a confidence set Bk . Then, OMLE uses policies adapted
from ПҖ k to collect data. Finally, using the collected sample trajectories, OMLE constructs a confidence
set which includes the true model parameter. The pseudo code is provided in Algorithm 2.

Algorithm 2 Downstream multi-task PSR (OMLE)
 1: Input: B1 = ОҳМӮu0 , estimation margin ОІ0 .
 2: for k = 1, . . . , KDown do
 3:
                                           ПҖ k = arg max max
                                                          вҖІ
                                                             DTV (PПҖОё , PПҖОёвҖІ )
                                                                ПҖвҲҲО  Оё,Оё вҲҲBk

 4:      for h вҲҲ [H] do
                    k                 k,h
 5:          Use ОҪhПҖ to collect data П„H   .
 6:      end for
 7:      Construct confidence set Bk+1 :
                                                            t                                  t

                                                    ОҪПҖ                                       ОҪПҖ
                                   XX                    t,h
                                                                              XX                  t,h
          Bk+1 =        Оё вҲҲ ОҳМӮ :               log PОёh (П„H   ) вүҘ max                    log PОёh (П„H   ) вҲ’ ОІ0       вҲ© Bk
                                                                 Оё вҖІ вҲҲОҳМӮ
                                   t<k    h                                   t<k   h

 8: end for
 9: Output: Any ОёМ„0 вҲҲ BKDown +1 , and a greedy policy ПҖМ„0 = arg maxПҖ VОёМ„ПҖ ,R .
                                                                                                0   0


D.2    E STIMATION G UARANTEE OF OMLE

Recall that Пө0 = eОұ (ОҳМӮu0 ) = minОё0 вҲҲОҳМӮu maxПҖ DR,Оұ (PПҖОёвҲ— , PПҖОё0 ) is the approximation error of the model
                                                0                       0

class ОҳМӮu0 . In this section, let Оё0Пө0 = arg minОё0 вҲҲОҳМӮu maxПҖ DR,Оұ (PПҖОёвҲ— , PПҖОё0 ).
                                                                   0                0

The following lemma is from Proposition B.1 in Liu et al. (2022).
                  1
Lemma 3. Let О· вүӨ KH . With probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, for any Оё0 вҲҲ ОҳМӮu0 , we have
                                                        t
                                                   ОҪПҖ t,h
                            XX                 PОё0h (П„H   )                                  eK
                                         log            t          вүӨ log(NО· (ОҳМӮu0 )) + log      .
                                                ОҪПҖ    t,h
                                               PОёhвҲ— (П„H   )                                   Оҙ
                            t<k     h
                                                 0



Then, we show that the log-likelihood of model Оё0Пө0 is sufficiently large.
Lemma 4. With probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, we have
                                                     t
                                                ОҪПҖ    t,h
                           XX                  PОёhвҲ— (П„H   )                    1{Пө0 Мё=0}    K
                                         log     0
                                                 ПҖt
                                                                   вүӨ Пө0 KH +             log .
                                               P
                                                ОҪh         t,h
                                                         (П„H   )                ОұвҲ’1         Оҙ
                           t<k     h             Пө
                                                Оё00


Proof. By the definition of Оё0Пө0 , we have

                                                 пЈ®             !ОұвҲ’1 пЈ№
                                                     ПҖвҖІ
                                    1              P Оё вҲ— (П„H )      пЈ» вүӨ Пө0 .
                                       log EPПҖОёвҲ— пЈ°    вҖІ                                                                   (12)
                                   ОұвҲ’1             PПҖОёПө0 (П„H )

If Пө0 = 0, then the proof is trivial. In the following, we mainly consider the case when Пө0 > 0.


                                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


By the MarkovвҖҷs inequality, for any x вҲҲ R, we have
                             t,h
                                                !
                                    t,h
            XX           PПҖОёвҲ— (П„H       )
         P           log t,h t,h вүҘ x
            t<k h        PПҖОёПө0 (П„H )
               пЈ«                              !ОұвҲ’1               пЈ¶
                  Y Y PПҖвҲ—t,h (П„ t,h )
           = PпЈӯ                Оё       H
                                                       вүҘ e(ОұвҲ’1)x пЈё
                             P ПҖ t,h (П„ t,h )
                                 Пө
                               Оё 0     H
                  t<k h
                         пЈ®                                 !ОұвҲ’1 пЈ®                   !ОұвҲ’1       пЈ№пЈ№
                            Y Y PПҖвҲ—t,h (П„ t,h )                    P ПҖ k,h k,h
                                                                           (П„     )
                                                                     ОёвҲ—
           вүӨ eвҲ’(ОұвҲ’1)x E пЈ°                   Оё       H
                                                               EпЈ°            H
                                                                                         ПҖ k,h пЈ»пЈ»
                                          P ПҖ t,h (П„ t,h )         P ПҖ k,h (П„ k,h )
                                              Пө
                                            Оё 0     H                 Пө
                                                                     Оё 0     H
                            t<k h
             (i)
             вүӨ eвҲ’(ОұвҲ’1)x e(ОұвҲ’1)KHПө0
             = eвҲ’(ОұвҲ’1)(xвҲ’KHПө0 ) ,
where (i) follows from Equation (12).
                            1
By choosing x = Пө0 KH + ОұвҲ’1   log(K/Оҙ) and taking union bound over k, we conclude that, with
probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
                                                          t,ht,h
                                XX                    PПҖОёвҲ— (П„H   )                                         1     K
                                                log           t,h
                                                                            вүӨ Пө0 KH +                         log .
                                                         t,h
                                                      PПҖОёПө0 (П„H   )                                       ОұвҲ’1    Оҙ
                                t<k     h


Combining Lemma 3 and Lemma 4, we immediately obtain that with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ/2, the
following bound holds.
                            t                                                           t
                       ОҪПҖ                                                          ОҪПҖ
       XX                    t,h
                                                          XX                         t,h
                 log PОёhПө0 (П„H   ) вүҘ max                                  log PОё0h (П„H   )
                       0                        Оё0 вҲҲОҳМӮu
                                                      0
       t<k   h                                            t<k         h

                                                                                            4eK           1{Пө0 Мё=0}     4K
                                                вҲ’ log NО· (ОҳМӮu0 ) + log                          + Пө0 KH +           log                        ,
                                                                                             Оҙ             ОұвҲ’1           Оҙ
           1
where О· вүӨ KH .
                                                                             Пө01
Setting ОІ0 = log NО· (ОҳМӮu0 ) + log 4eK             {Пө0 Мё=0}   4K
                                   Оҙ + Пө0 KH + ОұвҲ’1 log Оҙ , we conclude that Оё0 вҲҲ B k for all
k вҲҲ [K]. Based on this fact, we have the following estimation guarantee.
Lemma 5. With probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, for any k вҲҲ [K] and Оё0 вҲҲ Bk , we have
                                             t
                                                ПҖ    ПҖt
                                               ОҪh   ОҪh
                               XX
                                        2
                                       DTV PОё0 , PОёвҲ—      вүӨ 2ОІ0 .
                                                                                            0
                                                t<k       h



Proof. We follow the same argument as in Proposition 2, except setting N = 1 and Оҳu = ОҳМӮu0 . Then,
we obtain that, with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ/2, the following inequality holds.

                                                                                                     t
                                                                                                ОҪПҖ t,h
                                                                                            PОёhвҲ— (П„H   )                   KNО· (ОҳМӮu0 )
                                            t         t

                                       ОҪПҖ     ОҪПҖ
                 XX                                               XX
                            D2H       PОё0h , PОёhвҲ—             вүӨ                    log           0
                                                                                                 ПҖt
                                                                                                                   + log               .
                                               0
                                                                                            P
                                                                                                ОҪh         t,h
                                                                                                         (П„H   )             Оҙ
                 t<k   h                                          tвүӨk      h                    Оё0


Since Оё0 , Оё0Пө0 вҲҲ Bk , by the optimality of Bk , we further have
                        X X   ОҪ ПҖt ОҪ ПҖt
                                D2H PОё0h , PОёhвҲ—
                                                                  0
                           t<k    h


                                                                            21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                         t
                                                                    ОҪПҖ t,h
                                            XX                  PОёhвҲ— (П„H   )                        KNО· (ОҳМӮu0 )
                                    вүӨ                     log        0
                                                                     ПҖt
                                                                                       + ОІ0 + log
                                                                P
                                                                    ОҪh         t,h
                                                                             (П„H   )                  Оҙ
                                            tвүӨk   h                  Пө0
                                                                    Оё0
                                    (i)                       1{Пө0 Мё=0}     K            KNО· (ОҳМӮu0 )
                                     вүӨ Пө0 KH +                          log   + ОІ0 + log
                                                               ОұвҲ’1          Оҙ              Оҙ
                                    вүӨ 2ОІ0 ,
where (i) is due to Lemma 4.



D.3     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

Theorem 4 (Restatement of Theorem 2). Fix Оұ > 1. Let Пө0 = eОұ (ОҳМӮu0 ), ОІ0 = O(log KH           Оҙ +
                          1 0 Мё=0}               1
log NО· (ОҳМӮu0 ) + Пө0 KH + {Пө ОұвҲ’1    ), where О· вүӨ KH .  Under Assumption 1, with probability at least
1 вҲ’ Оҙ, the output of Algorithm 2 satisfies that
                                                       q

                                        ПҖ   ПҖ

                                                       QA   r|A|HОІ0  вҲҡ
                      maxПҖвҲҲО  DTV PОёМ„0 , PОёвҲ— вүӨ OМғ Оі             K    + Пө0 .                     (13)
                                                                     0


Proof. First, we follow the proof in Lemma 2, except setting N = 1. We obtain that
                            Q |A| s                                 h                               i
                               A
                                             X        X
       ПҖ         ПҖ
DTV PОёМӮk (П„H ), PОё0вҲ— (П„H ) вүӨ            CО» +      0
                                                 О¶t,h   EП„hвҲ’1 вҲјPПҖОёвҲ— вҲҘ(A0h )вҖ  ПҲМ„ 0,вҲ— (П„hвҲ’1 )вҲҘ(Uk,h
                                                                                              0 )вҲ’1
        0                       Оі                                 0
                                             t<k      h
                p                                                      !
   (i)      QA |A|ОІ0 X                   h
                                             0 вҖ   0,вҲ—
                                                                     i
    вүӨO                       EП„hвҲ’1 вҲјPПҖОёвҲ— вҲҘ(Ah ) ПҲМ„ (П„hвҲ’1 )вҲҘ(Uk,h
                                                              0 )вҲ’1      ,
                 Оі                     0
                                    h

where
                      О»rQ2A |A|
             пЈұ
               C    =              ,
             пЈҙ
                 О»
             пЈҙ
                           Оі4
             пЈҙ
             пЈҙ
             пЈҙ
             пЈҙ
             пЈҙ
                      Оі 4 ОІ0
             пЈҙ
             пЈҙ
             пЈІО» = rQ2 |A| ,
             пЈҙ
             пЈҙ
             пЈҙ
                        A
                             t             t
                                                                                                                           (14)
             пЈҙО¶ 0 = D2 PОҪhПҖ (П„ t,h ), PОҪhвҲ—ПҖ (П„ t,h ) ,
             пЈҙ
                t,h     H            H  Оё0    H
             пЈҙ
             пЈҙ
             пЈҙ
             пЈҙ                ОёМӮ0k
             пЈҙ
             пЈҙ                         X ОҪt
                                   0 вҖ 
                                                           (П„hвҲ’1 )ПҲМ„ 0,вҲ— (П„hвҲ’1 )вҠӨ ((A0h )вҖ  )вҠӨ ,
             пЈҙ 0
             пЈҙ                                         0,вҲ—
             пЈіUk,h = О»I + (Ah )                вҲјPОёвҲ— ПҲМ„
                                           h
             пЈҙ
             пЈҙ                          EП„hвҲ’1
                                                    0
                                                      t<k

and (i) is due to the estimation guarantee.
Therefore,

        KDTV PПҖОёМ„0 , PПҖОё0вҲ—

            вүӨ KDTV PПҖОёМ„0 , PПҖОёПө0 + KDTV PПҖОёПө0 , PПҖОё0вҲ—
                              0               0
              X                   k
                                  ПҖ      ПҖk
                                                вҲҡ
            вүӨ            max DTV PОёМӮk , PОёМғk + K Пө0
                           ОёМӮ0k ,ОёМғ0k вҲҲBk                 0      0
                   k
                   X                                  k         k
                                                                            вҲҡ
              вүӨ2              max DTV PПҖОёМӮk , PПҖОё0вҲ—                      + K Пө0
                             ОёМӮ0k вҲҲBk                 0
                       k
                       q
                                          1
                  QA    |A|(ОІ0 + Пө0 KH + ОұвҲ’1 log(K/Оҙ)) p                                                           вҲҡ
              вүӨ                                                                               rHK log(1 + rK/О») + K Пө0 .
                                                      Оі


                                                                                22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E     B RACKETING NUMBERS OF E XAMPLES AND M ISSING P ROOFS IN
      S ECTION 4.3 AND S ECTION 5.2
In the section, we present bracketing   numbers of examples and missing Proofs in Section 4.3 and
Section 5.2. Because П•вҠӨ                         вҠӨ
                               P
                         h =     (oh ,ah )вҲҲOГ—A П•h+1 Mh (oh , ah ) for each h вҲҲ [H вҲ’ 1], П•h can be
                           H
decided by П•H and {Mh }h=1 . For simplicity, in this section, we reparameterize the PSRs parameters
as Оё = {П•H , {Mh }H h=1 }. Without loss of generality, from Theorem C.1 and C.7 in Liu et al. (2022),
we assume for any (o, a) вҲҲ O Г— A, Mh (o, a) вҲҲ RrГ—r , and the rank of Mh (o, a) is r.

E.1   B RACKETING N UMBERS OF BASIC SINGLE - TASK PSR S

For completeness, in this subsection, we first present the analysis of bracketing number of basic
single-task PSRs.
Lemma 6 (Bracketing number of single-task PSRs). Let Оҳ be the collection of PSR parameters of all
rank-r sequential decision making problems with obseration space O, action space A and horizon
H. Then we have
                                                                               |O||A|
                                log NО· (Оҳ) вүӨ O(r2 H 2 |O||A| log(                     )).
                                                                                 О·
                                             p
Proof. We assume ПҲ0 is known,5 and вҲҘПҲ0 вҲҘ2 вүӨ |A|H . By Corollary C.8 from Liu et al. (2022), the
PSR model class have following form:
       Оҳ = Оё : Оё = {П•H , {Mh }H

                                h=1 }, вҲҘMh (o, a)вҲҘ2 вүӨ 1 for (o, a) вҲҲ O Г— A, вҲҘП•H вҲҘ2 вүӨ 1 .

                                                              О·
Denote Оҳ e Оҙ as the Оҙ-cover of Оҳ w.r.t в„“вҲһ -norm with Оҙ =
                                                         (|O||A|)cH
                                                                    for some large c > 0. Mathemati-
cally, for any Оё = {П•H , {Mh }h=1 } вҲҲ Оҳ, there exists ОёМғ = {П•МғH , {Mh }H
                                H                                   f
                                                                         h=1 } вҲҲ ОҳОҙ , such that for any
                                                                                 e
(o, a) вҲҲ O Г— A,

                     П•H вҲ’ П•МғH        вүӨ Оҙ,             Vec(Mh (o, a)) вҲ’ Vec(M
                                                                           f h (o, a))                  вүӨ Оҙ.
                                 вҲһ                                                                  вҲһ


Next, we show that Оҳ
                   e Оҙ can constitute an О·-bracket for Оҳ. For any policy ПҖ, we have
   X
            PОё (П„H ) вҲ’ PОёМғ (П„H ) Г— ПҖ(П„H )
П„H вҲҲ(OГ—A)H

                          X     H
                                X
             вүӨ                       mh (Пүh )вҠӨ Mf h (oh , ah ) вҲ’ Mh (oh , ah ) ПҲhвҲ’1 (П„hвҲ’1 ) Г— ПҖ(П„H )
                   П„H вҲҲ(OГ—A)H h=1

             (i)          X     H
                                X
             вүӨ                       вҲҘmh (Пүh )вҲҘ2                gh (oh , ah ) вҲ’ Mh (oh , ah )
                                                                M                                         вҲҘПҲhвҲ’1 (П„hвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2 Г— ПҖ(П„H )
                                                                                                      2
                   П„H вҲҲ(OГ—A)H h=1

             (ii)         X      H
                                 X                                                      q
              вүӨ                           f h (oh , ah ) вҲ’ Mh (oh , ah )
                                          M                                                 |A|H Г— ПҖ(П„H )
                                                                                    2
                    П„H вҲҲ(OГ—A)H h=1
                                  H
             (iii)         X      X вҲҡ                                                           q
              вүӨ                           r           gh (oh , ah ) вҲ’ Mh (oh , ah )
                                                      M                                             |A|H Г— ПҖ(П„H )        (15)
                                                                                            вҲһ
                     П„H   вҲҲ(OГ—A)H h=1

                      X        H вҲҡ
                               X                                                                              q
             вүӨ                       r3               gh (oh , ah )) вҲ’ Vec(Mh (oh , ah ))
                                                  Vec(M                                                        |A|H Г— ПҖ(П„H )
                                                                                                          вҲһ
                 П„H вҲҲ(OГ—A)H h=1
                q
             вүӨ H r3 |A|H Оҙ вүӨ О·,
   5
     Such assumption does not influence the order of bracketing number since the model complexity related to
ОЁ0 does not dominate.


                                                                 23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where (i) follows from the property of operation norm of matrix, (ii) follows from the fact that
вҲҘmh (Пүh )вҲҘ2 вүӨ вҲҘП•H вҲҘ2 вҲҘMH (oH , aH )вҲҘ2 . . . вҲҘMh+1 p   (oh+1 , ah+1 )вҲҘ2 вүӨ 1 and вҲҘПҲhвҲ’1 (П„hвҲ’1 )вҲҘ вүӨ
вҲҘMhвҲ’1 (ohвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 )вҲҘ2 . . . вҲҘM1 (o1 , a1 )вҲҘ2 вҲҘПҲ0 вҲҘ2 вүӨ |A|H , and (iii) follows from the relation-
ship between the operation norm induced by в„“2 norm and в„“вҲһ norm.
By Lemma 10,
                                вҲҡ  r+r2 Г—H|O||A|                 r+r2 Г—H|O||A|
                                                   вҲҡ (|O||A|)cH

                            1+2 r
              |Оҳ
               e Оҙ| вүӨ                           = 3 r
                              Оҙ                           О·
and
                                     e Оҙ | = O(r2 H 2 |O||A| log(   |O||A|
                                log |Оҳ                                     )),
                                                                      О·
which equals to the log О·-bracketing number.



E.2   B RACKETING N UMBER OF U PSTREAM EXAMPLES

Example 1(Multi-task POMDP with same transition kernels): The multi-task parameter space is
        n                                                                           o
                                               |S|Г—|S|
         (Th,a , O1h , . . . , ON
                                h ) : Th,a вҲҲ R         , Oih вҲҲ R|O|Г—|A| , вҲҖi вҲҲ [N ]   .
                                                                                       hвҲҲ[H],aвҲҲA


Note that the value of each coordinate of these matrices are probabilities, and thus are bounded within
[0,1]. Therefore, the О·-bracketing number in this case is O(H(|S|2 |A| + N |O||S|) log H|S||O||A|
                                                                                                О·     )
Example 2(Multi-task PSR with perturbed models): Suppose there exist a latent base task Pb , and
a noisy perturbation space вҲҶ. Each task n вҲҲ [N ] is a noisy perturbation of the latent base task and
can be parameterized into two parts: the base task plus a task-specified noise term. Specifically, for
each step h вҲҲ [H] and task n вҲҲ [N ], any (o, a) вҲҲ O Г— A, we have
                        Mnh (oh , ah ) = Mbh (oh , ah ) + вҲҶnh (oh , ah ),   вҲҶnh вҲҲ вҲҶ.

Such a multi-task PSR satisfies that ОІ (N ) вүӨ O(log KHN
                                                     Оҙ  + r2 |O||A|H 2 log |O||A|
                                                                             О·    + HN log |вҲҶ|),
whereas ОІ (1) for a single task is given by O(r2 |O||A|H 2 log |O||A|
                                                                 О·    + H(N вҲ’ 1) log |вҲҶ|). Clearly,
ОІ (N ) вүӘ N ОІ (1) holds if log |вҲҶ| вүӘ OМғ(r2 |O||A|H), which can be easily satisfied for low perturbation
environments. In such a case, the multi-task PSR benefits from a significantly reduced sample
complexity compared to single-task learning.

Proof of Example 2. Suppose there exist a latent base task model space:
      Оҳb = Оё : Оё = {П•H , {Mh }H

                                h=1 }, вҲҘMh (o, a)вҲҘ2 вүӨ 1for (o, a) вҲҲ O Г— A, вҲҘП•H вҲҘ2 вүӨ 1 .

A base task model is selected: Оёb = {П•bH , {Mbh }H
                                                 h=1 }. The parameters of each task n in multi-task
PSR models are as follows:
               Оҳn = Оё : Оё = {П•bH , {Mbh + вҲҶnh }H            n         n

                                                   h=1 }, вҲҶh вҲҲ вҲҶ, вҲҘП•H вҲҘ2 вүӨ 1 ,



where вҲҶnh (В·, В·) : O Г— A вҶ’ Rdh Г—dhвҲ’1 for any h вҲҲ [H], and n вҲҲ [N ], and вҲҶ is the noisy perturbation
space with finite cardinality.
     e b be the Оҙ-cover of Оҳb w.r.t в„“вҲһ -norm with Оҙ =         О·                              e b| =
Let Оҳ  Оҙ                                                 (|O||A|)cH
                                                                    . From Lemma 6, we have |Оҳ Оҙ
              2r+r2 Г—H|O||A|
  (|O||A|)cH
       О·                     . For each n вҲҲ [N ], denote

          e nОҙ = Оҳ
          Оҳ      e bОҙ + вҲҶ
                 n                                                          o
               := Оё : Оё = П•ebH , {M
                                  f n + вҲҶn }H
                                    h
                                                  eb f H         eb n
                                         h h=1 ; П•H , {Mh }h=1 вҲҲ ОҳОҙ ; вҲҶh вҲҲ вҲҶ .



                                                      24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                        r+r2 Г—H|O||A|
            e n | = 3вҲҡr (|O||A|)
                                    cH
Obviously, |Оҳ Оҙ                  О·                    Г— |вҲҶ|H . Then denote the multi-task Оҙ-cover
as Оҳ
   eОҙ = Оҳ e1 Г— В· В· В· Г— Оҳ e N . Following from Lemma 6, for any task n вүҘ 1, Оҳ    e n can constitute
            Оҙ              Оҙ                                                      Оҙ
an О·-bracket for Оҳn , so Оҳ  e Оҙ can constitute an О·-bracket for Оҳ. By noticing that each ОҳМ„n has
                                                                                            Оҙ
a common part, and the changing part is only related to вҲҶnh . The corresponding О·-bracketing
            вҲҡ             cH
                              r+r2 Г—H|O||A|
number is 3 r (|O||A|)О·                      Г— |вҲҶ|HN , and the log О·-bracketing number is at most

O r2 |O||A|H 2 log |O||A|
                        О·    +  H(N   вҲ’ 1) log |вҲҶ|  .

Example 3(Multi-task PSRs: Linear combination of core tasks): Suppose that the multi-task PSR
lies in the linear span of m core tasks, i.e., there exist a set of core tasks indexed by {1, 2, . . . , m}
such that each PSR can be represented as a linear combination of those m core tasks. Specifically, for
                                                                           n вҠӨ
each task n вҲҲ [N ], there exists a coefficient vector Оұn = (Оұ1n , В· В· В· , Оұm ) вҲҲ Rm s.t. for any h вҲҲ [H]
and (oh , ah ) вҲҲ O Г— A,
                              Pm                                        Pm
              П•nh (oh , ah ) = l=1 Оұln П•lh (oh , ah ), Mnh (oh , ah ) = l=1 Оұln Mlh (oh , ah ).
                                                                                 Pm
For regularization, we assume 0 вүӨ Оұln вүӨ 1 for all l вҲҲ [m] and n вҲҲ [N ], and l=1 Оұln = 1 for all n вҲҲ
[N ]. It can be shown that ОІ (N ) = O(m(r2 |O||A|H 2 + N ) log |O||A|  О·   ), whereas ОІ (1) for a single task
is given by r2 |O||A|H 2 log |O||A|
                                О·   . Clearly, ОІ (N ) вүӘ N ОІ (1) holds if m вүӨ min{N, r2 |O||A|H 2 },
which is satisfied in practice.

Proof of Example 3. Denote the core tasks model class Оҳ0 = Оҳ0,1 Г— В· В· В· Г— Оҳ0,m , and the multi-task
model class Оҳ = Оҳ1 Г— В· В· В· Г— ОҳN , where for any n вҲҲ [N ], Оҳn is defined as:
      пЈұпЈ«                (m          )H пЈ¶                                                              пЈј
      пЈІ X  m             X                                                                            пЈҪ
                                                                 n вҠӨ
Оҳn = пЈӯ        Оұln П•lH ,     Оұln Mlh     пЈё : Оұn = (Оұ1n , В· В· В· , Оұm ) вҲҲ Rm ; П•lH , {Mlh }H         0,l

                                                                                        h=1   вҲҲ Оҳ       .
      пЈі                                                                                               пЈҫ
             l=1           l=1               h=1


                                                                              e0 = Оҳ
For any Оҙ вүҘ 0, we first consider the Оҙ-cover of the model class of core tasks Оҳ     e 0,1 Г— В· В· В· Г— Оҳ
                                                                                                    e 0,m ,
                                                                                Оҙ     Оҙ                Оҙ
where for each base tasks l вҲҲ [m], Оҳ e l is a Оҙ-cover for Оҳm . Similar to proof of Lemma 6, |Оҳ    e 0,l | =
                                       Оҙ                                                            Оҙ
  вҲҡ         2 2
                            e 0 | = (3вҲҡr Г— 1 )r2 H 2 |O||A|m .
(3 r Г— 1Оҙ )r H |O||A| and |Оҳ  Оҙ               Оҙ
Then we consider the cover for multi-task parameter space. Denote CОҙm as a Оҙ-cover for the unit
ball in Rm w.r.t. в„“1 norm. Mathematically, for any n вҲҲ [N ] and vector Оұn вҲҲ Rm , there exists an
ОұМғn вҲҲ CОҙm such that вҲҘОұn вҲ’ ОұМғn вҲҘ1 вүӨ Оҙ. In addition, the cardinality |CОҙm | = ( 3Оҙ )m .

Define the multi-task model class Оҳ      e1 Г— В· В· В· Г— Оҳ
                                    eОҙ = Оҳ            e N , where for any n вҲҲ [N ], Оҳ  e n is defined as
                                           Оҙ            Оҙ                                Оҙ
      пЈұпЈ«                  (m         )H  пЈ¶                                                                   пЈј
      пЈІ X   m              X                                                                                 пЈҪ
e nОҙ = пЈӯ
Оҳ             ОұМғln П•elH ,    ОұМғln M
                                  fl
                                   h
                                                                     n вҠӨ
                                         пЈё : ОұМғn = (ОұМғ1n , В· В· В· , ОұМғm ) вҲҲ CОҙm ; П•elH , {M
                                                                                         f l }H
                                                                                            h h=1 вҲҲ ОҳОҙ
                                                                                                        e 0,l .
      пЈі                                                                                                      пЈҫ
             l=1           l=1               h=1


We next show that Оҳ
                  e Оҙ is a О·-bracket of ОҳОҙ .

By definition,
               for any  model of base task l вҲҲ [m]: Оёl = П•lH , {Mlh }H
                                                                     h=1                                  вҲҲ Оҳl , there exists
ОёМғl = П•el , {M
         H
             f l }H
                   h h=1вҲҲОҳe l , such that for any (o, a) вҲҲ O Г— A,
                                 Оҙ


                      П•lH вҲ’ П•МғlH         вүӨ Оҙ, Vec(Mlh (o, a)) вҲ’ Vec(M
                                                                    f l (o, a))
                                                                      h                               вүӨ Оҙ.
                                     вҲһ                                                            вҲһ


Then, for any Оёl вҲҲ Оҳl , Оұn вҲҲ Rm , there exist ОёМғ вҲҲ ОҳМғlОҙ and ОұМғn вҲҲ CОҙ such that
                           m
                           X                 m
                                             X
                                 Оұln П•lH вҲ’         ОұМғln П•elH
                           l=1               l=1               вҲһ
                                 m
                                 X                                      m
                                                                        X
                            вүӨ          |Оұln | П•lH вҲ’ П•elH            +          Оұln вҲ’ Оұln | П•elH
                                                                              |e
                                                               вҲһ                                  вҲһ
                                 l=1                                    l=1


                                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 m
                                 X               m
                                                 X
                            вүӨ          Оұln Оҙ +          Оұln вҲ’ Оұln | вүӨ 2Оҙ,
                                                       |e
                                 l=1             l=1

and for any (oh , ah ) вҲҲ O Г— A
                m
                X                    m
                                     X
                      Оұln Mlh вҲ’            eln M
                                           Оұ   fl
                                                h
                l=1                  l=1               вҲһ
                      m
                      X                                        m
                                                               X
                  вүӨ         |Оұln | Mlh вҲ’ M
                                         fl
                                          h                +          Оұln вҲ’ Оұln | M
                                                                     |e           fl
                                                                                   h
                                                       вҲһ                                 вҲһ
                      l=1                                      l=1
                       m                                                        m
                      X        вҲҡ                                                X
                  вүӨ         Оұln r Vec(Mlh ) вҲ’ Vec(M
                                                  fl )
                                                   h                        +          Оұln вҲ’ Оұln | M
                                                                                      |e           fl
                                                                                                    h
                                                                        вҲһ                               вҲһ
                      l=1                                                       l=1
                       m                   m
                      X        вҲҡ           X     вҲҡ
                  вүӨ         Оұln rОҙ +                 r|ОұМғln вҲ’ Оұln |
                      l=1                  l=1
                      вҲҡ          вҲҡ                     вҲҡ
                  =       rОҙ +       r вҲҘОұМғn вҲ’ Оұn вҲҘ1 вүӨ 2 rОҙ.

                                                                              e t can constitute an
Similar to the analysis in the proof of Lemma 6, specifically, Equation (15), Оҳ Оҙ
                t                 О·
О·-bracket for Оҳ with Оҙ = 2вҲҡr(|O||A|)cH .

The cardinality of the cover of multi-task model class is |Оҳ     e Оҙ | = |Оҳe 0 ||CОҙ |N = (3вҲҡr Г—
                                                                             Оҙ
    2 2
1 r H |O||A|m        3 mN
Оҙ )             Г—  ( Оҙ )  .

In conclusion, the log О·-bracketing number is O r2 H 2 |O||A|m log( rH|O||A|
                                                                        О·    ) + mN log( rH|O||A|
                                                                                            О·     ) .


E.3    B RACKETING N UMBER OF D OWNSTREAM E XAMPLES

 Example 1 Note that the model class for downstream learning is ОҳМӮu0 = {Oh }hвҲҲ[H] . Thus, we
immediately obtaint that log NО· (ОҳМӮu0 ) = O(H|O||S| log |O||S|
                                                          О· )

Example 2(Multi-task PSR with perturbed models): Similar to the upstream tasks, the downstream
task 0 is also a noisy perturbation of the latent base task. Specifically, for each step h вҲҲ [H], any
(o, a) вҲҲ O Г— A, we have
                П•0H = П•bH , M0h (oh , ah ) = Mbh (oh , ah ) + вҲҶ0h (oh , ah ),                вҲҶ0h вҲҲ вҲҶ.       (16)
The log О·-bracketing number is at most H log |вҲҶ|.

                                                                                                        b
Proof. Suppose the estimated model parameter of the base task is ОёМ„b = {П•М„bH , {Mh }H
                                                                                    h=1 }. Because
the downstream task model parameters satisfy Equation (16), the empirical candidate model class
can be characterized as
   ОҳМӮu0 = {Оё : Оё = {П•0H , {M0h }H       0     b
                                h=1 }; П•H = П•М„H ;
                                                  b
                       M0h (oh , ah ) = Mh (oh , ah ) + вҲҶ0h (oh , ah ), (oh , ah ) вҲҲ O Г— A; вҲҶ0h вҲҲ вҲҶ }.
If ОёМ„b is given, then the candidate model class is decided by вҲҶ. Then for any О· > 0, the О·-bracketing
number is |вҲҶ|H .

Example 3(Multi-task PSRs: Linear combination of core tasks): Suppose the downstream task 0
also lies in the linear span of m core tasks same as the upstream. Moreover, assume the upstream
tasks are diverse enough to span the whole core tasks space. As a result, the downstream task can
be represented as a linear combination of a subset of the upstream tasks. Specifically, there exists a
                                                                              0 вҠӨ
constant L satisfying m вүӨ L вүӨ N and a coefficient vector Оұ0 = (Оұ10 , В· В· В· , ОұL ) вҲҲ RL s.t. for any
h вҲҲ [H] and (oh , ah ) вҲҲ O Г— A,
                            PL                             PL
                     П•0H = l=1 Оұl0 П•lH , M0h (oh , ah ) = l=1 Оұl0 Mlh (oh , ah ).                (17)


                                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                PL
For regularization, we assume 0 вүӨ Оұl0 вүӨ 1 for all l вҲҲ [L], and l=1 Оұl0 = 1. It can be shown
that ОІ0 = O(LH log( r|O||A|
                         О·  )), whereas ОІ (1) for learning without prior information is given by
O(r2 |O||A|H 2 log |O||A|
                       О·  ). Clearly, ОІ0 вүӘ ОІ (1) holds if m вүӨ min{N, r2 |O||A|H 2 }, which is
satisfied in practice.

Proof. Suppose for the upstream task l вҲҲ [L], the estimated model parameter is ОёМ„l =
          l
{П•М„lH , {Mh }H
             h=1 }. Because the downstream task model parameters satisfy Equation (17), the empiri-
cal candidate model class can be characterized as
                                                                        L
                                                                        X
         ОҳМӮu0 = {Оё : Оё = {П•0H , {M0h }H       0
                                      h=1 }; П•H =                             Оұn0 П•М„lH ;
                                                                        l=1
                                                          L
                                                          X               l
                                 M0h (oh , ah ) =               Оұl0 Mh (oh , ah ), (oh , ah ) вҲҲ O Г— A; Оұ0 вҲҲ RL }.
                                                          l=1

Then we consider the cover for ОҳМӮu0 . Denote CОҙL as a Оҙ-cover for the unit ball in RL w.r.t. в„“1 norm.
Mathematically, for any vector Оұ0 вҲҲ RL , there exists an ОұМғ0 вҲҲ CОҙL such that Оұ0 вҲ’ ОұМғ0 1 вүӨ Оҙ. In
addition, the cardinality |CОҙL | = ( 3Оҙ )L .
Define
                                                                        L
                                                                        X
         e u = {Оё : Оё = {П•0 , {Mh }H }; П•0 =
         Оҳ                                                                    ОұМғl0 П•М„lH ;
           Оҙ              H        h=1   H
                                                                        l=1
                                                          L
                                                          X               l
                                 M0h (oh , ah ) =               ОұМғl0 Mh (oh , ah ), (oh , ah ) вҲҲ O Г— A; ОұМғ0 вҲҲ CОҙL }.
                                                          l=1

Then, for any Оё0 вҲҲ ОҳМӮ0 with Оұ0 вҲҲ RL , there exist ОёМғ вҲҲ ОҳМғuОҙ with ОұМғ0 вҲҲ CОҙL such that
               L
               X                  L
                                  X                           L
                                                              X
                     Оұl0 П•М„lH вҲ’         ОұМғl0 П•М„lH         вүӨ             |Оұl0 вҲ’ ОұМғl0 | П•М„lH вҲһ вүӨ Оұ0 вҲ’ ОұМғ0 1 вүӨ Оҙ,
               l=1                l=1               вҲһ         l=1

and for any (oh , ah ) вҲҲ O Г— A
                 L                                  L
                 X           l                      X               l
                       Оұl0 Mh (oh , ah ) вҲ’                ОұМғl0 Mh (oh , ah )
                 l=1                                l=1                                вҲһ
                                  L
                                  X                             l                               вҲҡ                  вҲҡ
                            вүӨ           |Оұl0 вҲ’ ОұМғl0 | Mh (oh , ah )                         вүӨ       r Оұ0 вҲ’ ОұМғ0 вүӨ       rОҙ.
                                                                                     вҲһ
                                  l=1


                                                                              e u can constitute an
Similar to the analysis in the proof of Lemma 6, specifically, Equation (15), Оҳ Оҙ
                u                 О·
О·-bracket for Оҳ0 with Оҙ = 2вҲҡr(|O||A|)cH .
              b

                                                         eu       L       3 L
                                               class is |ОҳОҙ | = |CОҙ | = ( Оҙ ) . In conclusion, the log
The cardinality of the cover of multi-task model
О·-bracketing number is O LH log( r|O||A|
                                    О·    ) .


F    E XAMPLES OF M ULTI - TASK MDP S FROM PREVIOUS WORK
To demonstrate that our framework encompasses multi-task learning under MDPs, we provide several
examples of MDPs from previous work in this subsection. Suppose S is the state space, there exist
N source tasks, and P (вҲ—,n) : S Г— A Г— S вҶ’ R is the true transition kernel of task n.
Cheng et al. (2022) studied multi-task learning under low-rank MDPs in which the transition kernel
P (вҲ—,n) has a d dimension low-rank decomposition into two embedding functions П•(вҲ—) : S Г— A вҶ’


                                                                        27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                             Fu вҠӮ P 2


                                                     P (вҲ—,1) , P (вҲ—,2)
                                                 пЈ«                       пЈ¶
                                                 пЈ¬                       пЈ·
                                                 пЈ¬                       пЈ·
                                                 пЈ¬                       пЈ·
                                                 пЈ¬                       пЈ·
                                                 пЈ¬                       пЈ·
                                                 пЈ¬                       пЈ·
                                                 пЈ¬                       пЈ·
                                                 пЈ¬                       пЈ·
                                                 пЈӯ                       пЈё


                           P1

                                      DTV (P 0 (В·|s, a), P 1 (В·|s, a)) вүӨ Пө



                           P0


Figure 2: Supplementary illustration of joint model class in two dimensions for MDPs. A concrete
example of tasks with similar transition kernels, i.e., any point (P 0 , P 1 ) in the joint class Fu satisfies
max(s,a)вҲҲSГ—A DTV (P 0 (В·|s, a), P 1 (В·|s, a)) вүӨ Пө for a small positive constant Пө.

                                             вҖІ                                     вҖІ      вҖІ
Rd , Вө(вҲ—,n) : S вҶ’ Rd as P (вҲ—,n) (s, a, s ) = вҹЁП•(вҲ—) (s, a), Вө(вҲ—,n) (s )вҹ© for all (s, a, s ) вҲҲ S Г— A Г— S
for each task n. In this setting, Cheng et al. (2022) assume the N source tasks share common
representations П•(вҲ—) and for each task n, П•(вҲ—) вҲҲ ОҰ, Вө(вҲ—,n) вҲҲ ОЁ for finite model class {ОҰ, ОЁ}.
Consequently, the О·-bracketing number for the multi-task low-rank MDPs model class is at most
O(H|ОҰ||ОЁ|N ), which is much smaller than the one of the individual single-task with O(H|ОҰ|N |ОЁ|N )
if |ОҰ| вү« |ОЁ| .
Zhang & Wang (2021) studied multi-task learning under tabular MDPs with an assumption that for
any two tasks n1 , n2 вҲҲ [N ], it holds that max(s,a)вҲҲSГ—A DTV (P (вҲ—,n1 ) (В·|s, a)|P (вҲ—,n2 ) (В·|s, a)) вүӨ Пө
for some small Пө > 0. Then the multi-task model class is much smaller than the model
class of N individual single-task (see Figure 2 for an illustration when N = 2). Conse-
quently, the О·-bracketing number for the multi-task low-rank MDPs model class is at most
O(H|S|2 |A|(log H|A||S|
                    О·    + (N вҲ’ 1) log H|A||S|Пө
                                             О·   )). This is smaller than that of each individual
single-task, which is O(HN |S|2 |A| log H|A||S|
                                          О·     ) if Пө вүӨ О· and N вүҘ 1.

G    AUXILLARY LEMMAS
The following lemma characterizes the relationship between the total variation distance and the
Hellinger-squared distance. Note that the result for probability measures has been proved in Lemma
H.1 in Zhong et al. (2022). Since we consider more general bounded measures, we provide the full
proof for completeness.
                                                                                   P
Lemma  P7. Given two bounded measures P and Q defined on the set X , let |P | = xвҲҲX P (x) and
|Q| = xвҲҲX Q(x). We have

                                   D2TV (P, Q) вүӨ 4(|P | + |Q|)D2H (P, Q).
In addition, if PY |X , QY |X are two conditional distributions over a random variable Y , and PX,Y =
PY |X P , QX,Y = QY |X Q are the joint distributions when X follows the distributions P and Q,
respectively, we have
                               2                                  2
                         E DH (PY |X (В·|X), QY |X (В·|X)) вүӨ 8DH (PX,Y , QX,Y ).
                      XвҲјP

Lemma 8. Suppose P and Q are two probability distributions. For any Оұ > 1, we have the following
inequality.
                                            r
                                                1
                               DTV (P, Q) вүӨ       DR,Оұ (P, Q).
                                                2

                                                               28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. By PinskerвҖҷs inequality, we have
                                                         r
                                                             1
                                      DTV (P, Q) вүӨ             DKL (P, Q).
                                                             2
By Theorem 5 from Van Erven & Harremos (2014), we have
                           DKL (P, Q) = lim DR,Оұ (P, Q) вүӨ inf DR,Оұ (P, Q).
                                           ОұвҶ‘1                     Оұ>1



                                                                                                     d
               P potential lemma ). For any sequence of vectors X = {x1 , . . . , xn , . . .} вҠӮ R ,
Lemma 9 (Elliptical
let Uk = О»I + t<k xk xвҠӨ    k , where О» is a positive constant, and B > 0 is a real number. If the rank
of X is at most r, then, we have
                    K
                    X        n              o
                          min вҲҘxk вҲҘ2U вҲ’1 , B вүӨ (1 + B)r log(1 + K/О»),
                                       k
                    k=1
                    K
                    X        n           вҲҡ o p
                          min вҲҘxk вҲҘU вҲ’1 , B вүӨ (1 + B)rK log(1 + K/О»).
                                       k
                    k=1


Proof. Note that the second inequality is an immediate result from the first inequality by the CauchyвҖҷs
inequality. Hence, it suffices to prove the first inequality. To this end, we have
     K
     X        n              o (i)      K
                                        X
           min вҲҘxk вҲҘ2U вҲ’1 , B вүӨ (1 + B)   log 1 + вҲҘxk вҲҘ2U вҲ’1
                      k                                                  k
     k=1                                     k=1
                                            K
                                            X
                                                   log 1 + trace (Uk+1 вҲ’ Uk ) UkвҲ’1

                               = (1 + B)
                                            k=1
                                            K
                                                                  вҲ’1/2               вҲ’1/2
                                            X
                               = (1 + B)           log 1 + trace Uk    (Uk+1 вҲ’ Uk ) Uk
                                            k=1
                                            K
                                                                 вҲ’1/2               вҲ’1/2
                                            X
                               вүӨ (1 + B)           log det Id + Uk    (Uk+1 вҲ’ Uk ) Uk
                                            k=1
                                            K
                                            X            det (Uk+1 )
                               = (1 + B)           log
                                                          det(Uk )
                                            k=1
                                                  det(UK+1 )
                               = (1 + B) log
                                                   det(U1 )
                                                                     K
                                                                             !
                                                     1X
                               = (1 + B) log det I +    xk xвҠӨ
                                                            k
                                                     О»
                                                                    k=1
                               (ii)
                               вүӨ (1 + B)r log(1 + K/О»),
where (i) follows because x вүӨ (1 + B) log(1 + x) if 0 < x вүӨ B, and (ii) follows because
rank(X ) вүӨ r.

To compute the bracketing number of mulit-task model class, we first require a basic result on the
covering number of a Euclidean ball as follows. Proof of the lemma can be found in Lemma 5.2 in
Vershynin (2010).
Lemma 10 (Covering Number of Euclidean Ball). For any Пө > 0, the Пө-covering number of the
Euclidean ball in Rd with radius R > 0 is upper bounded by (1 + 2R/Пө)d .


                                                     29
