Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


P ROXIMAL P REFERENCE O PTIMIZATION FOR
D IFFUSION M ODELS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT
         Preference optimization techniques such as Reinforcement Learning From Hu-
         man/AI Feedback(RLHF/RLAIF) emerge as the new standard approach in fine-
         tuning foundation models. Preference learning, however, is often optimized under
         the reinforcement learning setting which leads to a high variance, low data effi-
         ciency, as well as much longer steps to converge. Recent study of Direct Preference
         Optimization proved to be an effective way to mitigate such issues by converting
         the preference learning into a supervised learning paradigm for language models.
         However, little have been studied in the case of image generative models such as
         diffusion models. In this paper, we propose Proximal Preference Optimization for
         Diffusion models (PPOD) that extends the prior work with proximal constraints to
         solve the optimization challenges in diffusion model. We further study the online
         vs offline evaluation as well as the optimization objective choices and figure out
         the optimal setting for different use cases. Such a method makes preference opti-
         mization stable and feasible under the supervised learning setting. Our evaluation
         shows PPOD outperforms the other RL based reward optimization approaches on
         the stable diffusion model. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first work that
         enabled the efficient optimization for the RLAIF on the diffusion models.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020) have demonstrated impressive capabilities
for generating high-quality images from random Gaussian noise going through multiple iterative
denoising steps. Despite the stunning quality, it is difficult to control the generated content from
randomly sampled noise. Recent large-scale text-to-image diffusion models, e.g. Imagen (Saharia
et al., 2022), DALL-E 2 (Ramesh et al., 2022), and Stable Diffusion (SD) (Rombach et al., 2022)
incorporate text encoders (e.g. CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) and T5 (Raffel et al., 2020)) to enable
generating high-quality images from text prompts. The generated content becomes therefore more
controllable under the text prompt guidance. However, all these approaches train diffusion models
via supervised learning, which makes generated images follow the training data distribution. These
models generally do not perform well in generating images for the properties that are not well learned
from the training dataset, e.g. specific color, image composition, object count, object location, etc.
Although supervised finetuning (SFT) can alleviate this problem, the model is very easy to over-fit on
the content details, leaving the image-text alignment issue being unresolved.
Learning from human or AI feedback has been verified to be an effective solution to solve the
limitation of supervised learning for generative models. Lee et al. (2023b) explored learning a reward
model from human feedback, followed by SFT of the text-to-image model with a reward-weighted
loss. Although their approach achieves better reward scores and improves the generation capabilities
on some properties, e.g. specified color, object count, and background, the model still suffers from
the limitations of SFT. A very recent work (Black et al., 2023) first scoped the denoising process
in diffusion models as a multi-step decision making problem, which enabled using policy gradient
algorithm namely denoising diffusion policy optimization (DDPO) to optimize the diffusion model.
Their work demonstrated that DDPO is more effective than SFT, and is able to adapt text-to-image
diffusion models to learn the difficult concepts that are hard to express by text prompts, such as
image compressibility, aesthetic, etc. Another recent work (Fan et al., 2023) proposed using online
reinforcement learning (RL) to finetune text-to-image models. Their approach integrated diffusion
policy optimization from an online reward model with a KL regularization, namely DPOK. Their


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


experiments verified that RL can improve both the image-text alignment and image quality compared
to basic SFT. Both DDPO and DPOK optimize diffusion models via the RL policy optimization
approach, i.e. proximal policy optimization (PPO; Schulman et al., 2017).
In large language models, Rafailov et al. (2023) proposed direct preference optimization (DPO) to
transform the RL with human preference to a supervised learning setting. The core idea of DPO is
using the Bradley-Terry (BT; Bradley & Terry, 1952) model to model the human preference between
a pair of sampled data. The optimization problem is therefore transformed from a reward optimization
to a cross-entropy loss optimization problem. A big advantage of DPO is that it bypasses the explicit
reward modeling step, and avoids the need to perform reinforcement learning optimization. Their
studies showed that DPO is efficient and effective, since it achieved similar or even better performance
than other policy optimization approaches such as proximal policy optimization (PPO) and trust
region policy optimization (TRPO; Schulman et al., 2015) etc.
Inspired by the success of DPO on language models, we explore finetuning the diffusion model by
the direct preference optimization. Since the human feedback is expensive and the AI evaluation
performance achieves remarkable progress, the AI feedback is getting increasing attention. We
therefore focus on optimizing the diffusion model by directly optimizing the reward from RLAIF. In
our work, we choose ImageReward (Xu et al., 2023), a prelearned reward model that shows the best
alignment with human evaluation among all the image quality reward models as the AI evaluator. We
derive the optimization algorithm for diffusion models by considering the iterative denosing steps in
the preference modeling. We also introduce the proximal principle featured in PPO into our approach
to improve the model training stability. Some further studies about performance of optimizing the
model with both online and offline preference data demonstrate the online optimization can achieve
state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance for learning the properties in text prompts, e.g. specified color,
image composition, object count, object location, etc. Figure 1 overviews optimization frameworks
between the traditional RL based approach adopted by previous work (e.g. DDPO and DPOK) and
the proposed PPOD approach.
The main contribution of our paper is proposing a novel reward maximization algorithm, Proximal
Preference Optimization for Diffusion models, namely PPOD, for RLAIF. We rederive the DPO
algorithm for diffusion models with RLAIF, but find that it cannot work out of the box. Our
investigation reveals that by further incorporating elements from PPO, such as the proximal update
principle and online training, we are able to drastically improve the model training stability and
performance. Our PPOD approach enables direct preference optimization for diffusion models for
the first time and achieves superior performance than PPO-based methods.



2    R ELATED W ORK

Text-to-image diffusion. Diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020; Song & Ermon, 2019; Saharia et al.,
2021b;a) have emerged as an effective class of approaches for high-quality image generation via an
iterative denoising process to transform Gaussian noise into image samples.
The text-to-image generation approaches (Rombach et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2022; Ho et al.,
2022; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2022; Nichol et al., 2021; Saharia et al., 2022) demonstrate remarkable
performance on fine-grained high-resolution image generation conditioned by text prompts. Some
text-to-image diffusion approaches (Rombach et al., 2022) replace the pixel space denoising with
latent space denoising to significantly reduce the computational complexity. Since the denoising
training is defined as a supervised learning process, the generated images follow the training data
distribution.
Although text-to-image diffusion models introduce text encoders to condition the denoising process,
from a user’s perspective, generating images with desired content from text prompts is still not easy.
To improve model adaption to user context, a number of recent work focus on fine-tuning the model
with limited user data (Ruiz et al., 2023; Gal et al., 2023; Sohn et al., 2023; Kawar et al., 2023).
Although fine-tuning can adapt the generated data distribution to the distribution learned from user
input data, it still cannot learn the semantic properties in text prompts including specific color, image
composition, object count, object location, etc. Fine-tuning the model to be able to generate unlearned
properties in text prompts remains an open research problem.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Text             Diffusion                                                              Reward
                                                                      Reward                                     Optimization
     prompt             model
                                                                      model                                         target
        c                 πr


                                                                 Model update
                              (a) Traditional text-to-image generation model fine-tuning with RL.

                                                           Predict


                                      Sampled            Sampled pair                               Preference
                                       dataset


                  Diffusion
                                                                                 Reward                          Optimization
                   model
                                                                                 model                              target
                    πref

      Text
     prompt
        c

                  Diffusion                                Predict
                   model
                      πr

                                                                  Model update

                  (b) Our proximal preference optimization for fine-tuning text-to-image generation model.



Figure 1: Comparison between (a) the traditional RL based diffusion model finetuning frame-
work and (b) the proposed PPOD framework. The traditional finetuning approach (e.g. Fan et al.
(2023)) performs an online RL by predicting a reward for each generated image and optimizing the
KL-divergence regularized reward objective. Our approach converts the policy optimization to a
supervised learning problem. It samples a pair of images from a generated image dataset (generated
either online or offline). Predict the preference from the current and reference diffusion models.
Finally optimize the current diffusion model via a cross-entropy optimization objectives.


Learning from human / AI feedback. Introducing human / AI assessment to improve the perfor-
mance of generative models has become a popular approach, since the log likelihood optimization is
not sufficient to optimize generative models. The reinforcement learning from human / AI feedback,
i.e. (RLHF; Ouyang et al., 2022) and (RLAIF; Lee et al., 2023a), has been widely studied in
language modeling. The human feedback is collected by asking the annotator to rank the outputs
from the language model, and called preference data. A reward model is learned from the human
preference data and used for the policy optimization. The main challenges of RLHF / RLAIF is the
learning complexity. Schulman et al. (2017) proposed proximal policy optimization (PPO) to reduce
the optimization complexity by clapping the gradient during the learning. Schulman et al. (2015)
proposed the trusted region policy optimization (TRPO) to limit the exploration space within the
trusted region. Recently, Rafailov et al. (2023) proposed a direct preference optimization (DPO),
which transforms the reward optimization to a cross-entropy loss optimization problem by applying
the BT model (Bradley & Terry, 1952) to model the preference data. Their evaluation demonstrated
that DPO performs similarly or better than existing RLHF algorithms, and reduces the complexity by
skipping training reward model.
Reinforcement learning to fine-tune diffusion model. Fine-tuning text-to-image generation models
with RL is an emerging research topic given the success of RLHF / RLAIF in language modeling. The
early work learned a reward model for image generator by fine-tuning the vision-language models
such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) and BLIP (Li et al., 2022) to predict the scalar reward value that is
expected to be aligned with the human preference (Xu et al., 2023; Kirstain et al., 2023). The reward
model is then used to fine-tune the generative model (Wu et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2023b). Recently,
Black et al. (2023) introduced an online RL learning pipeline by treating the denoising process as a
Markov Decision Process (MDP) and solving it by PPO. In parallel, Fan et al. (2023) also proposed
an online fine-tuning framework to optimize the reward function plus the KL divergence between the
reference and fine-tuned diffusion model. These RL based fine-tuning approaches explored a new


                                                                3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


direction of enabling diffusion models to learn under the guidance. The learning efficiency is not
well optimized since they all required to build a reward model from the preference data. We develop
a proximal preference optimization to directly optimize on the preference data. Evaluation results
demonstrate that our approach outperforms existing RL based fine-tuning approaches for diffusion
models.

3     M ETHOD
3.1   P ROBLEM S ETTING

Diffusion model. In our work, we use the stable diffusion (SD) model (Rombach et al., 2022) as the
starting point for RL finetuning. The SD model is trained based on denoising diffusion probabilistic
models (DDPMs; Ho et al., 2020). Let x0 be the original image, and xT be a noise image sampled
from a Gaussian distribution. The forward pass is a Markovian process q(xt |xt−1 ), which transforms
the original image x0 to xT by iteratively adding Gaussian noise, producing a sequence of noisy
samples {x1 , · · · , xT }. The Markovian process can be described as:
                                       p                                     T
                                                                             Y
            q(xt |xt−1 ) = N (xt ;      1 − βt xt−1 , βt I) , q(x1:T |x0 ) =   q(xt |xt−1 ) .             (1)
                                                                                 t=1
The denoising process is trained to reverse the forward process to convert from a noise input
xT ∼ N (0, I) to the original image x0 as below:
                                T
                                Y
          pθ (x0:T ) = p(xT )         pθ (xt−1 |xt ) , pθ (xt−1 |xt ) = N (xt−1 ; µθ (xt , t), σt2 I) .   (2)
                                t=1

The distribution pθ (xt−1 |xt ) can be modeled as a Gaussian when the noise at each step is small.
Its mean is then predicted by the neural network µθ (xt , t) based on the input noisy image xt at
timestamp t.
Text-to-image diffusion model. Text-to-image diffusion models introduce text prompts to condition
the image generation. The encoded text prompt is attended to the latent code during the denoising
process. Therefore, the prediction network can be updated to µθ (xt , t, c) where c is the conditional
text prompt.
Reinforcement learning with reward model. We introduce a reward model into the finetuning loop
to guide the performance improvement. The reward model steers the finetuning process by evaluating
the generated image quality and alignment with the text prompt. The reward function is defined
as r(x0 , c). Since the denoising process is defined as a MDP (Black et al., 2023; Fan et al., 2023),
which is formalized as a sequential decision making process, the diffusion model can be treated as a
policy πθ . The diffusion model defines a conditional probability distribution πθ (x0 |c).

3.2   P ROXIMAL P REFERENCE O PTIMIZATION

The proximal preference optimization for diffusion (PPOD) models is proposed to optimize the
reward. The optimization problem of PPOD is defined as

          max Ec∼p(c) Ex0 ∼π(x0 |c) [r(x0 , c)] − ηKL[π(x0:T | c) k πref (x0:T | c)] ,   (3)
             π

where πref (x0 |c) is the reference policy before finetuning, i.e. the pretrained diffusion model.
Ex0 ∼π(x0 |c) [r(x0 , c)] defines the objective to optimize reward. KL denotes the KL divergence
between the finetuned and reference policies, which regularizes the finetuned policy to maintain the
overall generation capability of the pretrained policy. Different from the language modeling, the
KL divergence for diffusion models needs to regularize the whole denoising process between the
finetuned and reference policies, i.e. π(x0:T | c) and πref (x0:T | c). Finally, η denotes a weighting
coefficient between the reward and KL divergence regularization.
Inspired by the derivation in Rafailov et al. (2023), the optimal solution to Equation (3) can be
expressed as
                                       1                        1
                     πr (x0:T | c) =       πref (x0:T | c) exp    r(x0 , c) ,                 (4)
                                     Z(c)                       η

                                                        4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Training without Clipped Log Ratios                         Training with Clipped Log Ratios


Figure 2: Effect of clipping log probability ratios during training. Clipping log probability ratios
remarkably improves optimization stability.

where the denominator Z(c) can be written as
                                  Z
                                                             1
                         Z(c) = πref (x0:T | c) exp            r(x0 , c) dx0:T .                   (5)
                                                             η
Predicting the optimal policy πr from Equation (4) is hard, since the denominator Z(c) is intractable.
However, the Bradley-Terry (BT; Bradley & Terry, 1952) model designed for modeling the preference
data inspires us to solve the problem via modeling the reward difference between samples. Assume
we have a pair of generated image samples {xw           l          w
                                                   0 , x0 }, and x0 achieves higher reward value than
 l
x0 . The BT model can therefore be framed as optimizing the following cross-entropy loss with a
parameterized reward model r(x0 , c)
                                                            w            l

                          max E(xw    ,xl ,c)∼D log σ r(x0 , c) − r(x0 , c)   ,                    (6)
                              r     0   0

where σ is the logistic function. Besides the Sigmoid function, we can also consider the other loss
functions such as MSE, etc. We evaluate the performance between cross-entropy and MSE loss in the
ablation studies.
By transforming Equation (4), we can express the reward for each sample as
                                                   πr (x0:T | c)
                              r(x0 , c) = η log                     + η log Z(c) .                    (7)
                                                  πref (x0:T | c)
Substituting r(x0 , c) defined in Equation (7) in Equation (6) yields the following optimization target
                                                       πr (xw                    πr (xl0:T | c)

                                                             0:T | c)
           max E(xw        l
                     0:T ,x0:T ,c)∼D
                                       log σ   η log                   −  η log                     . (8)
            πr                                        πref (xw0:T | c)          πref (xl0:T | c)
Now, the denominator Z(c) is canceled out in Equation (8), which makes the optimization problem
solvable. We can interpret Equation (8) as using the difference between two log probability ratios
to predict which generated image is preferred by humans or a reward model. That is, the policy is
optimized for predicting the preference, instead of directly maximizing the reward.
Since the diffusion model can be treated as a MDP, x0:T can be expanded as a product of the step-wise
denoising step. The log ratio term in Equation (8) can be transformed to a sum of the step-wise log
ratios as:
                                                T
                            πr (xw                       πr (xw        w
                                                               t−1 | xt , c)

                                  0:T | c)
                                              X
                       log                  =       log                         .                 (9)
                           πref (xw0:T | c)    t=1
                                                        πref (xw        w
                                                                t−1 | xt , c)

Our experiments found optimizing Equation (8) without any regularization can produce very unstable
fine-tuing results as demonstated in the left sub-figure of Figure 2. To improve the stability of the
optimization process, we are inspired by the PPO approach to clip the log ratio between the finetuned
and reference policies by clog(·) = clip (log(·), − ,  ) . After introducing the clip, the optimization
output becomes much more stable than without clipping. The images in the right sub-figure of
Figure 2 demonstrate the tractable progress of the optimization process.
Therefore, the optimization targets in Equation (8) can be further simplified as

                          "          T                                                                 !#
                                     X           πr (xw        w
                                                       t−1 | xt , c)          πr (xlt−1 | xlt , c)
  max E(xw     l
         0:T ,x0:T ,c)∼D
                         log σ η           clog                       − clog                                .
    πr
                                     t=1
                                                πref (xw        w
                                                        t−1 | xt , c)        πref (xlt−1 | xlt , c)
                                                                                                        (10)


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 PPOD Training
Require: A pretrained denoising model πref (x0:T | c), a reward model r(x0 , c)
  while not converged do
     Sample K images from the given text prompt c and record the sampling process (xk0:T | c).
     Predict a reward score r(xk , c) for each sampled image xk .
     Sample M pairs of images from the rated images generated last step.
     Calculate the preference prediction loss defined in Equation (10).
     Optimize the model with gradient descent.
  end while


The PPOD algorithm is outlined in Algorithm 1. PPOD can optimize with the reward generated both
online and offline. The offline generated reward is used in RLHF when the human preference data
is collected offline. In this case, the preference pair are sampled from the offline dataset in each
batch to optimize the model. On the other side, the online generated reward can be used in RLAIF or
interactive finetuning. In this case, a new dataset is generated at each training step from the latest
finetuned generator. The reward model or human annotator rates the sampled pair as the preference
for each iteration. Based on our evaluation, the online learning can achieve better performance than
the offline learning.


4     E XPERIMENTS

4.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

We follow the same setting as DPOK (Fan et al., 2023), where we use Stable Diffusion v1.5 (Rombach
et al., 2022) as the pretrained model, and finetune it on one prompt at a time. Specifically, we use
the following prompts for training: “A green colored rabbit”, “Four wolves in the park”, “A cat and
a dog”, and “A dog on the moon”. They involve generating objects with specific colors, counts,
compositions, and locations, which have been found challenging for Stable Diffusion. It has been
shown in DPOK that by finetuning Stable Diffusion through reward maximization, we can partially
mitigate these weaknesses. Our results will demonstrate that our proposed model PPOD obtains a
better reward than DPOK on all four prompts, showing great potential for RLAIF in diffusion models.
Baselines. In addition to the pretrained Stable Diffusion, we mainly consider supervised finetuning
(SFT) and DPOK to be our baselines. Because the source code of DPOK has not been released,
we follow the training setup described in the DPOK paper. Specifically, we use ImageReward (Xu
et al., 2023) as the reward model, as it is better aligned with human preference than alternatives
such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021). The number of queries to the reward model is 20K for all
methods compared. That is, SFT generates an offline dataset of 20K images using the pretrained
Stable Diffusion. DPOK generates 20K images in total during its online policy update. For our
model, the offline version uses the same amount of data as SFT. The online version consists of 4
stages. For each stage, we generate 5K images using the latest model checkpoint, and update the
model till convergence on these 5K images.

4.2   M AIN R ESULTS

We report the ImageReward score of all models in Figure 3. The scores of Stable Diffusion and PPOD
are averaged over 5K samples per prompt using the same random seed. The scores of SFT and DPOK
are obtained from the DPOK paper, which uses 50 samples. PPOD achieves the best ImageReward
score across all four prompts, surpassing the PPO-based DPOK and significantly outperforming SFT.
This suggests that optimizing policy for preference prediction is a promising alternative to direct
reward maximization for RLAIF in diffusion models.
In Figure 4 (Right), we show PPOD generation samples at the end of each online training stage. It
can be seen that PPOD is able to continually improve through online training, correcting mistakes in
the pretrained Stable Diffusion and previous training stages. For example, in the second row, PPOD
gradually increases the number of wolves to four. In the third row, PPOD removes the additional cat


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                               7XEFPI (MJJYWMSR
                                                                                                               7*8
                                                                                                            (43/
                                                                                                               443(


                    -QEKI6I[EVH  7GSVI


                                                                    'SPSV   'SYRX 'SQTSWMXMSR 0SGEXMSR
Figure 3: Comparison of reward maximization capability. Our proposed model PPOD achieves
the best ImageReward score across all four prompts, showing great potential for RLAIF.

                          Stable                                         PPOD
                                                                                                             PPOD Online Training
                         Diffusion                                       Oﬄine


     "A green
  colored rabbit"


   "Four wolves
    in the park"


     "A cat and
       a dog"


     "A dog on
     the moon"



Figure 4: Generation samples on training prompts. The first image on each row is the image
generated by Stable Diffusion. It shows limitations in generating the correct color, count, composition,
and location. The second image on each row is generated by the PPOD offline version. It can partially
address the limitations of the pretrained SD model. The last four images in a row on each row are the
images generated by PPOD at different online training stages. Through online training, PPOD is able
to continually improve its generation and correct mistakes. Images in the same row are generated
with the same random seed.


in the last training stage. Because there is no DPOK checkpoint available, we are unable to provide a
qualitative comparison with DPOK. We refer the reader to the DPOK paper for qualitative results.
We also test PPOD with unseen prompts at the end of each online training stage. Generation samples
are shown in Figure 5 (Right). We find that PPOD generalizes reasonably, and the generation quality
on unseen prompts also improves in the process of online training.


                                                                                       7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                              Stable                                    PPOD
                                                                                                                                                                                       PPOD Online Training
                                                                             Diffusion                                  Oﬄine


                                         "A green
                                       colored cat"


                                       "Four birds
                                       in the park"


                                        "A cat and
                                          a cup"


                                         "A lion on
                                        the moon"



Figure 5: Generation samples on unseen prompts. PPOD maintains reasonable generalization
ability. The generation quality on unseen prompts also improves over iterations in online training.
Images in the same row are generated with the same random seed.

                                                % KVIIR GSPSVIH VEFFMX                *SYV [SPZIW MR XLI TEVO                 % GEX ERH E HSK                        % HSK SR XLI QSSR

-QEKI6I[EVH  7GSVI


                                                                             3JJPMRI
                                                                          3RPMRI


                                                3RPMRI 8VEMRMRK 7XEKI                   3RPMRI 8VEMRMRK 7XEKI               3RPMRI 8VEMRMRK 7XEKI            3RPMRI 8VEMRMRK 7XEKI

Figure 6: Online vs. offline learning on training prompts. The online model matches the offline
model performance within two stages, and keeps improving afterwards in most cases.


 4.3                                       A BLATION S TUDY

Online Learning vs. Offline Learning. In Figures 4 and 5, we have qualitatively demonstrated that
online training continually improves the generation quality of PPOD on both training prompts and
unseen prompts. We further provide quantitative comparisons in Figures 6 and 7. Here, we evaluate
the ImageReward score of PPOD at the end of each online training stage, for both training and unseen
prompts. For a fair comparison, both the offline and online model use the same total number of
reward queries and gradient updates. We find that in most cases, the online model is able to match the
offline model performance within two stages (using half the number of reward queries and gradient
updates), and keeps improving afterwards. We conjecture that with more frequent online updates,
PPOD may become even better.
Preference Prediction Loss: Cross Entropy vs. Mean Squared Error. Here, we compare PPOD
with its variant, PPOD-MSE, that uses mean squared error (MSE) as the preference prediction loss.
For simplicity, we only consider the offline setting. We observe in Table 1 that the two models
obtain similar ImageReward scores. Qualitatively, as shown in Figure 8, PPOD-MSE generations can
sometimes be less natural. Therefore, we choose cross-entropy as the favorable loss function in our
design.


                                                                                                                                                       8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                     % KVIIR GSPSVIH GEX                   *SYV FMVHW MR XLI TEVO                 % GEX ERH E GYT                        % PMSR SR XLI QSSR


-QEKI6I[EVH  7GSVI



                                                                               3JJPMRI
                                                                            3RPMRI


                                                3RPMRI 8VEMRMRK 7XEKI                    3RPMRI 8VEMRMRK 7XEKI              3RPMRI 8VEMRMRK 7XEKI            3RPMRI 8VEMRMRK 7XEKI

Figure 7: Online vs. offline learning on unseen prompts. The online model matches the offline
model performance within two stages, and keeps improving afterwards in most cases.


                                                                 PPOD Oﬄine                                                                                                         PPOD-MSE Oﬄine


Figure 8: Generated images learned with cross-entropy and MSE as the preference prediction loss,
respectively.


 5                                      C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we propose a novel proximal preference optimization approach to fine-tune the diffusion
model (PPOD) for the use case of reinforcement learning with AI feedback (RLAIF). PPOD derives
the direct preference optimization algorithm for diffusion process and introduces the proximal
constraint to solve the optimization challenges in diffusion model. Similar to DPO, PPOD reduces the
barriers in fine-tuning the diffusion model and makes the fine-tuning process efficient and stable. Our
experiments demonstrate the superior performance for maximizing the reward model with fine-tuning
the diffusion model, over both the supervised fine-tuning and the RL based approach. We also study
the design including online and offline learning as well as the supervised learning loss choice. The
evaluation proves our design achieves the optimal performance. We mainly target on RLAIF in this
paper as RLAIF is getting more attention due to its low cost and comparable performance to RLHF.
Notably, the proposed PPOD is a generic approach for various use cases including online RLAIF,
iteractive RLHF, the offline RLHF, etc.


 R EFERENCES
Kevin Black, Michael Janner, Yilun Du, Ilya Kostrikov, and Sergey Levine. Training diffusion models
  with reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13301, 2023.


  Table 1: Quantitative evaluation of using cross-entropy and MSE as the preference prediction loss.

                                                                                                                                                   PPOD                    PPOD-MSE
                                                                                                                   Model
                                                                                                                                                   Offline                   Offline
                                                                                                          ImageReward
                                                                                                                                                      1.18                          1.15
                                                                                                             Score


                                                                                                                                                        9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ralph Allan Bradley and Milton E Terry. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the method
  of paired comparisons. Biometrika, 39(3/4):324–345, 1952.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alex Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. In Conference
  on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Ying Fan, Olivia Watkins, Yuqing Du, Hao Liu, Moonkyung Ryu, Craig Boutilier, Pieter Abbeel,
  Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, Kangwook Lee, and Kimin Lee. Dpok: Reinforcement learning for
  fine-tuning text-to-image diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16381, 2023.
Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit Haim Bermano, Gal Chechik, and
  Daniel Cohen-or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using
  textual inversion. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Jonathan Ho, Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, David J Fleet, Mohammad Norouzi, and Tim Salimans.
  Cascaded diffusion models for high fidelity image generation. Journal of Machine Learning
  Research, 2022.
Bahjat Kawar, Shiran Zada, Oran Lang, Omer Tov, Huiwen Chang, Tali Dekel, Inbar Mosseri, and
  Michal Irani. Imagic: Text-based real image editing with diffusion models. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6007–6017, 2023.
Yuval Kirstain, Adam Polyak, Uriel Singer, Shahbuland Matiana, Joe Penna, and Omer Levy.
  Pick-a-pic: An open dataset of user preferences for text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.01569, 2023.
Harrison Lee, Samrat Phatale, Hassan Mansoor, Kellie Lu, Thomas Mesnard, Colton Bishop, Victor
  Carbune, and Abhinav Rastogi. Rlaif: Scaling reinforcement learning from human feedback with
  ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.00267, 2023a.
Kimin Lee, Hao Liu, Moonkyung Ryu, Olivia Watkins, Yuqing Du, Craig Boutilier, Pieter Abbeel,
  Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, and Shixiang Shane Gu. Aligning text-to-image models using human
  feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.12192, 2023b.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Caiming Xiong, and Steven Hoi. Blip: Bootstrapping language-image pre-
  training for unified vision-language understanding and generation. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 12888–12900. PMLR, 2022.
Alex Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Bob McGrew Pamela Mishkin,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and editing with
  text-guided diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.10741, 2021.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Stefano Ermon, Christopher D Manning, and Chelsea
  Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.18290, 2023.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, , and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21:5485–5551, 2020.


                                                   10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman.
  Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In Proceed-
  ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 22500–22510,
  2023.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Huiwen Chang, Chris A. Lee, Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, David J.
  Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi. Palette: Image-to-image diffusion models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2111.05826, 2021a.
Chitwan Saharia, Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Tim Salimans, David J Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi.
  Image super-resolution via iterative refinemen. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.07636, 2021b.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed Kam-
  yar Seyed Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, Jonathan
  Ho, David J. Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi. Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with
  deep language understanding. In Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region
  policy optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1889–1897. PMLR,
  2015.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Kihyuk Sohn, Nataniel Ruiz, Kimin Lee, Daniel Castro Chin, Irina Blok, Huiwen Chang, Jarred
  Barber, Lu Jiang, Glenn Entis, Yuanzhen Li, et al. Styledrop: Text-to-image generation in any
  style. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00983, 2023.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020.
Yang Song and Stefano Ermon. Generative modeling by estimating gradients of the data distribution.
  In Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.
Xiaoshi Wu, Keqiang Sun, Feng Zhu, Rui Zhao, and Hongsheng Li. Better aligning text-to-image
  models with human preference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.14420, 2023.
Jiazheng Xu, Xiao Liu, Yuchen Wu, Yuxuan Tong, Qinkai Li, Ming Ding, Jie Tang, and Yuxiao Dong.
   Imagereward: Learning and evaluating human preferences for text-to-image generation. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2304.05977, 2023.


                                               11
