Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


V ISION - BASED D ISCOVERY OF N ONLINEAR DYNAM -
ICS FOR 3D M OVING TARGET

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                              A BSTRACT

         Data-driven discovery of governing equations has kindled significant interests in
         many science and engineering areas. Existing studies primarily focus on uncov-
         ering equations that govern nonlinear dynamics based on direct measurement of
         the system states (e.g., trajectories). Limited efforts have been placed on distill-
         ing governing laws of dynamics directly from videos for moving targets in a 3D
         space. To this end, we propose a vision-based approach to automatically uncover
         governing equations of nonlinear dynamics for 3D moving targets via raw videos
         recorded by a set of cameras. The approach is composed of three key blocks: (1)
         a target tracking module that extracts plane pixel motions of the moving target
         in each video, (2) a Rodrigues’ rotation formula-based coordinate transformation
         learning module that reconstructs the 3D coordinates with respect to a predefined
         reference point, and (3) a spline-enhanced library-based sparse regressor that un-
         covers the underlying governing law of dynamics. This framework is capable of
         effectively handling the challenges associated with measurement data, e.g., noise
         in the video, imprecise tracking of the target that causes data missing, etc. The
         efficacy of the proposed method has been demonstrated through multiple sets of
         synthetic videos considering different nonlinear dynamics.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Nonlinear dynamics is ubiquitous in nature. Data-driven discovery of underlying laws or equations
that govern complex dynamics has drawn great attention in many science and engineering areas such
as astrophysics, aerospace science, biomedicine, etc. Existing studies primarily focus on uncovering
governing equations based on direct measurement of the system states, e.g., trajectory time series,
(Bongard & Lipson, 2007; Schmidt & Lipson, 2009; Brunton et al., 2016; Rudy et al., 2017; Chen
et al., 2021b; Sun et al., 2021). Limited efforts have been placed on distilling governing laws of
dynamics directly from videos for moving targets in a 3D space, which represents a novel and
interdisciplinary research domain. This challenge calls for a solution of fusing various techniques,
including computer stereo vision, visual object tracking, and symbolic discovery of equations.
Let us consider a moving object in a 3D space. The scene of this object is recorded by a set of hori-
zontally positioned, calibrated cameras at different locations. Discovery of the governing equations
for the moving target first requires accurate estimation of its 3D trajectory directly from the videos,
which can be realized based on computer stereo vision and object tracking techniques. Computer
stereo vision, which aims to reconstruct 3D coordinates for depth estimation of a given target, has
shown immense potential in the fields of robotics (Nalpantidis & Gasteratos, 2011; Li et al., 2021),
autonomous driving (Ma et al., 2019; Peng et al., 2020), among others. Disparity estimation is a cru-
cial step in stereo vision, as it computes the distance information of objects in a 3D space, thereby
enabling accurate perception and understanding of the environment. Recent advances of deep learn-
ing has kindled successful techniques for visual object tracking e.g., DeepSORT (Wojke et al., 2017)
and YOLO (Redmon et al., 2016). The aforementioned techniques lay a critical foundation to accu-
rately estimate the 3D trajectory of a moving target for distilling governing equations, simply based
on videos recorded by multiple cameras in a complex scene.
We assume that the nonlinear dynamics of a moving target can be described by a set of ordinary
differential equations, e.g., dy/dt = F(y), where F is a nonlinear function of the d-dimensional
system state y = {y1 (t), y2 (t), . . . , yd (t)} ∈ Rd . The objective of equation discovery is to identify


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the closed-form of F given observations of y. This could be achieved via symbolic regression (Bon-
gard & Lipson, 2007; Schmidt & Lipson, 2009; Sahoo et al., 2018; Petersen et al., 2021; Mundhenk
et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2023) or sparse regression (Brunton et al., 2016; Rudy et al., 2017; Rao et al.,
2023). When the measurement data is noisy and sparse, differentiable models (e.g., neural networks
(Chen et al., 2021b), cubic splines (Sun et al., 2021; 2022)) are employed to reconstruct the system
states, thereby forming the physics-informed learning scheme for more robust equation discovery.
Recently, attempts have been made toward scene understanding and prediction grounding physical
concepts (Jaques et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021a). Although a number of efforts have been placed on
distilling the unknown governing laws of dynamics from videos for moving targets (Champion et al.,
2019; Udrescu & Tegmark, 2021; Luan et al., 2022), the system dynamics was assumed in plane
(e.g., in a 2D space). To our knowledge, distilling governing equations for a moving object in a 3D
space (e.g., d = 3) directly from raw videos remains scant in literature. To this end, we introduce a
unified vision-based approach to automatically uncover governing equations of nonlinear dynamics
for a moving target in a predefined reference coordinate system, based on raw video data recorded
by a set of horizontally positioned, calibrated cameras at different locations.

Contributions. The proposed approach is composed of three key blocks: (1) a target tracking
module based on YOLO-v8 that extracts plane pixel motions of the moving target in each video
data; (2) a coordinate transformation model based on Rodrigues’ rotation formula, which allows the
conversion of pixel coordinates obtained through target tracking to 3D spatial/physical coordinates
in a predefined reference coordinate system given the calibrated parameters of only one camera;
and (3) a spline-enhanced library-based sparse regressor that uncovers a parsimonious form of the
underlying governing equations for the nonlinear dynamics. Through the integration of these com-
ponents, it becomes possible to extract spatiotemporal information of a moving target from 2D video
data and subsequently uncover the underlying governing law of dynamics. This integrated frame-
work excels in effectively addressing challenges associated with measurement noise and data gaps
induced by imprecise target tracking. Results from extensive experiments demonstrate the efficacy
of the proposed method. This endeavor offers a novel perspective for understanding the complex
dynamics of moving targets in a 3D space.

2    R ELATED W ORK
Computer stereo vision. Multi-view stereo aims to reconstruct a 3D model of the observed scene
from images with different viewpoints (Schönberger et al., 2016; Galliani et al., 2016), assuming
the intrinsic and extrinsic camera parameters are known.Recently, many endeavors have been based
on deep learning to tackle this challenge, such as convolutional neural networks (Flynn et al., 2016;
Huang et al., 2018) and adaptive modulation network with co-teaching strategy (Wang et al., 2021).
Target tracking. Methods for vision-based target tracking can be broadly categorized into two
main classes: correlation filtering and deep learning. Compared to traditional algorithms, correlation
filtering-based approaches offer faster target tracking (Mueller et al., 2017), while deep learning-
based methods (Ciaparrone et al., 2020; Marvasti-Zadeh et al., 2021) provide higher precision.
Governing equation discovery. Data-driven discovery of governing equations can be realized
through a number of symbolic/sparse regression techniques. The most popular symbolic regression
methods include genetic programming (Koza, 1994; Bongard & Lipson, 2007; Schmidt & Lipson,
2009), symbolic neural networks (Sahoo et al., 2018), deep symbolic regression (Petersen et al.,
2021; Mundhenk et al., 2021), and Monte Carlo tree search (Lu et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2023).
Sparse regression techniques such as SINDy (Brunton et al., 2016; Rudy et al., 2017; Rao et al.,
2023) leverage a predefined library that includes a limited number of candidate terms, which search
for the underlying equations in a compact solution space.
Physics-informed learning. Physics-informed learning has been developed to deal with noisy and
sparse data in the context of equation discovery. Specifically, differentiable models (e.g., neural net-
works (Raissi et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2021b), cubic splines (Sun et al., 2021; 2022)) are employed
to reconstruct the system states and approximate the required derivative terms required to form the
underlying eauqtions.
Vision-based discovery of dynamics. Very recently, attempts have been made to discover the
governing of equations for moving objects directly from videos. These methods are generally based


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         time
          !                                     …
                                                                      Target
                                                                     tracking                       Camera
                                                                                                   parameters

                                                …
                                                                                                    Coordinates
                                                                      Target
                                                                                                    learning and
                                                                     tracking
                                                                                                  transformation


                                                …                                                                                          Reconstructed 3D
                                                                                                                                           trajectory points
                                                                      Target
                                                                     tracking
                Reference point
                                                                              Pixel coordinates

              Video measurement                        Target tracking                            Trajectory reconstruction

          "                                Differentiation w.r.t. time:                where

                              Adaptive
                             parameter


                                                                                                    Collocation Points
              Spline Model
                                                                                     Construct                                     =           …
                                                                                     Equation
                                            Reconstructed 3D                          Model
                                            trajectory points
                                            Spline-fitted
                                            trajectory
                                                            Library of candidate functions                               For training details, see Section 3.4
              Equation discovery


Figure 1: Schematic of vision-based discovery of nonlinear dynamics for 3D moving target. Firstly, we record
the motion trajectory of the object in a 3D space using multiple cameras in a predefined reference coordinate
system (see a). Pixel trajectory coordinates are obtained through target identification and tracking. Note that
camera parameters include the camera’s position, the normal vector of the camera’s view plane, and the cal-
ibrated camera parameters, which comprise the scaling factor and tilt angle. In particular, we use coordinate
learning and transformation to obtain the spatial motion trajectory in the reference coordinate system. Sec-
ondly, for each dimension of the trajectory, we introduce a spline-enhanced library-based sparse regressor to
uncover the underlying governing law of dynamics (see b).

on autoencoders that extract the latent dynamics for equation discovery (Champion et al., 2019;
Udrescu & Tegmark, 2021; Luan et al., 2022). Other related works include the discovery of intrinsic
dynamics Floryan & Graham (2022) or fundamental variables (Chen et al., 2022) based on high-
dimensional data such as videos.

3     M ETHODOLOGY
We here elucidate the concept and approach of vision-based discovery of nonlinear dynamics for 3D
moving target. Figure 1 shows the schematic architecture of our method. The target tracking mod-
ule serves as the foundational stage, which extracts pixel-level motion information from the target’s
movements across consecutive frames in a video sequence. The coordinate transformation module
utilizes Rodrigues’ rotation formula with respect to a predefined reference coordinate origin, which
lays the groundwork for the subsequent analysis of the object’s dynamics. The final crucial compo-
nent is the spline-enhanced library-based sparse regressor, essential for revealing the fundamental
dynamics governing object motion. We then introduce each module in detail as follows.

3.1   C OORDINATES T RANSFORMATION
In this paper, we employ three fixed-position cameras oriented in different directions to indepen-
dently capture the motion of an object (see Figure 1a). With the constraint of calibrating only one
camera, our coordinate learning module becomes essential (e.g., the 3D trajectory of the target and
other camera parameters can be simultaneously learned). In particular, it is tasked with learning the
unknown parameters of the other two cameras, including scaling factors and the rotation angle on
each camera plane. These parameters enable to reconstruct the motion trajectory of the object in the
reference coordinate system. We leverage Rodrigues’ rotation formula to compute vector rotations
in three-dimensional space, which enables the derivation of the rotation matrix, describing the ro-
tation operation from a given initial vector to a desired target vector. This formula finds extensive
utility in computer graphics, computer vision, robotics, and 3D rigid body motion problems.


                                                                          3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In a 3D space, a rotation matrix is used to represent the transformation of a rigid body around an axis.
Let v0 represent the initial vector and v1 denote the target vector. We denote the rotation matrix as
R. The relationship between the pre- and post-rotation vectors can be expressed as v1 = Rv0 . The
                                                                  ·v1
rotation angle, denoted as θ, can be calculated via cos θ = ∥vv00∥∥v 1∥
                                                                        . The rotation axis is represented
                                                      v0 ×v1
by the unit vector u = [ux , uy , uz ], namely, u = ∥v0 ×v1 ∥ . Having defined the rotation angle θ and
the unit vector k, we construct the rotation matrix R using Rodrigues’ rotation formula, given by
                                  R = I + sin θU + (1 − cos θ)U2 .                                     (1)
where I is a 3 × 3 identity matrix, and U is a 3 × 3 skew-symmetric matrix representing the cross
product of the rotation axis vector u expressed as
                                             0     −uz uy
                                          "                 #
                                     U = uz         0   −ux .                                 (2)
                                            −uy ux       0
The resulting expansion of the rotation matrix R is then given as follows:
                                                                                              
           cos θ + u2x (1 − cos θ)   ux uy (1 − cos θ) − uz sin θ ux uz (1 − cos θ) + uy sin θ
  R = ux uy (1 − cos θ) + uz sin θ     cos θ + u2y (1 − cos θ)   uy uz (1 − cos θ) − ux sin θ.       (3)
        ux uz (1 − cos θ) − uy sin θ uy uz (1 − cos θ) + ux sin θ    cos θ + u2z (1 − cos θ)
In a predefined reference coordinate system, we use multiple cameras to track the target motion in
a 3D space. Let v0 = (0, 0, 1)T be the initial vector, and a camera’s plane equation be Ax + By +
Cz + D = 0, where v1 = (A, B, C) is the target vector. The rotation axis vector is u = (ux , uy , 0),
and the rotation matrix R is computed as:
                                                                                  
                       cos θ + u2x (1 − cos θ)     ux uy (1 − cos θ)     uy sin θ
               R=       ux uy (1 − cos θ)      cos θ + u2y (1 − cos θ) −ux sin θ  .             (4)
                             −uy sin θ                  ux sin θ           cos θ
Let x(t) = (x, y, z)T represent the initial coordinates of a moving object at time t, and xr =
(xr , yr , zr )T denotes its coordinates after rotation. This relationship is defined as R · x = xr , where
the rotation matrix R transforms the initial coordinates x into the rotated coordinates xr . Hence, we
can obtain [xr , yr , zr ]T = R · [x, y, z]T .
The camera plane equation is Ax + By + Cz + D = 0. When projecting a three-dimensional object
onto this plane, denoting the coordinates of the projection as xp = (xp , yp , zp )T , we have:
                                                 2     2
                                                                                   
                                1            x(B    + C   ) − A(By +  Cz   +   D)
                   xp = 2                 · y(A2 + C 2 ) − B(Ax + Cz + D) .                   (5)
                         A + B2 + C 2         z(A2 + B 2 ) − C(Ax + By + D)
If the camera plane’s normal vector remains constant and scaling is neglected, the captured trajectory
is determined by the camera plane’s normal vector, irrespective of its position. After rotating the
camera’s normal vector v1 to v0 = (0, 0, 1)T (initial vector), denoted as xrp = (xrp , yrp , zrp )T , we
have xrp = R · xp . Here, xrp and yrp depending solely on the camera plane’s normal vector v1 and
independent of the parameter D shown in the camera’s plane equation. For more details, please refer
to Appendix A. In the reference coordinate system, an object’s trajectory is projected onto a camera
plane. Considering a camera position as the origin of the 2D camera plane, the positional offset of an
object’s projection on the 2D camera plane with respect to this origin is denoted as ∆c = (δx , δy )T .
This offset distance ∆c can be computed following the details shown in Appendix B.

3.2   C UBIC B-S PLINES
B-splines are differentiable, and constructed using piecewise polynomial functions called basis func-
tions. Sun et al. (2021) demonstrated that, when the measurement data is noisy and sparse, cubic
B-splines could serve as a differentiable surrogate model to form robust physics-informed learning
for equation discovery. We herein adopt this approach to tackle challenges associated with data
noise and gaps induced by the imprecise target tracking for discovering laws of 3D dynamics. The
i-th cubic B-spline basis function of degree k, written as Gi,k (u), can be defined recursively as:

                                    1 if ui ≤ u < ui+1
                     Gi,0 (u) =                            ,
                                    0 otherwise                                                     (6)
                                   u−ui                  ui+k+1 −u
                     Gi,k (u) = ui+k −ui G i,k−1 (u) + ui+k+1 −ui+1 G i+1,k−1 (u),


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where ui represents a knot that partitions the computational domain. By selecting appropriate con-
trol points and combinations of basis functions, cubic B-splines with C2 continuity can be cus-
tomized to meet specific requirements. In general, a cubic B-spline curve of degree p defined by
           Pn points P = {p0 , p1 , ..., pn } and a knot vector U = {u0 , u1 , ..., um } is given by:
n + 1 control
C(u) = i=0 Gi,3 (u) · pi . To ensure the curve possesses continuous and smooth tangent direc-
tions at the starting and ending nodes, meeting the first derivative interpolation requirement, we use
Clamped cubic B-spline curves for fitting.

3.3   N ETWORK A RCHITECTURE
We utilized the YOLO-v8 for object tracking in the recorded videos (see Figure 1a). Regardless of
whether the captured object has an irregular shape or is in a rotated state, we only need to capture
their centroid positions and track them to obtain pixel data. Subsequently, leveraging Rodrigues’
rotation formula and based on the calibrated camera, we derive the scaling and rotation factors of the
other two cameras. These factors enable the conversion of the object trajectory’s pixel coordinates
into the world coordinates deducing the physical trajectory. For the trajectory varying with time in
each dimension, we use the cubic B-splines to fit the trajectory and a library-based sparse regressor
to uncover the underlying governing law of dynamics in the reference coordinate system. This
approach is capable of dealing with data noise, multiple instances of data missing and gaps.
Learning 3D trajectory. In this work, we use a three-camera setup to capture and represent the
object’s 2D motion trajectory in each video scene, yielding the 2D coordinates denoted as (xrp , yrp ).
The rotation matrix R is decomposed to retain only the first two rows, denoted as R− , to suitably
handle the projection onto the image planes. Under the condition of calibrating only one camera, we
can reconstruct the coordinates of a moving object in the reference 3D coordinate system using three
fixed cameras capturing an object’s motion in a 3D space. The assumed given information includes
normal vectors v1 , v2 , v3 of camera planes for all three cameras, the positions of the cameras, as
well as a scaling factor s1 and rotation angles ϑ1 for one of the cameras. We define the scaling factor
vector as s = {s1 , s2 , s3 } and the rotation angle vector as ϑ = {ϑ1 , ϑ2 , ϑ3 }. The loss function for
reconstructing the 3D coordinates of the object in the reference coordinate system is given by
                                       −1                                                            2
                                 R−

                 1                            s2 T (ϑ2 ) xc2 + ∆c2
        ∗   ∗
  Lr (s ; ϑ ) =    R−             2                                      − (s1 T (ϑ1 ) xc1 + ∆c1 )       , (7)
                Nm  1            R−
                                  3
                                              s3 T (ϑ3 ) xc3 + ∆c3
                                                                                                     2

where s∗ = {s2 , s3 } and ϑ∗ = {ϑ2 , ϑ3 }. Here, xci = (xci , yci )T represents the pixel coordinates,
Nm the number of effectively recognized object coordinate points, T (ϑ) the transformation matrix
induced by rotation angle ϑ expressed as T (ϑ) = [cos ϑ sin ϑ; − sin ϑ cos ϑ].
In the case of using three cameras, the transformation between the object’s coordinates xref in the
reference coordinate system and the pixel coordinates xc in the camera setups is as follows
                                  − −1 "
                                    R1           s1 T (ϑ1 )xc1 + ∆c1
                                                                         #
                                      −
                             x =  R2           s2 T (ϑ2 )xc2 + ∆c2 .                          (8)
                                    R−3
                                                 s3 T (ϑ 3 )x c3
                                                                 + ∆ c 3


By solving for parameter values (s∗ , ϑ∗ ) via optimization of Eq. (7), we can subsequently compute
the reconstructed 3D physical coordinates through the calculation provided in Eq. (8).
Equation discovery. Given the potential challenges in target tracking, e.g., momentary target loss,
noise, or occlusions, we leverage physics-informed spline learning to address these issues (see Fig-
ure 1b). In particular, cubic B-splines are employed to approximate the 3D trajectory. Given three
sets of control points denoted as P = {p1 , p2 , p3 } ∈ Rr×3 . Given that the coordinate system is
arbitrarily defined, and to enhance the fitting of data Dr , we introduce the learnable adaptive offset
parameter ∆ = {∆1 , ∆2 , ∆3 }. The 3D parametric curves where x(t; P, ∆) are defined by the con-
trol point vectors P, the cubic B-spline basis functions G(t) and the offset parameter ∆, namely,
x(t; P, ∆) = G(t)P + ∆. Since the basis functions consist of differentiable polynomials, the ex-
pression of its differential equation is given by ẋ(P) = ĠP. Generally, the dynamics is governed by
a limited number of significant terms, which can be selected from a library of l candidate functions,
v.i.z., ϕ(x) ∈ R1×l (Brunton et al., 2016). The governing equations can be written as:
                                         ẋ(P) = ϕ(P, ∆)Λ,                                                 (9)


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where ϕ(P, ∆) = ϕ(x(t; P, ∆)), and Λ = {λ1 , λ2 , λ3 } ∈ S ⊂ Rl×3 is the sparse coefficient
matrix belonging to a constraint subset S (only the terms active in ϕ exhibit non-zero values).
Accordingly, the task of equation discovery can be formulated as follows: when provided with
                                                                  Nm ×3
reconstructed 3D trajectory data Dr = {xm            m    m
                                                1 , x2 , x3 } ∈ R       . In other words, Dr is presented as
effectively tracking the object movements in a video and subsequently transforming them into a 3D
trajectory, where Nm is the number of data points. Our goal is to identify the suitable set of P and a
sparse Λ that fits the trajectory data meanwhile satisfying Eq. (9). Considering that the reconstructed
trajectory Dr might exhibit noise or temporal discontinuity, we use collocation points denoted as
Dc = {t0 , t1 , . . . , tnc −1 } to compensate data imperfection, where Dc denotes the randomly sampled
set of Nc number of collocation points (Nc ≫ Nm ). These points are strategically employed to
reinforce the fulfillment of physics constraints at all time instances (see Figure 1b).

3.4   N ETWORK TRAINING
The loss function for this network comprises three main components, namely, the data component
Ld , the physics component Lp , and the sparsity regularizer, given by:
          L(P∗ , Λ∗ , ∆∗ ) = arg min [Ld (P, ∆; Dr ) + αLp (P, ∆, Λ; Dc )] + β∥Λ∥0 ,                     (10)
                                   {P,Λ,∆}
                      3                                            3        2
                  1   X                   2        1               X
          Ld =          ∥Gm pi + ∆i − xm
                                       i ∥2 , Lp =        Φ(P, ∆)λi − Ġc pi .                           (11)
                 Nm i=1                            Nc i=1                   2

where Gm denotes the spline basis matrix evaluated at the measured time instances, xm     i the coordi-
nates in each dimension after 3D reconstruction in the reference coordinate system (may be sparse
or exhibit data gaps whereas Ġc the derivative of the spline basis matrix evaluated at the colloca-
tion instances. The term Gm pi is employed to fit the measured trajectory in each dimension, while
Ġc pi is used to reconstruct the potential equations evaluated at the collocation instances. Addition-
ally, Φ ∈ RNc ×l represents the collocation library matrix encompassing the collection of candidate
terms, ∥Λ∥0 the sparsity regularizer, α and β the relative weighting parameters.
Since the regularizer ∥Λ∥0 leads to an NP-hard optimization issue, we apply an Alternate Direction
Optimization (ADO) strategy (see Appendix C) to optimize the loss function (Chen et al., 2021b;
Sun et al., 2021). The interplay of spline interpolation and sparse equations yields subsequent ef-
fects: the spline interpolation ensures accurate modeling of the system’s response, its derivatives,
and the candidate function terms, thereby laying the foundation for constructing the governing equa-
tions. Simultaneously, the equations represented in a sparse manner synergistically constrain spline
interpolation and facilitate the projection of accurate candidate functions. Ultimately, this transforms
the extraction of a 3D trajectory of an object from video into a closed-form differential equation.
                                           ẋ = ϕ(x − ∆∗ )Λ∗ .                                           (12)
After applying ADO to execute our model, resulting in the optimal control point matrix P∗ , sparse
matrix Λ∗ , and adaptive parameter ∆∗ , an affine transformation is necessary to eliminate ∆∗ in the
identified equations. We replace x with x − ∆∗ , as shown in Eq. (12), to obtain the final form
of equations. We then assign a small value to prune equation coefficients, yielding the discovered
governing equations in a predefined 3D coordinate system.

4     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we evaluate our method for uncovering 3D governing equations of a moving tar-
get automatically from videos using nine datasets1 . The nonlinear dynamical equations for these
chaotic systems and their respective trajectories can be found in Appendix D (see Figure S1). We
generate 3D trajectories based on the governing equations of the dataset and subsequently produce
corresponding video data captured from various positions. Our analysis encompasses the method’s
robustness across distinct video backgrounds, varying shapes of moving objects, object rotations,
levels of data noise, and occlusion scenarios. We further validate the identified equations demon-
strating their interpretability and generalizability. The proposed computational framework is imple-
mented in PyTorch. All simulations in this study are conducted on an Intel Core i9-13900 CPU
workstation with an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 GPU.
   1
     The datasets are derived from instances introduced in Gilpin (2021), where we utilize the following exam-
ples: Lorenz, SprottE, RayleighBenard, SprottF, NoseHoover, Tsucs2 and WangSun.


                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Data generation. The videos in this study are synthetically generated using MATLAB to simulate
real dynamic systems captured by cameras. To commence, the dynamic system is pre-defined, and
its trajectory is simulated utilizing the 4th-order Runge-Kutta method in MATLAB. Leveraging the
generated 3D trajectory, a camera’s orientation is established within a manually defined 3D coordi-
nate system to simulate the 2D projection of the object onto the camera plane. The original colored
images featuring the moving object are confined to dimensions of 512 × 512 pixels at 25 frames per
second (fps). Various shapes are employed as target markers in the video along with local dynamics
(e.g., with self-rotation) to emulate the motion of the object (see Appendix E). Subsequently, a set
of background images are randomly selected to mimic the real-world video scenarios. The resultant
videos generated within the background imagery comprise color content, with each frame containing
RGB channels (e.g., see Appendix Figure S2). After obtaining the video data, it becomes imperative
to perform object recognition and tracking on the observed entities based on the YOLO-v8 method.

4.1   R ESULTS                           Table 1: The performance of our method compared to the PySINDy
                                         in reconstructing three-dimensional coordinates from videos.
Evaluation metrics. We employ
both qualitative and quantitative           Cases      Methods
                                                               Terms   False    ℓ2 Error
                                                                                                P (%)    R (%)
                                                               Found? Positives (×10−2 )
metrics to assess the performance
of our method. Our goal is to                            Ours   Yes      1        1.50           92.31    100
                                            Lorenz
                                                       PySINDy  Yes      1        4.17           92.31    100
identify all equation terms as ac-
                                                         Ours   Yes      0        0.15            100     100
curately as possible while elimi-          SprottE
                                                       PySINDy  Yes      3        3.48           72.73    100
nating irrelevant terms (False Pos-                      Ours   Yes      1        2.00           91.67    100
                                        RayleighBenard
itives) to the greatest extent. The                    PySINDy  Yes      2        2.74           84.62    100
error ℓ2 , represented as ||Λid −          SprottF
                                                         Ours   Yes      0        0.16           100      100
Λtrue ||2 /||Λtrue ||2 , quantifies the                PySINDy   No      1        7.51           90       90
relative difference between the          NoseHoover
                                                         Ours   Yes      0        6.22           100      100
                                                       PySINDy  Yes      3       824.44          75       100
identified coefficients Λid and the
                                                         Ours   Yes      1        5.39           93.75    100
ground truth Λtrue . To avoid the           Tsucs2
                                                       PySINDy  Yes      1       12.29           93.75    100
overshadowing of smaller coeffi-
                                                         Ours   Yes      1        0.16           93.33    100
cients when there is a significant        WangSun
                                                       PySINDy   No      3       856.47          86.67   92.86
disparity in their magnitudes, we
introduce a non-dimensional measure to obtain a more comprehensive evaluation.
                                                            Lorenz      Spro ttE Rayle ig hBenard
The discovery of governing equations can be framed                                                   True
as a binary classification task (Rao et al., 2022),                                               • D iscovered
determining whether a particular term exists or
not, given a candidate library. Hence, we intro-
                                                            Sp ro ttF NoseHoover  Tsucs2           Wan g Sun
duce precision and recall as metrics for evaluation,
which quantify the proportion of correctly identi-
fied coefficients among the actual coefficients, ex-
pressed as: P = ∥Λid ⊙ Λtrue ∥0 / ∥Λid ∥0 and
R = ∥Λid ⊙ Λtrue ∥0 / ∥Λtrue ∥0 , where ⊙ denotes Figure 2: Comparison between the discovered 3D
element-wise product. Successful identification is trajectories and the ground truth.
achieved when both the entries in the identified and true vectors are non-zero.
Discovery results. Based on our evaluation metrics (e.g., the ℓ2 error, the number of correct and
incorrect equations terms found, precision, and recall), a detailed analysis of the experimental re-
sults obtained by our method is found in Table 1 (without data noise). After reconstructing the 3D
trajectories in the world coordinate system, we also compare our approach with PySINDy (Brunton
et al., 2016) as the baseline model. The library of candidate functions includes combinations of
system states with polynomials up to the third order. The listed results are averaged over five trials.
It demonstrates that our method outperforms PySINDy on each dataset in the pre-defined coordinate
system. The explicit forms of the discovered governing equations for 3D moving objects obtained
using our approach can be further found in Appendix F (e.g., Table S2). It is evident from Appendix
Table S2 that the discovered equations by our method align better with the ground truth. We also re-
constructed the motion trajectories in a 3D space using our discovered equations compared with the
actual trajectories under the same coordinate system, as shown in Figure 2. These two trajectories
nearly coincide, demonstrating the feasibility of our method.
It is noted that we also tested the variations and rotations of the moving object shapes in the recorded
videos (e.g., see Appendix Figure S2) and found that they have little impact on the performance of


                                                      7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  (a)                                                                          (b)                                                               (c)


                                                                                                                                .32
                                                          .69


                                                                                                                                                                                                    7
             14


                                                                                                                                                                                                 9.9
                                                                                                                              11
                                                        13
                                                                5                                                                     3                     10                                          6
2 Error × 10 2


                                                                         2 Error × 10 2


                                                                                                                                           2 Error × 10 2
                             2 Error × 10 2                                                          2 Error × 10 2                                                      2 Error × 10 2
             12             False Positives Number                                        10         False Positives Number                                             False Positives Number
                                                                                                                                                                                                        5
                                                                4                                                                                            8
             10


                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                           8


                                                                                                                         7.5
                                                                                                                                      2                                                                 4
              8                                                 3                                                                                            6
                                                                                           6                                                                                                            3
              6                                                 2                                                                                            4
                                                                                                                                      1                                                                 2


                                                                    False Positives


                                                                                                                                          False Positives


                                                                                                                                                                                                        False Positives
                                                                                           4
              4


                                                                                                                                                                                          3
                                                   5


                                                                                                                                                                               3

                                                                                                                                                                                        3
                                                                1


                                                                                                                                                                                      2.1
                                                  2.8


                                                                                                                                                                             1.9

                                                                                                                                                                                    1.9
                                                                                           2                                                                 2                                          1
                                              7
              2


                                                                                                                                                                 6

                                                                                                                                                                        7
                                      1.4


                                                                                                                                                             0.9

                                                                                                                                                                       0.8
                                      4
                                     0.5


                                                                                               3
                   6


                                                                                               2
                                                                                               2
                                                                                               2
                                                                                               1
                                                                                               1
                                 3


                                                                0                                                                     0                                                                 0


                                                                                           0.1
                 0% 0.1


                                                                                           0.1
                                                                                           0.1
                                                                                           0.1
                                                                                           0.1
                                                                                           0.1
                          5% 0.0



              0                                                                            0                                                                 0


                                                                                            5%


                                                                                                                                                             5%
                                     %
                                           %
                                                   %
                                                         %


                                                                                              %
                                                                                              %
                                                                                              %
                                                                                              %
                                                                                              %
                                                                                              %
                                                                                              %


                                                                                                                                                                       %
                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                     %
                                                                                                                                                                                            %
                                                                                                                                                                                                  %
                                     10
                                           15
                                                  20
                                                        30


                                                                                           10
                                                                                           20
                                                                                           30
                                                                                           40
                                                                                           50
                                                                                           60
                                                                                           70


                                                                                                                                                                       10
                                                                                                                                                                             15
                                                                                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                                                                                          25
                                                                                                                                                                                                 30
                                     Noise Level                                                       Random Block Rate                                                    Fiber Missing Rate
Figure 3: The influence of noisy and missing data (e.g., random block missing and fiber missing) on the
experimental results, using the sprootF-based video data as an example. The evaluation metrics include the l2
relative error and the number of incorrectly identified equation coefficients. We analyzed the effect of (a) noise
levels, (b) random block missing rates, and (c) fiber missing rates, respectively, to test the model’s robustness.


our algorithm, primarily affecting the tracking efficiency. In fact, encountering noise and situations
where moving objects are occluded during the measurement process can significantly impact our
experimental results. To assess the robustness of our algorithm, we selected the SprottF instance for
in-depth analysis and conducted experiments under various noise levels and different data occlusion
scenarios. The experimental results are detailed in Figure 3. It is seen that our approach is robust
against data noise and missing, discussed in detail as follows.
Noise effect. The Gaussian noise with zero mean and unit variance at a given level (e.g., 0%, 5%,
..., 30%) is added to the generated video data. To address the issue of small coefficients being over-
shadowed due to significant magnitude differences, we use two evaluation metrics in a standardized
coordinate system: the ℓ2 error and the count of incorrectly identified equation coefficients. Fig-
ure 3a showcases our method’s performance across various noise levels. We observe that up to a
20% noise interference, our method almost accurately identifies all correct coefficients of the gov-
erning equation. However, beyond a 30% noise level, our method’s performance begins to decline.
Random block missing data effect. To evaluate our algorithm’s robustness in the presence of
missing data, we consider two missing scenarios (e.g., the target is blocked in the video scene),
namely, random block missing and fiber missing (see Appendix Figure S3 for example). Firstly,
we randomly introduce non-overlapping occlusion blocking on the target in the video during the
observation period. Each block covers 1% of the total time periods. We validate our method’s
performance as the number of occlusion blocks increases. The “random block rate” represents the
overall occlusion time as a percentage of the total observation time. We showcase our algorithm’s
robustness by introducing occlusion blocks that temporarily obscure the moving object, rendering
it unidentifiable (see Figure 3b). These non-overlapping occlusion blocks progressively increase in
number, simulating higher occlusion rates. Remarkably, our algorithm remains highly robust even
with up to 50% data loss due to occlusion.
Fiber missing data effect. Additionally, we conducted tests for scenarios involving continuous
missing data (defined as fiber missing). By introducing 5 non-overlapping occlusion blocks ran-
domly throughout the observation period, we varied the occlusion duration of each block, quantified
by the “fiber missing rate” — the ratio of continuous missing data to the overall data volume. In
Figure 3c, we explore the impact of increasing occlusion duration per block while maintaining a
constant number of randomly selected occlusion blocks. All results are averaged over five trials.
Our algorithm demonstrates strong stability even when the fiber missing rate is around 20%.
Simulating real-world scenario. Furthermore, we generated a synthetic video dataset simulating
real-world scenarios. Here, we modeled the observed object as an irregular shape undergoing ran-
dom self-rotational motion and size variations, as shown in Appendix Figure S4a. Note that the size
variations simulate changes in the camera’s focal length when capturing the moving object in depth.
The video frames were perturbed with a zero mean Gaussian noise (variance = 0.01). Moreover, a
tree-like obstruction was introduced to further simulate the real-world complexity (e.g., the object
might be obscured during motion) as depicted in Appendix Figure S4b. Despite these challenges,
our method can discover the governing equations of the moving object in the reference coordinate
system, showing its potential in practical applications. Please refer to Appendix G for more details.


                                                                                                                8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Overall, our algorithm proves robust in scenarios with unexpected data noise, multiple instances
of data loss, and continuous data gaps, effectively uncovering the underlying governing laws of
dynamics for the moving object in a 3D space based on raw videos.
                                      Table 2: Test results for the ablated model named Model-A (i.e., spline
4.2   A BLATION S TUDY                + SINDy) under varying noise levels, random block rates, and fiber
                                      missing rates on discovering the SprottF equations.
We performed an ablation study
to validate whether the physics         Conditions Rate (%) Methods
                                                                    Terms   False    ℓ2 Error
                                                                                              P (%) R (%)
                                                                    Found? Positives (×10−2 )
component in the spline-enhanced
                                                             Ours    Yes      0        0.77    100   100
library-based sparse regressor                        10
                                                            Model-A   No      1        8.78    90    90
                                          Noise
module is effective. Hence, we in-                           Ours    Yes      1        2.85    100   100
                                                      20
troduced an ablated model named                             Model-A   No      1       17.79    80    80
Model-A (e.g., fully decoupled                        10
                                                             Ours    Yes      0        0.77    100   100
                                         Random             Model-A   No      3        9.49    75    90
“spline + SINDy” approach). We
                                          Block              Ours    Yes      0        2.19    100   100
first employed the cubic splines                      20
                                                            Model-A   No      1        7.67    90    90
to interpolate the 3D trajectory                             Ours    Yes      0        0.87    100   100
                                                      10
in each dimension and then com-            Fiber            Model-A   No      3        7.88    75    90
puted the time derivatives of the        Missing
                                                      20
                                                             Ours    Yes      0        1.71    100   100
                                                            Model-A   No      4       10.79   66.67  80
fitted trajectory points based on
spline differentiation. These trajectories and the estimated derivatives are then fed into the SINDy
model for equation discovery. Taking the instance of SprootF as an example, we show in Table 2
the performance of the ablated model under varying noise levels, random block rates, and fiber
missing rates. It is observed that the performance of the ablated model deteriorates in all considered
cases. Hence, we can ascertain that the physics-informed spline learning in the library-based sparse
regressor module plays a crucial role in equation discovery under imperfect data conditions.

4.3   D ISCUSSION AND L IMITATIONS
The above results show that our approach can effectively uncover the governing equations of a mov-
ing target in a 3D space directly from a set of recorded videos. The false positives of identification,
when in the presence (e.g., see Appendix Table S2), are all small constants. We consider these errors
to be within a reasonable range. This is because the camera pixels can only take approximate integer
values, and factors such as the size of pixels captured by the camera and the number of cameras
capturing the moving object can affect the reconstruction of the 3D coordinates in the reference
coordinate system. The experimental results can be further improved when high-resolution videos
are recorded and more cameras are used. There is an affine transformation relationship between
the artificially set reference coordinate system and the actual coordinate system. Potential errors in
learning such a relationship also lead to false positives in governing equation discovery.
Despite efficacy, our approach has limitations in certain scenarios. For instance, the library-based
sparse regression technique encounters a bottleneck when identifying very complex equations when
the a priori knowledge of the candidate terms is deficient. We plan to integrate symbolic regression
techniques to tackle this challenge. Furthermore, the present study only focuses on discovering the
3D dynamics of a single moving target in a video scene. In the future, we will test the discovery of
dynamics for multiple moving objects (inter-coupled or independent).

5     C ONCLUSION
We proposed a vision-based method to distill the governing equations for nonlinear dynamics of
a moving object in a 3D space, solely from video data captured by a set of three cameras. By
leveraging geometric transformations in a 3D space, combined with Rodrigues’ rotation formula
and computer vision techniques to track the object’s motion, we can learn and reconstruct the 3D
coordinates of the moving object in a user-defined coordinate system with the calibration of only one
camera. Building upon this, we introduced an adaptive spline learning framework integrated with
a library-based sparse regressor to identify the underlying law of dynamics. This framework can
effectively handle challenges posed by partially missing and noisy data, successfully uncovering the
governing equations of the moving target in a predefined reference coordinate system. The efficacy
of this method has been validated on synthetic videos that record the behavior of different nonlinear
dynamic systems. This approach offers a novel perspective for understanding the complex dynamics
of moving objects in a 3D space. We will test it on real-world recorded videos in our future study.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Josh Bongard and Hod Lipson. Automated reverse engineering of nonlinear dynamical systems.
  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104(24):9943–9948, 2007.
Steven L Brunton, Joshua L Proctor, and J Nathan Kutz. Discovering governing equations from data
  by sparse identification of nonlinear dynamical systems. Proceedings of the national academy of
  sciences, 113(15):3932–3937, 2016.
Kathleen Champion, Bethany Lusch, J Nathan Kutz, and Steven L Brunton. Data-driven discovery
  of coordinates and governing equations. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 116
  (45):22445–22451, 2019.
Boyuan Chen, Kuang Huang, Sunand Raghupathi, Ishaan Chandratreya, Qiang Du, and Hod Lip-
  son. Automated discovery of fundamental variables hidden in experimental data. Nature Compu-
  tational Science, 2(7):433–442, 2022.
Z Chen, J Mao, J Wu, KKY Wong, JB Tenenbaum, and C Gan. Grounding physical concepts of
  objects and events through dynamic visual reasoning. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2021a.
Zhao Chen, Yang Liu, and Hao Sun. Physics-informed learning of governing equations from scarce
  data. Nature communications, 12(1):6136, 2021b.
Gioele Ciaparrone, Francisco Luque Sánchez, Siham Tabik, Luigi Troiano, Roberto Tagliaferri, and
  Francisco Herrera. Deep learning in video multi-object tracking: A survey. Neurocomputing,
  381:61–88, 2020.
Daniel Floryan and Michael D Graham. Data-driven discovery of intrinsic dynamics. Nature Ma-
  chine Intelligence, 4(12):1113–1120, 2022.
John Flynn, Ivan Neulander, James Philbin, and Noah Snavely. Deepstereo: Learning to predict new
  views from the world’s imagery. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition, pp. 5515–5524, 2016.
Silvano Galliani, Katrin Lasinger, and Konrad Schindler. Gipuma: Massively parallel multi-view
   stereo reconstruction. Publikationen der Deutschen Gesellschaft für Photogrammetrie, Fern-
   erkundung und Geoinformation e. V, 25(361-369):2, 2016.
William Gilpin. Chaos as an interpretable benchmark for forecasting and data-driven modelling.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.05266, 2021.
Po-Han Huang, Kevin Matzen, Johannes Kopf, Narendra Ahuja, and Jia-Bin Huang. Deepmvs:
  Learning multi-view stereopsis. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 2821–2830, 2018.
Miguel Jaques, Michael Burke, and Timothy Hospedales. Physics-as-inverse-graphics: Unsuper-
 vised physical parameter estimation from video. In International Conference on Learning Repre-
 sentations, 2020.
John R Koza. Genetic programming as a means for programming computers by natural selection.
  Statistics and computing, 4:87–112, 1994.
Mingyang Li, Zhijiang Du, Xiaoxing Ma, Wei Dong, and Yongzhuo Gao. A robot hand-eye calibra-
 tion method of line laser sensor based on 3d reconstruction. Robotics and Computer-Integrated
 Manufacturing, 71:102136, 2021.
Qiang Lu, Fan Tao, Shuo Zhou, and Zhiguang Wang. Incorporating actor-critic in monte carlo tree
  search for symbolic regression. Neural Computing and Applications, pp. 1–17, 2021.
Lele Luan, Yang Liu, and Hao Sun. Distilling governing laws and source input for dynamical sys-
  tems from videos. Proceedings of the 31st International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  (IJCAI-22), pp. 3873–3879, 2022.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xinzhu Ma, Zhihui Wang, Haojie Li, Pengbo Zhang, Wanli Ouyang, and Xin Fan. Accurate monoc-
  ular 3d object detection via color-embedded 3d reconstruction for autonomous driving. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 6851–6860, 2019.
Seyed Mojtaba Marvasti-Zadeh, Li Cheng, Hossein Ghanei-Yakhdan, and Shohreh Kasaei. Deep
  learning for visual tracking: A comprehensive survey. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Trans-
  portation Systems, 23(5):3943–3968, 2021.
Matthias Mueller, Neil Smith, and Bernard Ghanem. Context-aware correlation filter tracking. In
 Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1396–1404,
 2017.
T Nathan Mundhenk, Mikel Landajuela, Ruben Glatt, Claudio P Santiago, Daniel M Faissol, and
  Brenden K Petersen. Symbolic regression via neural-guided genetic programming population
  seeding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.00053, 2021.
Lazaros Nalpantidis and Antonios Gasteratos. Stereovision-based fuzzy obstacle avoidance method.
  International Journal of Humanoid Robotics, 8(01):169–183, 2011.
Wanli Peng, Hao Pan, He Liu, and Yi Sun. Ida-3d: Instance-depth-aware 3d object detection from
 stereo vision for autonomous driving. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
 Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 13015–13024, 2020.
Brenden K Petersen, Mikel Landajuela Larma, Terrell N Mundhenk, Claudio Prata Santiago,
  Soo Kyung Kim, and Joanne Taery Kim. Deep symbolic regression: Recovering mathematical
  expressions from data via risk-seeking policy gradients. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2021.
Maziar Raissi, Paris Perdikaris, and George E Karniadakis. Physics-informed neural networks: A
 deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial
 differential equations. Journal of Computational physics, 378:686–707, 2019.
Chengping Rao, Pu Ren, Yang Liu, and Hao Sun. Discovering nonlinear pdes from scarce data with
  physics-encoded learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.12354, 2022.
Chengping Rao, Pu Ren, Qi Wang, Oral Buyukozturk, Hao Sun, and Yang Liu. Encoding physics
  to learn reaction–diffusion processes. Nature Machine Intelligence, 5:765–779, 2023.
Joseph Redmon, Santosh Divvala, Ross Girshick, and Ali Farhadi. You only look once: Unified,
  real-time object detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 779–788, 2016.
Samuel H Rudy, Steven L Brunton, Joshua L Proctor, and J Nathan Kutz. Data-driven discovery of
  partial differential equations. Science advances, 3(4):e1602614, 2017.
Subham Sahoo, Christoph Lampert, and Georg Martius. Learning equations for extrapolation and
  control. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4442–4450, 2018.
Michael Schmidt and Hod Lipson. Distilling free-form natural laws from experimental data. science,
 324(5923):81–85, 2009.
Johannes L Schönberger, Enliang Zheng, Jan-Michael Frahm, and Marc Pollefeys. Pixelwise view
  selection for unstructured multi-view stereo. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2016: 14th European
  Conference, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, October 11-14, 2016, Proceedings, Part III 14, pp.
  501–518. Springer, 2016.
Fangzheng Sun, Yang Liu, and Hao Sun. Physics-informed spline learning for nonlinear dynam-
  ics discovery. Proceedings of the 30th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  (IJCAI-21), pp. 2054–2061, 2021.
Fangzheng Sun, Yang Liu, Jian-Xun Wang, and Hao Sun. Symbolic physics learner: Discovering
  governing equations via monte carlo tree search. In The Eleventh International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2023.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Luning Sun, Daniel Zhengyu Huang, Hao Sun, and Jian-Xun Wang. Bayesian spline learning for
  equation discovery of nonlinear dynamics with quantified uncertainty. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Silviu-Marian Udrescu and Max Tegmark. Symbolic pregression: Discovering physical laws from
   distorted video. Physical Review E, 103(4):043307, 2021.
Hengli Wang, Rui Fan, and Ming Liu. Cot-amflow: Adaptive modulation network with co-teaching
  strategy for unsupervised optical flow estimation. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 143–155.
  PMLR, 2021.
Nicolai Wojke, Alex Bewley, and Dietrich Paulus. Simple online and realtime tracking with a deep
  association metric. In 2017 IEEE international conference on image processing (ICIP), pp. 3645–
  3649. IEEE, 2017.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX

This appendix provides extrat explanations for several critical aspects, including method validation
and computation, data generation, and object recognition and tracking.


A      P LANE P ROJECTION P ROOF

In a 3D space, let us assume a camera plane equation is represented as Ax + By + Cz + D = 0.
We then expand the equation xrp = R · xp and obtain
              " #                                                                   
                xrp        cos θ + u2x (1 − cos θ)   ux uy (1 − cos θ)      uy sin θ
                yrp =  ux uy (1 − cos θ)          cos θ + u2y (1 − cos θ) ux sin θ
                zrp              −uy sin θ                ux sin θ           cos θ
                                2      2
                                                                                       (S1)
                            x(B + C ) − A(By + Cz + D)                    1
                         · y(A2 + C 2 ) − B(Ax + Cz + D) · 2
                             z(A2 + B 2 ) − C(Ax + By + D)         A + B2 + C 2


The expansion of xrp in the above equation reads:

                                                   x(B 2 + C 2 ) − A(By + Cz + D)
                  xrp = [cos θ + u2x (1 − cos θ)] ·
                                                            A2 + B 2 + C 2
                                                   2     2
                                               y(A + C ) − B(Ax + Cz + D)
                         + ux uy (1 − cos θ) ·                                                         (S2)
                                                        A2 + B 2 + C 2
                                           2      2
                                        z(A + B ) − C(Ax + By + D)
                         + (uy sin θ) ·
                                                 A2 + B 2 + C 2

Collecting the coefficients of D from Eq. (S2) yields zero, namely,
    − A[cos θ + u2x (1 − cos θ)] − Cuy sin θ − Buy ux (1 − cos θ)
                                                      2        C                 2       C
             AC                AC           AB ( √A2 +B 2 +C 2 − 1) AB ( √A2 +B 2 +C 2 − 1)
    =√                  −√                +                        −                        (S3)
         A2 + B 2 + C 2    A2 + B 2 + C 2         A2 + B 2                A2 + B 2
    =0

Similarly, it can be proven that the coordinate in yrp is also independent of the parameter D.


B     C OMPUTE THE OFFSET DISTANCE OF A CAMERA PLANE

As shown in Appendix A, when the camera plane’s normal vector remains unchanged, the shape of
the recorded motion trajectory remains constant. However, due to the camera’s position not align-
ing with the origin of the reference coordinate system, there will be positional offsets relative to
trajectories recorded by camera planes with the same normal vector but positioned at the coordinate
origin. To calculate these offset distances, the approach involves determining the post-rotation co-
ordinate plane and subsequently computing the point-to-plane distance. In this regard, we employ
a method based on three-point plane determination: given three points p1 (x1 , y1 , z1 ), p2 (x2 , y2 , z2 )
and p3 (x3 , y3 , z3 ), the primary task is to ascertain the plane’s equation, with a key focus on deriving
one of the plane’s normal vector ⃗n given by
                                  i           j              k
       ⃗n = p1 p2 × p1 p3 =    x2 − x1     y2 − y1        z2 − z1   = ai + bj + ck = (a, b, c)T .      (S4)
                               x3 − x1     y3 − y1        z3 − z1

A visual representation of this process is shown in Figure S1. The offset relative to the origin on the
2D plane can be obtained by computing the distance of the position of the camera in the 3D space
        ′    ′                                ′    ′
to the X OZ plane and its distance to the X OY plane.


                                                      13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure S1: Schematic of trajectory projection from the 3D space to a 2D plane. The blue trajectory represents
the 3D motion trajectory, while the red trajectory represents its projection on the 2D camera plane. Here, C1
                                                                               ′    ′              ′
denotes the position of the camera. The normal vector of the camera plane X OY is denoted as Z .


        Lorenz                                            SprootF


      NoseHoover                                           Tsucs2


    RayleighBenard                                        WangSun


       SprootE                                             Note:    The object's shape (           , etc.)
                                                                    and rotation vary, and the background
                                                                    images are modifiable to simulate a
                                                                    realistic environment.


Figure S2: Example of generated video data. In the simulated videos capturing the 3D object motion, we use
three cameras, C1 , C2 , and C3 , at different positions and orientations to record the object’s trajectory.


C    A LTERNATE D IRECTION O PTIMIZATION
Addressing the optimization problem given in Eq. (10) directly via gradient descent is highly chal-
lenging, given the NP-hard problem induced by the ℓ0 regularizer. Alternatively, relaxing ℓ0 to ℓ1
eases the optimization process but only provides a loose promotion of sparsity. We employ an al-
ternating direction optimization (ADO) strategy that hybridizes gradient descent optimization and
sparse regression. The approach involves decomposing the overall optimization problem into a set
of tractable sub-optimization problems, formulated as follows:
                                                                     2
                      (k+1)                                      (k)
                              := arg min Φ P(k) , ∆(k) λi − Ġc pi

                     λi                                                + β∥λi ∥0 ,                           (S5)
                                     λi                                     2
             n                         o           h                         i
              P(k+1) , Λ̃(k+1) , ∆(k+1) := arg min Ld (P, ∆) + αLp (P, ∆, Λ̃) ,                              (S6)
                                                    {P,Λ̃,∆}

where k denotes the index of the alternating iteration, Λ̃ consists of only the non-zero coefficients in
            (k+1) (k+1) (k+1)
Λ̃(k+1) = λ1       , λ2    , λ3       . In each iteration, Λ(k+1) (shown in Eq. (S5)) is determined


                                                     14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                        z


                                                                                                 y
                                                                          x

Figure S3: Example of the 3D trajectory reconstruction of the observed object under conditions of occlusion-
induced data missing (e.g., fiber missing). The shading areas in the left figure represent regions affected by
occlusion.


using the STRidge algorithm (Rudy et al., 2017) with adaptive hard thresholding, pruning small
values by assigning zero. The optimization problem in Eq. (S6) can be solved via gradient descent
to obtain the updated P(k+1) , Λ̃(k+1) and ∆(k+1) with the remaining terms in Φ (e.g., redundant
terms are pruned). This iterative process continues for multiple iterations until achieving a final
balance between the spline interpolation and the pruned equations.

D    C HAOTIC SYSTEMS
In Table S1, we present the original equations for all instances and depict their respective trajectories
under given initial conditions and corresponding parameter settings.

E    E XAMPLES OF M EASURED V IDEOS
To simulate real-world scenarios, we considered various scenarios while generating simulated video
data. These include different environmental background images, varied shapes of the moving ob-
jects, and local self-rotation of the objects. We carefully crafted video data that adheres to these
conditions. Figure S2 illustrates the trajectories of the moving objects recorded by the cameras in
pixel coordinates. To illustrate scenarios involving the occlusion of moving objects, we employ oc-
clusion blocks to generate missing data. The 3D trajectory data, depicted in Figure S3 for example,
corresponds to the reconstruction of an observed object motion in the presence of occlusion-induced
data gaps.

F    D ISCOVERED E QUATIONS
In Table S2, we compare the discovered equations with the ground truth in the predefined reference
coordinate system. The coefficient values are quoted in two decimal places.

G    S IMULATING R EALISTIC S CENARIOS
Taking the instance of SprottF as an example, where the initial condition for this experiment is set
to be (−1.17, −1.1, 1). As a result, our method effectively reconstructed the 3D trajectory of the
moving object, where we see data gaps occur in the time series due to the obstruction. nevertheless,
our approach still manages to discover the underlying governing equations even under complex
environmental conditions (see Figure S4b).


                                                     15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    Table S1: Configuration conditions for various 3D chaotic systems.

          Cases         Original equation           Parameters    Initial condition   True trajectory

                        ẋ = σ(y − x)               σ = 10
         Lorenz         ẏ = x(ρ − z) − y           ρ = 28          (−8, 7, 27)
                        ż = xy − βz                β = 8/3

                        ẋ = yz
         SprottE        ẏ = x2 − y                 n                (−1, 1, 1)
                        ż = 1 − 4x
                        ẋ = a(y − x)               a = 30
     RayleighBenard     ẏ = ry − xz                b=5           (−16, −13, 27)
                        ż = xy − bz                r = 18

                        ẋ = y + z
         SprottF        ẏ = −x + ay                a = 0.5        (−1, −1.4, 1)
                        ż = x2 − z

                        ẋ = y
       NoseHoover       ẏ = −x + yz                a = 1.5         (−2, 0.5, 1)
                        ż = a − y 2
                                                    a = 40
                                                    c = 0.8
                        ẋ = a(y − x) + dxz
                                                    d = 0.5
         Tsucs2         ẏ = kx + f y − xz                            (1, 1, 5)
                                                    eps = 0.65
                        ż = cz + xy − eps × x2
                                                    f = 20
                                                    k=1
                                                    a = 0.5
                                                    b = −1
                        ẋ = ax + qyz
                                                    d = −0.5
        WangSun         ẏ = bx + dy − xz                             (1, 1, 0)
                                                    e = −1
                        ż = ez + f xy
                                                    f = −1
                                                    q=1


                                                   16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             Table S2: Discovered governing equations in the predefined reference coordinate system.

     Cases         Groud truth                   Ours                              PySINDy
                   ẋ = − 10x + 10y              ẋ = − 10.00x + 10.01y − 0.94     ẋ = − 10.98x + 10.62y + 3.59
                   ẏ = − xz + 28x − y           ẏ = − 0.99xz + 27.72x − 0.97y    ẏ = − 1.05xz + 28.14x − 0.40y
    Lorenz              + 10z − 270                   + 9.84z − 265.96                  + 10.69z − 281.43
                   ż = xy − 10x − 10y           ż = 0.99xy − 9.93x − 9.88y       ż = 0.98xy − 9.24x − 10.26y
                        − 2.667z + 100                − 2.70z + 98.72                   − 2.87z + 99.68
                                                                                   ẋ = 0.98yz − 9.76z
                   ẋ = yz − 10z                 ẋ = 1.00yz − 9.95z
                                                                                   ẏ = 0.97x2 − 19.38x − 0.89y
                   ẏ = x2 − 20x − y             ẏ = 1.00x2 − 20.13x − 0.93y
    SprottE                                                                             − 0.004y 2 + 106.17
                        + 110                         + 110.09
                                                                                   ż = 42.45 − 3.98x − 0.31y
                   ż = 41 − 4x                  ż = 41.00 − 4.00x
                                                                                       0.014y 2
                   ẋ = − 30x + 30y              ẋ = − 30.07x + 29.45y + 2.22     ẋ = − 29.82x + 29.22y + 2.15
                   ẏ = − xz + 18y + 10z         ẏ = − 1.04xz + 18.14y + 10.28z   ẏ = − 1.02xz + 18.14y + 10.09z
 RayleighBenard         − 180                         − 181.00                          − 0.39x − 176.69
                   ż = xy − 10x − 10y           ż = 0.99xy − 10.13x − 9.25y      ż = 0.99xy − 10.36x − 8.82y
                        − 5z + 100                    − 5.04z + 96.69                   − 5.04z + 96.04
                   ẋ = y + z − 10               ẋ = 1.00y + 1.00z − 9.99         ẋ = 0.78y + 0.50x − 2.38
                   ẏ = − x + 0.5y + 5.0         ẏ = − 1.00x + 0.50y + 5.01       ẏ = − 1.00x + 0.50y + 5.00
    SprootF
                   ż = x2 − 20x − z             ż = 1.00x2 − 20.01x − 1.00z      ż = 0.99x2 − 19.89x − 0.99z
                        + 100                         + 100.12                          + 99.49
                                                                                   ẋ = 10.97y − 99.45
                                                 ẋ = 1.10y − 9.99
                   ẋ = y − 10                                                     ẏ = − 9.10x + 10.38yz − 93.92z
                                                 ẏ = − 0.91x + 1.07yz − 9.66z
  NoseHoover       ẏ = − x + yz − 10z + 10                                             + 91.85
                                                      + 9.11
                   ż = − y 2 + 20y − 98.5                                         ż = − 11.18y 2 + 202.89y − 0.09x
                                                 ż = − 1.14y 2 + 20.66y − 92.27
                                                                                       + 0.016x2 − 0.014xy − 905.85
                                                                                   ẋ = 0.46xz − 37.76x + 38.64y
                   ẋ = 0.5xz − 40x + 40y        ẋ = 0.49xz − 39.58x + 39.92y
                                                                                        − 4.66z + 3.14
                        − 5z                          − 4.94z + 8.45
                                                                                   ẏ = − 0.92xz − 0.75x + 19.40y
                   ẏ = − 1.00xz + 1.00x + 20y   ẏ = − 0.99xz + 0.63x + 19.95y
    Tsucs2                                                                              + 9.35z − 183.22
                        + 10z − 210                   + 10.01z − 201.61
                                                                                   ż = − 0.59x2 + 0.90xy + 3.11x
                   ż = − 0.65x2 + xy + 3x       ż = − 0.65x2 + 0.99xy + 3.48x
                                                                                       − 9.12y + 0.72z − 0.59x2
                        − 10y + 0.8z + 35             − 10.258y + 0.76z + 35.19
                                                                                       + 30.91
                                                                                   ẋ = 4.89x + 9.77yz − 97.84z
                   ẋ = 0.5x + yz − 10 ∗ z       ẋ = 0.50x + 1.00yz − 9.97z
                                                                                        − 48.95
                        − 5.0                         − 4.89
                                                                                   ẏ = − 8.19xz − 9.37x + 82.27y
                   ẏ = − xz − x − 0.5y          ẏ = − 1.00xz − 0.99x − 0.50y
   WangSun                                                                             95.25
                        + 10 ∗ z + 15.0               + 9.99z + 14.90
                                                                                   ż = − 9.75xy + 97.65x + 94.74y
                   ż = − xy + 10x + 10y         ż = − 1.00xy + 9.98x + 9.99y
                                                                                       − 10.02z + 0.15y 2
                        − z − 100                     − 1.00z − 99.94
                                                                                       − 0.18z 2 − 963.18


                                                         17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    a                                                                                     trajectory


    b


                                                                                                         z


                                                                            x                      y


         Note: At time t, the object exhibits shape and size:     , and at time t + m, it shows:

          Ground truth:                                    Discovered:


Figure S4: Example of a synthetic dataset simulating real-world scenarios. a. An example of the generated
video for an object with an irregular shape undergoing random self-rotational motion and size variations. The
video frames were perturbed with a zero mean Gaussian noise (variance = 0.01), and a tree-like obstruction was
introduced to further simulate real-world complexity. b. We reconstructed the 3D trajectory of the observed
target under conditions of occlusion-induced data missing. The shading areas indicate the regions impacted
by the obstruction. Our approach can reconstruct the 3D point trajectories from sparse observation points,
revealing accurate discovery of the underlying governing equations. Note that the video file can be found in the
supplementary material.


                                                      18
