Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


DYNAMICAL VERSUS BAYESIAN P HASE T RANSITIONS
IN A T OY M ODEL OF S UPERPOSITION

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                              A BSTRACT
         We investigate phase transitions in a Toy Model of Superposition (TMS) (Elhage
         et al., 2022) using Singular Learning Theory (SLT). We derive a closed formula
         for the theoretical loss and, in the case of two hidden dimensions, discover that
         regular k-gons are critical points. We present supporting theory indicating that the
         local learning coefficient (a geometric invariant) of these k-gons determines phase
         transitions in the Bayesian posterior as a function of training sample size. We then
         show empirically that the same k-gon critical points also determine the behavior
         of SGD training. The picture that emerges adds evidence to the conjecture that the
         SGD learning trajectory is subject to a sequential learning mechanism. Specifi-
         cally, we find that the learning process in TMS, be it through SGD or Bayesian
         learning, can be characterized by a journey through parameter space from regions
         of high loss and low complexity to regions of low loss and high complexity.


1    I NTRODUCTION
The apparent simplicity of the Toy Model of Superposition (TMS) proposed in Elhage et al. (2022)
conceals a remarkably intricate phase structure. During training, a plateau in the loss is often fol-
lowed by a sudden discrete drop, suggesting some development in the networkвҖҷs internal structure.
To shed light on these transitions and their significance, this paper examines the dynamical transi-
tions in TMS during SGD training, connecting them to phase transitions of the Bayesian posterior
with respect to sample size n. While the former transitions have been observed in several recent
works in deep learning (Olsson et al., 2022; McGrath et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022a), their formal
status has remained elusive. In contrast, phase transitions of the Bayesian posterior are mathemati-
cally well-defined in Singular Learning Theory (SLT) (Watanabe, 2009).
Using SLT, we can show formally that the Bayesian posterior is subject to an internal model selection
mechanism in the following sense: the posterior prefers, for small training sample size n, critical
points with low complexity but potentially high loss. The opposite is true for high n where the
posterior prefers low loss critical points at the cost of higher complexity. The measure of complexity
here is very specific: it is the local learning coefficient, О», of the critical points, first alluded to by
Watanabe (2009, В§7.6) and clarified recently in Lau et al. (2023). We can think of this internal model
selection as a discrete dynamical process: at various critical sample sizes the posterior concentration
вҖңjumpsвҖқ from one region WОұ of parameter space to another region WОІ . We refer to an event of this
kind as a Bayesian phase transition Оұ вҶ’ ОІ.
For the TMS model with two hidden dimensions we show that these Bayesian phase transitions
actually occur and do so between phases dominated by weight configurations representing regular
polygons (termed here k-gons). The main result of SLT, the asymptotic expansion of the free energy
(Watanabe, 2018), predicts phase transitions as a function of the loss and local learning coefficient
of each phase. For TMS, we are in the fortunate position of being able to derive theoretically the
exact local learning coefficient of the k-gons which are most commonly encountered during MCMC
sampling of the posterior, and thereby verify that the mathematical theory correctly predicts the
empirically observed phases and phase transitions. Altogether, this forms a mathematically well-
founded toolkit for reasoning about phase transitions in the Bayesian posterior of TMS.
It has been observed empirically in TMS that SGD training also undergoes вҖңphase transitionsвҖқ (El-
hage et al., 2022) in the sense that we often see steady plateaus in the training (and test) loss separated
by sudden transitions, associated with geometric transformations in the configuration of the columns


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: For r = 2 hidden dimensions and c = 6 feature dimensions, neural network parameters
w = (W, b) for TMS with high loss are tolerated at the beginning of training because they have
low complexity (low local learning coefficient О»МӮ) but at the end of training low loss solutions are
attractive despite their high complexity (high О»МӮ). First row: columns Wi вҲҲ R2 of W are shown as
black arrows for three snapshots (timestamps shown as red dots in the third row). Adjacent columns
are connected by a blue line, the red dashed line shows the convex hull. Second row: for columns Wi
ordered 1 вүӨ i вүӨ 6 from the negative x-axis in a counter-clockwise direction, the norm вҲҘWi вҲҘ (black)
and |bi | (red, green) are shown. A white plus sign indicates a bias that exceeds 1.25 вҲ— maxiвҲҲI вҲҘWi вҲҘ2
where I is the set of all columns i where bi вүҘ вҲҘWi вҲҘ. All snapshots share the same axes. Third row:
losses and local learning coefficient, with the latter smoothed over a window of size 6, where О»МӮ is
measured every 30 epochs. For more examples see Appendix B.


of the weight matrix. Figure 1 shows a typical example. We refer to these as dynamical transitions.
A striking pattern emerges when we observe the evolution of the loss and the estimated local learn-
ing coefficient, О»МӮ, over the course of training: we see вҖңopposing staircasesвҖқ where each drop in the
training and test loss is accompanied by a jump in the (estimated) local complexity measure. In
essence, during the training process, as SGD reduces the loss, it exhibits an increasing tolerance for
complex solutions. On these grounds we propose the Bayesian antecedent hypothesis, which says
that these dynamical transtions have вҖңstanding behind themвҖқ a Bayesian phase transition.
We begin in Section 3.1 by recalling the TMS, and present a closed form for the population loss in
the high sparsity limit. In our first contribution, we provide a partial classification of critical points
of the population loss (Section 3.2) and document the local learning coefficients of several of these
critical points (Section 3.3). In our second contribution, we experimentally verify that the main
phase transition predicted by the internal model selection theory, using the theoretically derived
local learning coefficients, actually takes place (Section 4.2). In Section 5 we present experimental
results on dynamical transitions in TMS. Our third contribution is to show empirically that SGD
training in TMS transitions from high-loss-low-complexity solutions to low-loss-high-complexity
solutions, where complexity is measured by the estimated local learning coefficient. This provides
support for our proposed relation between Bayesian and dynamical transitions (Section 5.1).


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2     R ELATED WORK
The TMS problem is, with the nonlinearity removed and varying importance factors, solved by com-
puting principal components; it has long been understood that the learning dynamics of computing
principal components is determined by a unique global minimum and a hierarchy of saddle points
of decreasing loss (Baldi & Hornik, 1989), (Amari, 2016, В§13.1.3). In recent decades an extensive
literature has emerged on Deep Linear Networks (DLNs) building on these results, and applying
them to explain phenomena in the development of both natural and artificial neural networks (Saxe
et al., 2019). Under some hypotheses the saddles of a DLN are strict (Kawaguchi, 2016) and all local
minima are global; this suggests a picture of gradient descent dynamics moving through neighbour-
hoods of saddles of ever-decreasing index until reaching a global minima. This has been termed
вҖңsaddle-to-saddleвҖқ dynamics by Jacot et al. (2021). Through careful analysis of training dynamics
it has been shown for DLNs that there is a general tendency of optimization trajectories towards
solutions of lower loss and higher вҖңcomplexityвҖқ, which is generally defined in an ad-hoc way de-
pending on the data distribution (Arora et al., 2018; Li et al., 2020; Eftekhari, 2020; Advani et al.,
2020). For example, it has been shown that gradient-based optimization introduces a form of implicit
regularization towards low-rank solutions in deep matrix factorization (Arora et al., 2019).
Viewing the optimization process as a search for solutions which begins at candidates of low com-
plexity, the tendency to gradually increase complexity вҖңonly when necessaryвҖқ has been put forward
as a potential explanation for the generalization performance of neural networks (Gissin et al., 2019).
This intuition is backed by results such as (Gidel et al., 2019; Saxe et al., 2013), which show that
for DLNs the singular values of the model are learned separately at different rates, with features
corresponding to larger singular values learned first.
Outside of the DLN models, saddle-to-saddle dynamics of SGD training have been studied in toy
non-linear models often referred to as single-index or multi-index models. In these models, the
target function for input x вҲҲ Rd is generated by a non-linear, low dimensional function ПҶ : Rk вҶ’ R
via f (x) = ПҶ(ОёT x) with Оё вҲҲ RdГ—k where k вүӘ d. Single-index refers to k = 1. In a very recent
work, Abbe et al. (2023) showed that for a particular multi-index model with certain restrictions
on the input data distribution, SGD follows a saddle-to-saddle dynamic where the learning process
adaptively selects target functions of increasing complexity. Their Figure 1 tells the same story as
our Figure 1: at the beginning of training, low complexity solutions are preferred, and the opposite
preference develops as training progresses.
One attempt to put these intuitions in a broader context is (Zhang et al., 2018) which relates the above
phenomena to entropy-energy competition in statistical physics. However this approach suffers from
a lack of theoretical justification due to an incorrect application of the Laplace approximation (Wei
et al., 2022b; Lau et al., 2023). The internal model selection principle (Section 4.1) in singular
learning theory provides the correct form of entropy-energy competition for neural networks and
potentially gives a theoretical backing for the intuitions developed in the DLN literature.

3     T OY M ODEL OF S UPERPOSITION
3.1   T HE TMS P OTENTIAL

We recall the Toy Model of Superposition (TMS) setup from (Elhage et al., 2022) and derive a
closed-form expression for the population loss in the high sparsity limit. The TMS is an autoencoder
with input and output dimension c and hidden dimension r < c:
                                         f : X Г— W вҲ’вҶ’ Rc ,
                                  f (x, w) = ReLU(W T W x + b) ,                                    (1)
                                           c                                            c
where w = (W, b) вҲҲ W вҠҶ Mr,c (R) Г— R and inputs are taken from x вҲҲ X = [0, 1] . We suppose
that the (unknown) true generating mechanism of x is given by the distribution
                                               c
                                             X    1
                                      q(x) =        ОҙxвҲҲCi                             (2)
                                              i=1
                                                  c
where Ci denotes the ith coordinate axis intersected with X. Sampling from q(x) can be described
as follows: uniformly sample a coordinate 1 вүӨ i вүӨ c and then uniformly sample a length 0 вүӨ Вө вүӨ 1,


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


return Вөei where ei is the ith unit vector. This is the high sparsity limit of the TMS input distribution
of Elhage et al. (2022), see also Henighan et al. (2023). We posit the probability model
                                p(x|w) вҲқ exp вҲ’ 12 вҲҘx вҲ’ f (x, w)вҲҘ2 ,

                                                                                                      (3)
                                                           R
which leads to the expected negative log likelihood вҲ’ q(x) log p(x|w) dx. Dropping terms con-
stant with respect to w we arrive at the population loss function
                                           Z
                                 L(w) = q(x)вҲҘx вҲ’ f (x, w)вҲҘ2 dx .

Given W вҲҲ Mr,c (R) we denote by W1 , . . . , Wc the columns of W . We set

      1. Pi,j = {(W, b) вҲҲ Mr,c (R) Г— Rc | Wi В· Wj > 0 and вҲ’ Wi В· Wj вүӨ bi вүӨ 0};
      2. Pi = {(W, b) вҲҲ Mr,c (R) Г— Rc | вҲҘWi вҲҘ2 > 0 and вҲ’ вҲҘWi вҲҘ2 вүӨ bi вүӨ 0};
      3. Qi,j = {(W, b) вҲҲ Mr,c (R) Г— Rc | вҲ’ Wi В· Wj > bi > 0}

For w = (W, b) we set Оҙ(Pi,j ) to be 1 if w вҲҲ Pi,j and 0 otherwise, similarly for Оҙ(Pi ), Оҙ(Qi,j ).
                                                         1
Lemma 3.1. For w = (W, b) вҲҲ Mr,c (R) Г— Rc we have L(w) = 3c H(w) where
                                         c
                                         X
                       H(W, b) =               Оҙ(bi вүӨ 0)HiвҲ’ (W, b) + Оҙ(bi > 0)Hi+ (W, b)                         (4)
                                         i=1

and

                             X             1
             HiвҲ’ (W, b) =          Оҙ(Pi,j )      (Wi В· Wj + bi )3
                                        Wi В· Wj
                          jМё=i
                                     3
                                                  b3i

                                       bi
                          + Оҙ(Pi )          +               + (1 вҲ’ Оҙ(Pi )) + Оҙ(Pi )Ni
                                    вҲҘWi вҲҘ4     вҲҘWi вҲҘ2

                          X                    1
             Hi+ (W, b) =      Оҙ(Qi,j ) вҲ’             b3i
                                           W i В· Wj
                          jМё=i
                             X
                                                              2                      2
                          +      (1 вҲ’ Оҙ(Qi,j )) (Wi В· Wj ) + 3(Wi В· Wj )bi + 3bi + Ni
                                  jМё=i

where Ni = (1 вҲ’ вҲҘWi вҲҘ ) вҲ’ 3(1 вҲ’ вҲҘWi вҲҘ2 )bi + 3b2i
                            2 2



Proof. See Appendix G.

We refer to H(w) as the TMS potential. While this function is analytic at many of the critical
points of relevance when r = 2, it is not analytic at the 4-gons (see Appendix J).

3.2    k- GON CRITICAL POINTS

We prove that various k-gons are critical points for H when r = 2. Recall that wвҲ— вҲҲ W is a critical
point of H if вҲҮH|w=wвҲ— = 0. The function H is clearly O(r)-invariant: if O is an orthogonal matrix
then H(OW, b) = H(W, b). The potential is also invariant to jointly permuting the columns and
biases. Due to these generic symmetries we may without loss of generality assume that the columns
Wi of W are ordered anti-clockwise in R2 with zero columns coming last.
For i = 1, . . . , c, let Оёi вҲҲ [0, 2ПҖ) denote the angle between nonzero columns Wi and Wi+1 , where
c + 1 is defined to be 1. Let li вҲҲ RвүҘ0 denote вҲҘWi вҲҘ. In this parametrization W has coordinate
(l1 , . . . , lc , Оё1 , . . . , Оёc , b1 , . . . , bc ) with constraint Оё1 + В· В· В· + Оёc = 2ПҖ. Since O(2) has dimension
1 any critical point of H is automatically part of a 1-parameter family. For convenience we refer
to a critical point as non-degenerate (resp. minimally singular) if it has these properties modulo the
generic symmetries, that is, in the Оё, l, b parametrization. Thus, a critical point is non-degenerate
(resp. minimally singular) if in a local neighbourhood in the Оё, l, b parametrization H can be written


                                                           4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


as a full sum of squares with nonzero coefficients (resp. a non-full sum of squares). For background
on the minimal singularity condition see (Wei et al., 2022b, В§4) and (Lau et al., 2023, Appendix A).
We call w вҲҲ M2,c (R) Г— Rc a standard k-gon for k вҲҲ {4, 5, 6, 7, 8} and k вүӨ c if it has coordinate
                   l1 = В· В· В· = lk = l вҲ— ,                        lk+1 = В· В· В· = lc = 0 ,
                   Оё1 = В· В· В· = ОёkвҲ’1 = 2ПҖk ,                      Оёk + В· В· В· + Оёc = 2ПҖ
                                                                                     k ,
                                      вҲ—
                   b1 = В· В· В· = bk = b ,                         bk+1 < 0 , . . . , bc < 0
where l вҲҲ R>0 , b вҲҲ RвүӨ0 are the unique joint solution to вҲ’(lвҲ— )2 cos(s 2ПҖ
        вҲ—            вҲ—                                                                 вҲ—
                                                                                k ) вүӨ b where s is the
unique integer in [ k4 вҲ’ 1, k4 ) (see Theorem H.1). For values of lвҲ— , bвҲ— see Table A.1. Any parameter
of this form is proven to be a critical point of H in Appendix H. For k as above and 0 вүӨ Пғ вүӨ c вҲ’ k a
k Пғ+ -gon is a parameter with the same specification as the standard k-gon except that Пғ of the biases
bk+1 , . . . , bc are equal to 1/(2c) and the rest have arbitrary negative values. We usually write for
example k ++ when Пғ = 2, noting that the k 0+ -gon is the standard k-gon. These parameters are
proven to be critical points of H when k вүҘ 5 in Appendix I and for k = 4 in Appendix J.2.
For k = 4 there are a number of additional вҖңexoticвҖқ 4-gons. They are parametrized by 0 вүӨ Пғ вүӨ cвҲ’k
and 0 вүӨ П• вүӨ 4. A 4Пғ+,П•вҲ’ -gon has the same specification as the 4Пғ+ -gon, except that a subset of
the biases I вҠҶ {1, 2, 3, 4} of size |I| = П• are special in the following sense: for any i вҲҲ
                                                                                          / I the bias
bi has the optimal value bi = bвҲ— = 0 and the corresponding length is standard li = lвҲ— = 1, but if
i вҲҲ I then bi < 0 and li is subject only to the constraint li2 < вҲ’bi . We write for example 4++вҲ’ for
the 42+,1вҲ’ -gon. These are proven to be critical points of H in Appendix J.2. In Appendix A, we
provide visualizations and a quick guide for recognizing these critical points and their variants.
What we know is the following: the standard k-gon for k = c is a non-degenerate critical point
(modulo the generic symmetries) for c вҲҲ {5, 6, 7, 8} in the sense that in local coordianates in the
l, Оё, b-parametrization near the critical point H can be written as a full sum of squares (Section H.1).
For c > 8 and c being a multiple of 4, we conjecture that the c-gon is a critical point (Section H.2),
and we also conjecture that for c > 8 and c not a multiple of 4 there is no c-gon which is a critical
point. When k вҲҲ {5, 6, 7, 8} and k < c the standard k-gon is minimally singular (Appendix H.3).

3.3   L OCAL LEARNING COEFFICIENTS

The learning coefficient О» was established by Watanabe (2009) as a central invariant of Bayesian
statistics. In (Lau et al., 2023) a local form of the learning coefficient О»(wвҲ— ) was proposed as a
general measure of the degeneracy of a critical point wвҲ— in singular models (such as neural networks)
and an estimator О»МӮ(wвҲ— ) was proposed based on the WBIC (Watanabe, 2013).
Table 1 summarises theoretical local learning coefficients О» and losses L for some critical points1 .
For more theoretical values see Table H.2 and Appendix H, and for empirical estimates Appendix K.
In minimally singular cases (including 5, 5+ , 6) the local learning coefficient agrees with a simple
dimension count (half the number of normal directions to the level set, which is locally a manifold).
This explains why the coefficient increases by 32 as we move from the k-gon to the (k + 1)-gon:
this transition fixes one column of W (2 parameters) and the corresponding entry in the bias b, and
so reduces by 3 the number of free parameters, increasing the learning coefficient by 32 (for further
discussion see Appendix E).

                         Critical points     Local learning coefficient О»    Loss L
                                4                    4, 4.5, 5, 5.5          0.11111
                               4+                    5, 5.5, 6, 6.5          0.10417
                                5                          7                 0.06874
                               5+                          8                 0.06180
                                6                         8.5                0.04819

  Table 1: Critical points and their theoretical О» and L values for the r = 2, c = 6 TMS potential.

    1
      The 4-gons are on the boundary of multiple chambers (see Appendix J). We list 4, 4.5, 5, 5.5 as the lo-
cal learning coefficient for the standard 4-gon as these are the effective dimensions when the parameter is
approached from the four incident chambers.


                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4       BAYESIAN P HASE T RANSITIONS
In Bayesian statistics there is a fundamental distinction between the learning process for regular
models and singular models. In regular models, as the number of samples n increases, the posterior
concentrates at the MAP estimator and looks increasingly Gaussian. In singular models, which in-
clude neural networks, we expect rather that the learning process is dominated by phase transitions,
where at some critical values n вүҲ ncr the posterior вҖңjumpsвҖқ from one region of parameter space to
another.2 This is a universal phenomena in singular learning theory (Watanabe, 2009; 2020).

4.1     I NTERNAL M ODEL S ELECTION

We present phase transitions of the Bayesian posterior in SLT building on (Watanabe, 2009, В§7.6),
(Watanabe, 2018, В§9.4), Watanabe (2020). We assume (p(x|w), q(x), ПҶ(w)) is a model-truth-prior
triplet with parameter space W вҠҶ Rd satisfying the fundamental conditions of (Watanabe, 2009)
and the relative finite variance condition (Watanabe, 2018). Given aP  dataset Dn = {x1 , . . . , xn }, we
                                                                         n
define the empirical negative log likelihood function Ln (w) = вҲ’ n1 i=1 log p(xi |w). The posterior
distribution p(w|Dn ) is, up to a normalizing constant, given by exp(вҲ’nLn (w))ПҶ(w). The marginal
likelihood is the intractable normalizing constant of the posterior distribution. The free energy Fn is
defined to be the negative log of the marginal likelihood:
                                            Z
                               Fn = вҲ’ log      exp(вҲ’nLn (w))ПҶ(w)dw .                                    (5)
                                                    W
The asymptotic expansion in n is (Watanabe, 2018, В§6.3) given by
                        Fn = nLn (w0 ) + О» log n вҲ’ (m вҲ’ 1) log log n + Op (1)                                (6)
where w0 is an optimal parameter, О» is the learning coefficient and m is the multiplicity. We refer to
this as the free energy formula.
The philosophy behind using the marginal likelihood (or equivalently, the free energy) to perform
model selection is well established. Thus we could use the first two terms in (6) to choose between
two competing models on the basis of their fit (as measured by nLn ) and their complexity (as
measured by О»). We can also apply the same principle to different regions of the parameter space
in the same model. Let {WОұ }Оұ be a finite collection of compact semi-analytic subsets of W with
nonempty interior, whose interiors cover W. We assume each WОұ contains in its interior a point wОұвҲ—
minimising L on WОұ and that the triple (p, q, ПҶ) restricted to WОұ in the obvious sense has relative
finite variance. We refer to the Оұ rather loosely as phases. We can choose a partition of unity ПҒОұ
subordinate to a suitably chosen cover, so as to define ПҶОұ (w) = ПҒОұ (w)ПҶ(w) with
                          Z                                XZ
                                вҲ’nLn (w)
              Fn = вҲ’ log      e          ПҶ(w)dw = вҲ’ log            eвҲ’nLn (w) ПҶОұ (w)dw
                              W                                    Оұ   WОұ
                             X          Z                                     X
                   = вҲ’ log         VОұ            eвҲ’nLn (w) ПҶОұ (w)dw = вҲ’ log       eвҲ’Fn (WОұ )вҲ’vОұ
                              Оұ             WОұ                                Оұ

where ПҶОұ = V1Оұ ПҶОұ for VОұ =
                                   R
                                       ПҶОұ dw, vОұ = вҲ’ log(VОұ ) and
                                       WОұ
                                                   Z
                                  Fn (WОұ ) = вҲ’ log    eвҲ’nLn (w) ПҶОұ (w)dw                                     (7)
                                                         WОұ
denotes the free energy of the restricted tuple (p, q, ПҶОұ , WОұ ). We will refer to P
                                                                                   Fn (WОұ ) as the local
                                                                                        вҲ’Fn (WОұ )вҲ’vОұ
free energy.
                        log-sum-exp approximation, we can write Fn = вҲ’ log Оұ e
              Using the                                                                               вүҲ
minОұ Fn (WОұ ) + vОұ . Since (6) applies to the restricted tuple (p, q, ПҶОұ , WОұ ) we have
                   Fn (WОұ ) = nLn (wОұвҲ— ) + О»Оұ log n вҲ’ (mОұ вҲ’ 1) log log n + Op (1)                            (8)
                                                               3
which we refer to as the local free energy formula.
    2
      Another important class of phase transitions, where the posterior jumps as a hyperparameter in the prior or
true distribution is varied, will not be discussed here; see (Watanabe, 2018, В§9.4), (Carroll, 2021).
    3
      In general deriving the free energy formula requires some sophisticated mathematics (Watanabe, 2009;
                                        вҲ—
2018) but when the critical point wОұ       dominating the phase WОұ is minimally singular, simpler techniques
similar to (Balasubramanian, 1997) suffice; see (Lau et al., 2023, Appendix A). Many, but not all, of the
singularities appearing in this paper are minimally singular.


                                                           6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In this paper we absorb the volume constant vОұ and terms of order log log n or lower in (8) into a
term cОұ that we treat as effectively constant, giving
                              Fn вүҲ min nLn (wОұвҲ— ) + О»Оұ log n + cОұ .

                                                                                               (9)
                                        Оұ

A principle of internal model selection is suggested by (9) whereby the Bayesian posterior вҖңselectsвҖқ
a phase Оұ based on the local free energy of the phase, in the sense that this phase contains most of
the probability mass of the posterior for this value of n (Watanabe, 2009, В§7.6).4 At a given value of
n we can order the phases by their posterior concentration, or what is the same, their free energies
Fn (WОұ ). We say there is a local phase transition between phases Оұ, ОІ at critical sample size ncr ,
written Оұ вҶ’ ОІ, if the position of Оұ, ОІ in this ordered list of phases swaps. That is, for n вүҲ ncr and
n < ncr the Bayesian posterior prefers Оұ to ОІ, and the reverse is true for n > ncr . We say that a
phase Оұ dominates the posterior at n if it has the highest posterior mass, that is, Fn (WОұ ) < Fn (WОІ )
for all ОІ Мё= Оұ. A global phase transition is a local phase transition where Оұ dominates the posterior
for n < ncr and ОІ dominates for n > ncr with n near ncr . Generally when we speak of a phase
transition in this paper we mean a local transition.
Generically, phase transitions occur when, as n increases, phases with lower loss and higher com-
plexity are preferred; this expectation is verified in TMS in the next section. For more on the theory
of Bayesian phase transitions see Appendix C.


Figure 2: Proportion of Bayesian posterior concentrated in regions Wk,Пғ for r = 2, c = 6 according
to the free energy formula (theory, left) and MCMC sampling of the posterior (experimental, right).
Theory predicts, and experiments show, a phase transition 5 вҶ’ 6 in the range 600 вүӨ n вүӨ 700.


4.2    E XPERIMENTS

There is a tension in the internal model selection story: the free energy formula is asymptotic in n,
but the discussion of phase transitions involves Fn (WОұ ) at finite n. Whether this is valid, in a given
range of n and for a given system, is a question that may be difficult to resolve purely theoretically.
We show experimentally for r = 2, c = 6 that a Bayesian phase transition actually takes place
between the 5-gon and the 6-gon, within a range of n values consistent with the free energy formula.
In this section we focus on the case r = 2, c = 6. For c вҲҲ {4, 5} see Appendix F.4. We first define
regions of parameter space {WОұ }Оұ . Given a matrix W we write ConvHull(W ) for the number of
points in the convex hull of the set of columns. For 3 вүӨ k вүӨ c, 0 вүӨ Пғ вүӨ c вҲ’ k we define

          Wk,Пғ = w = (W, b) вҲҲ W | ConvHull(W ) = k and b has Пғ positive entries .

The set Wk,Пғ вҠҶ Rd is semi-analytic and contains the k Пғ+ -gon in its interior. For Оұ = (k, Пғ)
we let wОұвҲ— denote the parameter of the k Пғ+ -gon. We verify experimentally the hypothesis that this
parameter dominates the Bayesian posterior of WОұ (see Appendix F) by which we mean that most
samples from the posterior for a relevant range of n values are вҖңcloseвҖқ to wОұвҲ— .5 In this sense the
choice of phases WОұ is appropriate for the range of sample sizes we consider.
   4                         вҲ—         вҲ—
   We often replace Ln (wОұ     ) by L(wОұ ) in comparing phases; see (Watanabe, 2018, В§9.4).
   The kПғ+,П•вҲ’ -gons for П• > 0 have high loss but may nonetheless dominate the posterior for very low n,
   5

however this is outside the scope of our experiments, which ultimately dictates the choice of the set Wk,Пғ .


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We draw posterior samples using MCMC-NUTS (Homan & Gelman, 2014) with prior distribution
N(0, 1) and sample sizes n. Each posterior sample is then classified into some Wk,Пғ (our classifica-
tion algorithm for the deciding the appropriate value of k is not error-free.) For each n, 10 datasets
are generated and the average proportion of the k-gons, and standard error, is reported in Figure 2.
Details of the theoretical proportion plot are given in Appendix F.1.
Let wОұвҲ— , wОІвҲ— be k-gons dominating phases WОұ , WОІ . A Bayesian phase transition Оұ вҶ’ ОІ occurs
when the difference between the free energies Fn (WОІ )вҲ’Fn (WОұ ) changes from positive to negative.
The most distinctive feature in the experimental plot is the 5 вҶ’ 6 transition in the range 600 вүӨ n вүӨ
700. The free energy formula predicts this transition at ncr вүҲ 600 (Appendix C.2). An alternative
visualization of the 5 вҶ’ 6 transition using t-SNE is given in Appendix F.2. As n decreases past 400
the MCMC classification becomes increasingly uncertain, and it is less clear that we should expect
the free energy formula to be a good model of the Bayesian posterior, so we should not read too
much into any correspondence between the plots for n вүӨ 400 (see Appendix F.2).


Figure 3: Visualization of 400 SGD trajectories initialized at MCMC samples from the Bayesian
posterior for r = 2, c = 6 at sample size n = 100. We see that SGD trajectories are dominated
by plateaus at loss values corresponding to our classification of critical points (Appendix A) and
that lower loss critical points have higher estimated local learning coefficients. Note that for highly
singular critical points we see that О»МӮ is unable to provide non-negative values without additional
hyperparameter tuning, but the ordinality (more positive is less degenerate) is nonetheless correct.
See Appendix K for details and caveats for the О»МӮ estimation.



5    DYNAMICAL P HASE T RANSITIONS

A dynamical transition Оұ вҶ’ ОІ occurs in a trajectory if it is near a critical point wОұвҲ— of the loss at
some time П„1 (e.g. there is a visible plateau in the loss) and at some later time П„2 > П„1 it is near
wОІвҲ— without encountering an intermediate critical point. We conduct an empirical investigation into
whether the k-gon critical points of the TMS potential dominate the behaviour of SGD trajectories
for r = 2, c = 6, and the existence of dynamical transitions.
There are two sets of experiments. In the first we draw a training dataset Dn = {x1 , . . . , xn }
where n = 1000 from the true distribution q(x). We also draw a test set of size 5000. We use
minibatch-SGD initialized at a 4-gon plus Gaussian noise of standard deviation 0.01, and run for
4500 epochs with batch size 20 and learning rate 0.005. This initialisation is chosen to encourage
the SGD trajectory to pass through critical points with high loss after a small number of SGD steps,
allowing us to observe phase transitions more easily. Along the trajectory, we keep track of each
iterateвҖҷs training loss, test set loss and theoretical test loss. Figure 1 is a typical example, additional
plots are collected in Figures B.1-B.7. In the second set of experiments, summarized in Figure 3,
we take the same size training dataset but initialize SGD trajectories differently, at random MCMC
samples from the Bayesian posterior at n = 100 (a small value of n). The number of epochs is 5000.


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In both cases we estimate the local learning coefficient of the training iterates wt . This is a newly-
developed estimator Lau et al. (2023) that uses SGLD (Welling & Teh, 2011) to estimate a version
of the WBIC (Watanabe, 2013) localized to wt and then forms an estimate of the local learning
coefficient О»МӮ(wt ) based on the approximation that WBIC(wt ) вүҲ nLn (wt ) + О»(wt ) log n where
О»(wt ) is the local RLCT. In the language of Lau et al. (2023), we use a full-batch version of SGLD
with hyperparameters Пө = 0.001, Оі = 1 and 500 steps to estimate the local WBIC.
These experiments support the following description of SGD training for the TMS potential when
r = 2, c = 6: trajectories are characterised by plateaus associated to the critical points described in
Section 3.2 and further discussed in Appendix A. The dynamical transitions encountered are
                 4++вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’ вҲ’вҶ’ 4+вҲ’вҲ’ вҲ’вҶ’ 4вҲ’ ,                4+вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’ вҲ’вҶ’ 4вҲ’вҲ’ ,
                      4++вҲ’вҲ’ вҲ’вҶ’ 4+вҲ’ вҲ’вҶ’ 4 ,              4++вҲ’ вҲ’вҶ’ 4+ вҲ’вҶ’ 5 вҲ’вҶ’ 5+ .                      (10)
The dominance of the classified critical points, and the general relationship of decreasing loss and
increasing complexity, can be seen in Figure 3.

5.1   R ELATION B ETWEEN BAYESIAN AND DYNAMICAL T RANSITIONS

Phases of the Bayesian posterior for TMS with r = 2, c = 6 are dominated by k-gons which are
critical points of the TMS potential (Section 4). The same critical points explain plateaus of the SGD
training curves (Section 5). This is not a coincidence: on the one hand SLT predicts that phases of
the Bayesian posterior will be associated to singularities of the KL divergence, and on the other
hand it is a general principle of nonlinear dynamics that singularities of a potential dictate the global
behaviour of solution trajectories (Strogatz, 2018; Gilmore, 1981).
However, the relation between transitions of the Bayesian posterior and transitions over SGD train-
ing is more subtle. There is no necessary relation between these two kinds of transitions. A Bayesian
transition Оұ вҶ’ ОІ might not have an associated dynamical transition if, for example, the regions
WОұ , WОІ are distant or separated by high energy barriers. For example, the Bayesian phase transi-
tion 5 вҶ’ 6 has not been observed as a dynamical transition (it may occur, just with low probability
per SGD step). However, it seems reasonable to expect that for many dynamical transitions there
exists a Bayesian transition between the same phases. We call this the Bayesian antecedent of the
dynamical transition if it exists. This leads us to:
Bayesian Antecedent Hypothesis (BAH). The dynamical transitions Оұ вҶ’ ОІ encountered in neural
network training have Bayesian antecedents.
Since a dynamical transition decreases the loss, the main obstruction to having a Bayesian antecedent
is that in a Bayesian phase transition Оұ вҶ’ ОІ the local learning coefficient should increase (Appendix
D). Thus the BAH is in a similar conceptual vein to the expectation, discussed in Section 2, that SGD
prefers higher complexity critical points as training progresses. While the dynamical transitions in
(10) are all associated with increases in our estimate of the local learning coefficient, we also know
that at low n, the constant terms can play a nontrivial role in the free energy formula. Our analysis
(Appendix D.1) suggests that all dynamical transitions in (10) have Bayesian antecedents, with the
possible exception of 4++вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’ вҶ’ 4+вҲ’вҲ’ and 4+вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’ вҶ’ 4вҲ’вҲ’ where the analysis is inconclusive.


6     C ONCLUSION

Phase transitions and emergent structure are among the most interesting phenomena in modern deep
learning (Wei et al., 2022a; Barak et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022) and provide an interesting avenue
for fundamental progress in neural network interpretability (Olsson et al., 2022; Nanda et al., 2023)
and AI safety (Hoogland et al., 2023). Building on Elhage et al. (2022) we have shown that the Toy
Model of Superposition with two hidden dimensions has, in the high sparsity limit, phase transitions
in both stochastic gradient-based and Bayesian learning. We have shown that phases are in both
cases dominated by k-gon critical points which we have classified, and we have proposed with the
BAH a relation between transitions in SGD training and phase transitions in the Bayesian posterior.
Our analysis of TMS also demonstrates the practical utility of the local complexity measure О»МӮ intro-
duced in (Lau et al., 2023), which is an all-purpose tool for measuring model complexity.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Emmanuel Abbe, Enric Boix AdseraМҖ, and Theodor Misiakiewicz. SGD Learning on Neural Net-
  works: Leap Complexity and Saddle-to-Saddle Dynamics. In Proceedings of Thirty Sixth Con-
  ference on Learning Theory, pp. 2552вҖ“2623. PMLR, 2023.
Madhu S Advani, Andrew M Saxe, and Haim Sompolinsky. High-dimensional dynamics of gener-
 alization error in neural networks. Neural Networks, 132:428вҖ“446, 2020.
Shun-ichi Amari. Information Geometry and its Applications, volume 194. Springer, 2016.
Sanjeev Arora, Nadav Cohen, Noah Golowich, and Wei Hu. A convergence analysis of gradient
  descent for deep linear neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.02281, 2018.
Sanjeev Arora, Nadav Cohen, Wei Hu, and Yuping Luo. Implicit regularization in deep matrix
  factorization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Vijay Balasubramanian. Statistical inference, OccamвҖҷs razor, and Statistical Mechanics on the Space
  of Probability Distributions. Neural Computation, 9(2):349вҖ“368, 1997.
Pierre Baldi and Kurt Hornik. Neural networks and principal component analysis: Learning from
  examples without local minima. Neural networks, 2(1):53вҖ“58, 1989.
Boaz Barak, Benjamin Edelman, Surbhi Goel, Sham Kakade, Eran Malach, and Cyril Zhang. Hid-
  den progress in deep learning: Sgd learns parities near the computational limit. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:21750вҖ“21764, 2022.
Liam Carroll. Phase Transitions in Neural Networks. MSc Thesis at the University of Melbourne,
  2021.
Armin Eftekhari. Training linear neural networks: Non-local convergence and complexity results.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2836вҖ“2847. PMLR, 2020.
Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Catherine Olsson, Nicholas Schiefer, Tom Henighan, Shauna Kravec,
  Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Robert Lasenby, Dawn Drain, Carol Chen, Roger Grosse, Sam McCandlish,
  Jared Kaplan, Dario Amodei, Martin Wattenberg, and Christopher Olah. Toy Models of Super-
  position. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2022.
Gauthier Gidel, Francis Bach, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. Implicit regularization of discrete gradient
  dynamics in linear neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32,
  2019.
R. Gilmore. Catastrophe Theory for Scientists and Engineers. Wiley, 1981.
Daniel Gissin, Shai Shalev-Shwartz, and Amit Daniely. The implicit bias of depth: How incremental
  learning drives generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.12051, 2019.
Tom Henighan, Shan Carter, Tristan Hume, Nelson Elhage, Robert Lasenby, Stanislav Fort,
  Nicholas Schiefer, and Christopher Olah. Superposition, Memorization, and Double Descent.
  Transformer Circuits Thread, 2023.
Matthew D Homan and Andrew Gelman. The No-U-turn sampler: adaptively setting path lengths
 in Hamiltonian Monte Carlo. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 15(1):1593вҖ“1623, 2014.
Jesse Hoogland, Alexander Gietelink Oldenziel, Daniel Murfet, and Stan van Winger-
  den. Towards Developmental Interpretability. ttps://www.lesswrong.com/posts/
  TjaeCWvLZtEDAS5Ex/towards-developmental-interpretability, 2023. [On-
  line; accessed 28-September-2023].
Arthur Jacot, FrancМ§ois Ged, Berfin SМ§imsМ§ek, CleМҒment Hongler, and Franck Gabriel. Saddle-to-saddle
  dynamics in deep linear networks: Small initialization training, symmetry, and sparsity. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2106.15933, 2021.
Kenji Kawaguchi. Deep learning without poor local minima. Advances in neural information pro-
  cessing systems, 29, 2016.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E. Lau, S. Wei, and D. Murfet. Quantifying degeneracy in singular models via the learning coeffi-
  cient. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12108, 2023.
Zhiyuan Li, Yuping Luo, and Kaifeng Lyu. Towards resolving the implicit bias of gradient descent
  for matrix factorization: Greedy low-rank learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.09839, 2020.
Ziming Liu, Ouail Kitouni, Niklas S Nolte, Eric Michaud, Max Tegmark, and Mike Williams. To-
  wards understanding grokking: An effective theory of representation learning. Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, 35:34651вҖ“34663, 2022.
Thomas McGrath, Andrei Kapishnikov, Nenad TomasМҢev, Adam Pearce, Martin Wattenberg, Demis
  Hassabis, Been Kim, Ulrich Paquet, and Vladimir Kramnik. Acquisition of Chess Knowledge in
  AlphaZero. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 119(47), 2022.
Neel Nanda, Lawrence Chan, Tom Lieberum, Jess Smith, and Jacob Steinhardt. Progress measures
  for grokking via mechanistic interpretability. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learn-
  ing Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=9XFSbDPmdW.
Catherine Olsson, Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Nicholas Joseph, Nova DasSarma, Tom Henighan,
  Ben Mann, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli,
  Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Scott Johnston, Andy Jones, Jackson Kernion, Liane
  Lovitt, Kamal Ndousse, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish,
  and Chris Olah. In-context Learning and Induction Heads. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2022.
  https://transformer-circuits.pub/2022/in-context-learning-and-induction-heads/index.html.
Andrew M Saxe, James L McClelland, and Surya Ganguli. Exact solutions to the nonlinear dynam-
  ics of learning in deep linear neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6120, 2013.
Andrew M Saxe, James L McClelland, and Surya Ganguli. A mathematical theory of semantic
  development in deep neural networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 116
  (23):11537вҖ“11546, 2019.
Steven H Strogatz. Nonlinear dynamics and chaos with student solutions manual: With applications
  to physics, biology, chemistry, and engineering. CRC press, 2018.
Laurens van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. Visualizing Data using t-SNE. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 9(86):2579вҖ“2605, 2008.
Sumio Watanabe. Algebraic Geometry and Statistical Learning Theory. Cambridge University
  Press, USA, 2009.
Sumio Watanabe. A Widely Applicable Bayesian Information Criterion. Journal of Machine Learn-
  ing Research, 14:867вҖ“897, 2013.
Sumio Watanabe. Mathematical Theory of Bayesian Statistics. CRC Press, Taylor and Francis
  group, USA, 2018.
Sumio Watanabe. Cross Validation, Information Criterion and Phase Transition. Talk, 2020.
Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani
  Yogatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, Ed H. Chi, Tatsunori Hashimoto,
  Oriol Vinyals, Percy Liang, Jeff Dean, and William Fedus. Emergent abilities of large lan-
  guage models. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2022a. ISSN 2835-8856. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=yzkSU5zdwD. Survey Certification.
Susan Wei, Daniel Murfet, Mingming Gong, Hui Li, Jesse Gell-Redman, and Thomas Quella. Deep
  Learning is Singular, and ThatвҖҷs Good. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning
  Systems, 2022b.
M. Welling and Y. W. Teh. Bayesian Learning via Stochastic Gradient Langevin Dynamics. In
 Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Machine Learning, 2011.
Yao Zhang, Andrew M Saxe, Madhu S Advani, and Alpha A Lee. EnergyвҖ“entropy competition
  and the effectiveness of stochastic gradient descent in machine learning. Molecular Physics, 116
  (21-22):3214вҖ“3223, 2018.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    FANTASTIC C RITICAL P OINTS AND W HERE TO F IND T HEM
In this section we provide a brief guide, using loose intuitive language, to recognise known critical
parameters and their variations. Rigorous derivation and details are given in Appendix H, I, and J.
Broadly speaking, known critical parameters, (W вҲ— , bвҲ— ), are classified by three discrete numbers:

       вҖў k: the number of vertices in the regular polygon formed by the convex hull of the columns
         of the W вҲ— matrix, interpreted as a vector in R2 . The length of these vectors (for any k вүӨ c)
         have to be at the optimal values derived in Appendix H and listed in Table A.1.
       вҖў Пғ: the number of positive values in the bias vector. These positive biases are required to
         take on the optimal value at bвҲ— = 1/(2c) and have to occur at indices that do not correspond
         to the k-gon vertices.
       вҖў П•: the number of large negative values in the bias vectors. So far, weвҖҷve only observed
         П• > 0 when k = 4, i.e. this discrete subcategory only applies to 4-gons. These biases have
         to occur at indices that do correspond to the 4-gon vertices.

For r = 2, c = 6, the above description and constraints result in the 18 families of critical points
whose representative members are shown in Figure A.1 and their loss or potential energy levels are
shown in Figure A.2.
Next, we discuss possible variations within these families of critical points. Aside from the ever-
present rotational and permutation symmetries discussed elsewhere, there are variations of these
standard descriptions that allow the parameter to stay on the same critical submanifold. Figure A.3
shows some examples of irregular versions of known critical points. One can cross-check that their
potential values L are the same as their regular counterpart. Most of these variation is the result of
having negative values in the bias vectors allowing for extra variability without changing the loss
value. To explain the examples in Figure A.3,

       вҖў 5-gon (top left). In the standard 5-gon family, the vestigial bias bвҖІ can have arbitrary neg-
         ative value and
                      p corresponding weight column      can be any vector so long as its length lвҖІ is
                                 вҖІ    вҲ—         вҲ—
         smaller than min{|b |, |b |} where b is the optimal negative bias for the main columns
         (see Table A.1).
       вҖў 4-gon (top right). The two vestigial biases can take arbitrary negative values.
       вҖў 4+вҲ’вҲ’ -gon (bottom left). Having two negative biases with large magnitude afford a few
         other degrees of freedom. The weight columns W3 , W4 with    p those large negative biases
         can be any vector as long as (1) they lengths is smaller than |bi | for their respective biases
         and (2) they form obtuse angle relative other columns W1 and W2 , i.e the other two vertices
         of the 4-gon.
       вҖў 4вҲ’вҲ’ -gon (bottom right). Other than the variation in the main columns W3 , W6 with large
         negative biases, the two vestigial columns can also be any vectors as long  p     as they stay
         within the sector between W1 and W2 and their lengths are bounded by min              |bi | | i =
         3, 4, 5, 6 .

                                Critical point       lвҲ—          bвҲ—
                                    4-gon            1           0
                                    5-gon         1.17046     вҲ’0.28230
                                    6-gon         1.32053     вҲ’0.61814

                               Table A.1: Parameters of certain k-gons.


                                                   12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Figure A.1: Representative of each known class of critical parameters in r = 2, c = 6.


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         Figure A.2: Potential energy levels L for known critical points in r = 2, c = 6.


             Figure A.3: Irregular versions of known critical points in r = 2, c = 6.


                                               14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B    A DDITIONAL EXAMPLES OF SGD TRAJECTORIES FOR THE r = 2, c = 6
     TMS POTENTIAL


In this Appendix we collect additional individual SGD trajectories for the r = 2, c = 6 TMS
potential, with the same hyperparameters as discussed in Section 5. These are all of the runs from 30
random seeds that had a dynamical transition. We note that each of the critical points encountered in
a plateau fall into the classification discussed in Appendix A and the estimator О»МӮ for the local learning
coefficient jumps in each transition. Note that the transitions in Figure 1 are 4++вҲ’ вҶ’ 4+ вҶ’ 5.
The instructions for reading the figures in this appendix, for example Figure B.1, are the same as for
Figure 1 in the main text.
We note that in some runs containing particularly degenerate k-gons, such as the 4++вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’ in Figure
B.1, the estimator О»МӮ produces negative values for the standard hyperparameter Пө = 0.001. By
adapting this hyperparameter to the level of degeneracy we can correct for this and avoid invalid
estimates (see Appendix K). But since we cannot predict the trajectory of SGD iterates, we choose
to use a fixed hyperparameter Оі = 1.0, Пө = 0.001, number of SGLD steps = 500 in all Figures of
this form.


            Figure B.1: Trajectory with dynamical transitions 4++вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’ вҶ’ 4+вҲ’вҲ’ вҶ’ 4вҲ’ .


                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  Figure B.2: Trajectory with dynamical transition 4+вҲ’ вҶ’ 4.


                   Figure B.3: Trajectory with dynamical transition 4+ вҶ’ 5.


                                             16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   Figure B.4: Trajectory with dynamical transition 4+ вҶ’ 5.


               Figure B.5: Trajectory with dynamical transition 4+вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’ вҶ’ 4вҲ’вҲ’ .


                                             17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   Figure B.6: Trajectory with dynamical transition 4+ вҶ’ 5.


             Figure B.7: Trajectory with dynamical transition 4++вҲ’вҲ’ вҶ’ 4+вҲ’ вҶ’ 4.


                                             18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C     U SING THE F REE E NERGY F ORMULA
In Section 4.1 we defined a (local) phase transition Оұ вҶ’ ОІ at a critical sample size ncr to take place
when the local free energies swap order, as in the following table, with n taken close to ncr :

                     n < ncr                  n = ncr                  n > ncr
                Fn (WОұ ) < Fn (WОІ )      Fn (WОұ ) вүҲ Fn (WОІ )      Fn (WОұ ) > Fn (WОІ )

We assume n is in a range where the local free energies for Оі вҲҲ {Оұ, ОІ} are well-approximated by
the right hand-side of the following
                                Fn (WОі ) вүҲ nL(wОівҲ— ) + О»Оі log n + cОі                                (11)
for some constant cОі . While n is of course an integer, to find where the free energy curves cross we
may treat n as a real variable. To an ordered pair Оұ, ОІ we may associate
                                       вҲҶL = L(wОІвҲ— ) вҲ’ L(wОұвҲ— )
                                       вҲҶО» = О»ОІ вҲ’ О»Оұ
                                       вҲҶc = cОІ вҲ’ cОұ
Then to solve Fn (WОұ ) = Fn (WОІ ) for n we may instead solve
                                    nвҲҶL + вҲҶО» log n + вҲҶc = 0 .                                      (12)
Theoretically, a phase transition Оұ вҶ’ ОІ exists if and only if this equation has a positive solution.
However, in practice the free energy formula on which this equation is based will only well describe
the Bayesian posterior for sufficiently large n, and it is an empirical question what this n may be.
In the following when we say that a phase transition is predicted to exist (or not), the reader should
keep this caveat in mind.
When we refer to theoretically derived values for phase transitions, we mean that we solve (12) with
the given values of вҲҶL, вҲҶО», вҲҶc. Note that if the phase ОІ has lower loss, learning coefficient and
constant term (so that вҲҶL, вҲҶО» and вҲҶc are all negative) then there can be no phase transition Оұ вҶ’ ОІ
as Fn (WОұ ) is never lower than Fn (WОІ ).
Although the constant (and lower order) terms in the free energy expansion are not well-understood,
in this paper we proceed assuming that the leading contribution comes from the prior in the manner
described in Section C.1 below.

C.1   C ONSTANT TERMS IN THE F REE E NERGY F ORMULA

Recall from Section 4.1 that given a collection of phases {WОұ } the free energy is
                                        X Z
                           Fn = вҲ’ log        VОұ      eвҲ’nLn (w) ПҶОұ (w)dw
                                          Оұ       WОұ

where ПҶОұ = V1Оұ ПҶОұ for VОұ = WОұ ПҶОұ dw. Suppose that the phase WОұ is dominated by a critical
                                R

point wОұвҲ— and that the partition of unity is chosen so that ПҶОұ (wОұвҲ— ) вүҲ ПҶ(wОұ ) (this is reasonable since
the critical point is in the interior). We explore the following approximation to the contribution of Оұ
to the above integral
                          Z                                   Z
                                 вҲ’nLn (w)                   вҲ—
                               e          ПҶОұ (w)dw вүҲ ПҶ(wОұ )        eвҲ’nLn (w) dw .
                        WОұ                                   WОұ

This means that the prior contributes to cОұ of (8) through вҲ’ log(VОұ ПҶ(wОұвҲ— )) as well as through the
OP (1) term of the asymptotic expansion. With a normal prior ПҶ = вҲҡ 1 d exp(вҲ’ 2Пғ1 2 вҲҘwвҲҘ2 )
                                                                      Пғ   (2ПҖ)

                                                    1      1
                     VОұ ПҶ(wОұвҲ— ) = ПҶОұ (wОұвҲ— ) вүҲ p      exp вҲ’ 2 вҲҘwОұвҲ— вҲҘ2 .

                                             Пғ (2ПҖ)d      2Пғ
Hence вҲ’ log(VОұ ПҶ(wОұвҲ— )) depends on Пғ through the sum log Пғ + 2Пғ1 2 вҲҘwОұ вҲҘ2 . Here if wОұвҲ— = (WОұвҲ— , bвҲ—Оұ )
we have вҲҘwОұвҲ— вҲҘ2 = вҲҘWОұвҲ— вҲҘ2 + вҲҘbвҲ—Оұ вҲҘ2 . In Table C.1, Table C.2 we show the value of this contribution
when Пғ = 1 for c вҲҲ {5, 6}. Note that for some k-gons there are negative biases that can take
arbitrarily large values, so the shown values are lower bounds.


                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                       1   вҲ— 2
                                     Critical point    2 вҲҘwОұ вҲҘ
                                            4            вүҘ2
                                           4+          вүҘ 2.05
                                            5         вүҘ 3.62417

                          Table C.1: Prior factors for k-gons when c = 5.

                                                       1   вҲ— 2
                                     Critical point    2 вҲҘwОұ вҲҘ
                                            6          6.37767
                                            5         > 3.62417
                                           5+          3.62764
                                            4             2
                                           4вҲ’           > 1.5
                                          4вҲ’вҲ’            >1
                                         4вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’           > 0.5
                                        4вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’            >0
                                           4+          2.00347
                                          4+вҲ’         > 1.50347
                                         4+вҲ’вҲ’         > 1.00347
                                        4+вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’         > 0.50347
                                       4+вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’         > 0.00347
                                          4++          2.00694
                                         4++вҲ’         > 1.50694
                                        4++вҲ’вҲ’         > 1.00694
                                       4++вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’         > 0.50694
                                      4++вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’         > 0.00694

                          Table C.2: Prior factors for k-gons when c = 6.


C.2   T HEORETICAL PREDICTIONS FOR THE 5- GON TO 6- GON TRANSITION FOR r = 2, c = 6

With Оұ = 5 and ОІ = 6 we have from Table 1 and Table C.2 that
                              вҲҶL = 0.04819 вҲ’ 0.06874 = вҲ’0.02055
                              вҲҶО» = 8.5 вҲ’ 7 = 1.5
                              вҲҶc = 6.37767 вҲ’ 3.62417 = 2.7535
Solving (12) numerically gives ncr = 601 as the closest integer.

C.3   I NFLUENCE OF CONSTANT TERMS

Dividing (12) through by log n we have
                         n        1 вҲҶc    вҲҶО»     1 h вҲҶc      i
                             =вҲ’         вҲ’    =вҲ’          + вҲҶО» .                                  (13)
                       log n    log n вҲҶL вҲҶL     вҲҶL log n

In the phase transitions we analyse in this paper вҲҶL is on the order of 0.01, вҲҶО» is on the order of 1,
and вҲҶc is on the order of 1, so вҲҶО»/вҲҶL, вҲҶc/вҲҶL are on the order of 10. In Figure 2 we care about
roughly 200 вүӨ n вүӨ 1000 so 5 вүӨ log n вүӨ 7. Hence in practice the first term in (13) is roughly one
order of magnitude lower than the second; the upshot being that the primary determinant of ncr is
|вҲҶО»/вҲҶL| but the influence of the constant terms can be significant.
In the second transition of Figure 1 from 4+ вҶ’ 5 we have вҲҶО» = 2, вҲҶL = 0.06874 вҲ’ 0.10417 =
вҲ’0.03543 (based on Table 1) and вҲҶc = 3.62417 вҲ’ 2.00347 = 1.6207 (based on Table C.2) so
вҲ’вҲҶc/вҲҶL вүҲ 45 and вҲ’вҲҶО»/вҲҶL вүҲ 56. Solving (12) numerically yields ncr вүҲ 380. Solving the
equation with вҲҶc = 0 gives ncr вүҲ 327, so as suggested above including the constant term shifts the
critical sample size by a lower order term.


                                                 20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.4   D OUBLE T RANSITIONS

Assume that there are transitions Оұ вҶ’ ОІ at critical sample size n1 and ОІ вҶ’ Оі at critical sample size
n2 , both involving no change in constant terms so that (16) applies. Since n/ log n is increasing, if
n1 < n2 we deduce
                                           вҲҶО»1        вҲҶО»2
                                        вҲ’        <вҲ’                                              (14)
                                           вҲҶL1        вҲҶL2
where
                                     вҲҶО»1 = О»ОІ вҲ’ О»Оұ ,
                                     вҲҶО»2 = О»Оі вҲ’ О»ОІ ,
                                     вҲҶL1 = L(wОІвҲ— ) вҲ’ L(wОұвҲ— ) ,
                                     вҲҶL2 = L(wОівҲ— ) вҲ’ L(wОІвҲ— ) .
From (14) we obtain the inequality
                                                          вҲҶL2   вҲҶL1
                             вҲҶL2 вҲҶО»1 > вҲҶО»2 вҲҶL1 =вҮ’             >                                  (15)
                                                          вҲҶО»2   вҲҶО»1
which says that: along any curve in the (О», L) plane following a sequence of Bayesian phase tran-
sitions, the slope must increase. For example, we observe in Figure D.1 that the negative slopes
become successively less negative as we move along a sequence of transitions. This is the least
obvious for the pair of transitions 4+вҲ’вҲ’ вҶ’ 4+ and 4+ вҶ’ 5 which corresponds to the fact that the
gap n2 вҲ’ n1 is small in Figure D.5.

D     BAYESIAN A NTECEDENTS
In this section we review whether the phase transitions we find empirically have Bayesian an-
tecedents. To begin we consider the case where вҲҶc = 0. Then from (13) we deduce
                                            n      вҲҶО»
                                                =вҲ’    .                                          (16)
                                          log n    вҲҶL
For n > 3, n/ log n is positive and an increasing function of n, and we denote the inverse function
by N . Since the critical sample size for a transition Оұ вҶ’ ОІ must be positive, if вҲҶL < 0 (the loss
decreases) then (16) has a (unique) solution if and only if вҲҶО» > 0 (the complexity increases). The
unique solution is the critical sample size
                                                    вҲҶО»
                                         ncr = N вҲ’          .
                                                       вҲҶL
If вҲҶL < 0 and вҲҶc Мё= 0 we simply plot the free energy curves and see if they intersect. Given the
orders of magnitude discussed in Section C.3 we expect if вҲҶc > 0, вҲҶО» > 0 then there is likely to be
a solution, whereas if вҲҶc < 0, вҲҶО» < 0 then the right hand side of (13) is negative and no transition
can exist. The mixed cases are harder to argue about in general terms.

D.1   T HE BAH FOR r = 2, c = 6

We examine the evidence for the existence of Bayesian antecedents of the dynamical transitions in
TMS for r = 2, c = 6 exhibited in Section 5. The known dynamical transitions are summarised
in Figure D.1. The slope of the lines is, in the notation of (16), equal to вҲҶL
                                                                             вҲҶО» and so the fact that
all observed phase transitions go down and to the right would indicate, if the constant terms were
ignored, that the critical sample size is positive and a Bayesian phase transition exists. Here the L
values are from Section A and the О»МӮ values from Table K.1 (note the caveats there) for those k-gons
where we do not have theoretically derived values (for Оұ вҲҲ {5, 5+ , 6} see Table 1).
To perform a more refined analysis which includes the constant terms we use Table C.2 and com-
pare plots of free energy curves. In the cases where we use an empirical estimate of the learning
coefficient, we display the curve as part of a shaded region made up of curves with coefficients of
log n within one standard deviation of the estimate. The results are shown in Figures D.2-D.5.


                                                 21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure D.1: Summary of known dynamical transitions and the phases involved. Each scatter point
(О»МӮОұ , LОұ ) corresponds to one of our classified critical points wОұвҲ— and a red line is drawn between
phases with dynamical transitions connecting them (in the direction that goes right and down) as
listed in (10). These вҖңcurvesвҖқ are necessarily concave up if the time order of dynamical transitions
matches the sample size order of Bayesian transitions, see C.4.


For phase transitions occurring at large values of n, the existence of a transition is relatively insensi-
tive to small changes in the learning coefficient or constant terms, and we can also be more confident
that the predicted transition translates (via the correspondence between the free energy formula and
the posterior, which is only valid for sufficiently large n) to an actual phase transition in the pos-
terior. For transitions occurring at low n, such as those in Figure D.2 and Figure D.3, the analysis
is strongly affected by small changes in learning coefficient or constant terms, and so we cannot be
sure that a Bayesian transition exists.


Figure D.2: Free energy plot providing evidence of Bayesian transitions 4++вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’ вҶ’ 4+вҲ’вҲ’ and
4+вҲ’вҲ’ вҶ’ 4вҲ’ . In the former case the plot is merely suggestive, since the transition takes place at low
n and is very sensitive to the learning coefficients and constant terms.


                                                   22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure D.3: Free energy plot providing weak evidence of a Bayesian transition 4+вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’ вҶ’ 4вҲ’вҲ’ . The
transition takes place at low n and is very sensitive to the learning coefficients and constant terms.


   Figure D.4: Free energy plots suggesting Bayesian transitions 4++вҲ’вҲ’ вҶ’ 4+вҲ’ and 4+вҲ’ вҶ’ 4.


Figure D.5: Free energy plots suggesting Bayesian transitions 4++вҲ’ вҶ’ 4+ , 4+ вҶ’ 5 and 5 вҶ’ 5+ .



                                                 23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E    I NTUITION FOR THE LOCAL LEARNING COEFFICIENT AS COMPLEXITY
     MEASURE FOR c = 6

Here we provide some intuition for why critical points in TMS with higher local learning coefficient
should be thought of as more complex. It seems uncontroversial that the standard (k+1)-gon is more
complex than the standard k-gon. We focus on explaining why increasing the number of positive
biases on a k-gon causes a slight increase in the model complexity and increasing the number of
large negative biases on the 4-gon causes a large decrease in the complexity. This pattern can be
seen empirically in Table K.1.
The basic fact that informs this discussion is that the local learning coefficient is half the number of
normal directions to the level set L(w) = L(wОұвҲ— ) at wОұвҲ— when L is Morse-Bott at wОұвҲ— so that a naive
count of normal directions captures the degeneracy. See (Watanabe, 2009, В§7.1), (Wei et al., 2022b,
В§4) and (Lau et al., 2023, Appendix A) for relevant mathematical discussion. That means that if
we increase the number of directions we can travel in the level set by 1 when we move from wОұвҲ— to
wОІвҲ— then we expect to decrease the learning coefficient by 12 . When the level set is more degenerate
at wОұвҲ— such naive dimension counts fail to be the correct measure and it is more difficult to provide
simple intuitions. However in TMS we are fortunate that some of the critical points (e.g. 5, 5+ ) are
minimally singular so naive counts actually do capture what is going on.
So let us do some naive counting. Recall that any positive bias bi associated with a column Wi with
                                        1
zero norm must have the exact value 2c    , whereas negative biases associated with such columns can
take on any value. Fixing the value of the bias reduces the number of free parameters by 2, since if
we have a positive bias at bi then li = вҲҘWi вҲҘ must be zero. This explains why the learning coefficient
of the 5+ -gon is one larger than that of the 5-gon, since both are minimally singular and we have
decreased the number of free parameters (dimension of the level set) by 2.
Next we consider large negative biases. For the 4вҲ’ -gon, note that the neuron with the large negative
bias never fires (it is a вҖңdeadвҖқ neuron), so this critical point only really has representations for three
inputs. In fact, when there are no positive biases, the family of parameters that we call a 4вҲ’ -gon
includes w вҲҲ W with (using the l, Оё, b parametrization) any b4 < 0 and any l42 < вҲ’b4 including l4
arbitrarily close to zero, with a convex hull containing only three vertices. Further, in the case of the
4вҲ’вҲ’ -gon, this configuration only has representations for two inputs. In this case, if the two weights
with negative biases are adjacent then there is an entire вҖңdeadвҖқ quarter-plane of the activation space,
and the 5th and 6th columns of W can take on nonzero values in that quarter plane (provided they
satisfy li2 < вҲ’bi for i вҲҲ {5, 6}). This extra freedom means that the number of bits required to
вҖңpin downвҖқ a 4вҲ’вҲ’ -gon is less than a 4вҲ’ gon, which is less than a 4-gon. Similarly, specifying
the 4вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’ -gon and 4вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’ -gon requires even less information, so it is appropriate that the local
learning coefficient classifies them as less complex.


                                                   24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F     MCMC E XPERIMENTS
We give further details about the experiments where we use MCMC to sample the Bayesian posterior
to establish the phase occupancy plot in 2. For a given number of columns c and sampleQnsize n, we
generate n samples Xi from the true distribution q(x) and obtain a likelihood function i=1 p(Xi |
w) with q(x) and p(x | w) given by (2) and (3) respectively. We choose a prior on the parameter
space w = (W, b) to be the standard multivariate Gaussian prior (i.e. with zero mean and identity
covariance matrix).
To sample from the corresponding posterior distribution, we run Markov Chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC), specifically with the No U-Turn sampler (NUTS) (Homan & Gelman, 2014), with 6
randomly initialised MCMC chains, each with 5000 iterations after 500 iterations of burn-in. We
thin the resulting chain by a factor of 10 resulting in a total posterior sample size of 3000. For
each combination of n and c, we run the above posterior sampling procedure for 10 different PRNG
seeds, which produces different input samples Xi as well as changing MCMC trajectories.

F.1   D ETAILS OF T HEORETICAL P ROPORTION C URVES


Figure F.1: Extended version of theoretical occupancy plot shown previously in Figure 2 where
the effect of sub-dominant phases is now included. Note that exact theoretical values of the loss
and prior contributions were used for all critical points shown, and exact values of the local learning
coefficient were used for the 6-gon, 5+ -gon and 5-gon, but estimates of the local learning coefficients
were used for other critical points (Table K.1).

This section contains details of the theoretical component of Figure 2. For each Оұ вҲҲ {4, 4+ , 5, 5+ , 6}
we consider the free energy approximation
                                    fОұ (n) = nLОұ + О»Оұ log n + cОұ
where LОұ is the theoretical value taken from Section A and cОұ are the constant terms from Table
C.2. We use the theoretically derived value of О»Оұ in Table 1 for Оұ вҲҲ {5, 5+ , 6} and the empirically
estimated О»МӮОұ for Оұ вҲҲ {4, 4+ } from Table K.1. We then define
                                                                 X
                            pОұ (n) = exp(вҲ’fОұ (n)) , Z(n) =           pОұ (n)
                                                                  Оұ
and the theory plot in Figure 2 shows the curves { Z1 pОұ (n)}Оұ . Figure F.1 is produced in the same
way, with a larger range of phases Оұ.

F.2   V ERIFYING DOMINANT PHASES FOR r = 2, c = 6

To quantify the relative frequency of each phase at a given sample size n, we classify all posterior
samples into various phases Wk,Пғ by counting the vertices in their convex hull (k) and the number


                                                  25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


of positive biases (Пғ), and compute the proportion of samples that falls into each phase. We then
plot the frequencies of each phase as a function of sample size n to visualize how preferred phases
changed with n. Figure 2 shows the corresponding plot in the case for r = 2, c = 6. The lines show
the frequencies of the phases 6, 5, 5+ , 4 and 4+ , while unclassified posterior samples are labelled as
вҖңotherвҖқ.
While this convex-hull and positive bias counting classification scheme is based on the characteris-
tics of known critical points, it is only an imperfect reflection. There is the risk of mistaking posterior
samples in Wk,Пғ as evidence of occupation in the k Пғ+ -gon phase when it is not. Since we do not
claim to have found all possible critical points of the TMS potential and have neglected the higher
loss variants of 4-gon (explained below), it is possible that MCMC samples do not reflect known
phases. If this misclassification happens sufficiently often, it could invalidate the comparison of the
occupancy plots with theoretical predictions.
To guard against this, we should check that every MCMC sample in Wk,Пғ is close to a known critical
point in Wk,Пғ , or is classified as вҖңotherвҖқ. To reduce the amount of labour for this task, we run t-
SNE projection (van der Maaten & Hinton, 2008) of the parameters into a 2D space with a custom
metric design to remove known symmetries allowing samples that are similar to each other to show
up in t-SNE projections as clusters regardless of the irrelevant differences between their angular
displacement and column permutation. The custom t-SNE metric is such that distance between a
pair of parameters, (W, b), (W вҖІ , bвҖІ ), is given by the sum
 HammingDistance(b > 0, bвҖІ > 0) +            min         вҲҘNormalize(W, i) вҲ’ Normalize(W, j)вҲҘFrobenius
                                          i,jвҲҲ{1,...c}

where b > 0 denotes the binary array (1b1 >0 , . . . , 1bc >0 ) and Normalise(W, i) denotes a normalised
weight matrix where all column vectors are rotated by a fixed angle so that ith column vector is
aligned with the positive x-axis and the columns are reordered so that the column indices reflects the
order of the vectors when read counter-clockwise starting from the positive x-axis.
With this, we can verify the occupancy of dominant phases by checking several samples in each
cluster to verify the phase classification of the entire cluster. To illustrate, let us verify the phase
occupancy for c = 6 at n = 1000 as shown in Figure 2. Figure F.2 shows the t-SNE projection of
the samples for a particular MCMC run. Looking at both the theoretical and empirical occupancy
curves at n = 1000, the posterior is dominated by the 6-gon, followed by the 5-gon and then the
5+ -gon. Looking at various samples in the largest (green) t-SNE cluster, they do correspond to the 6-
gon all with biases near the optimal negative value. The minor cluster (in dark purple) corresponds
to the 5-gon. This cluster of 5-gons includes samples with a sixth вҖңvestigial legвҖқ with non-zero
length. However, these belong to the same phase (same critical submanifold as the 5-gon) since the
corresponding bias has large negative value. The t-SNE projection also reveals a small number of
5+ -gon samples.
Performing similar inspections for MCMC chains at n = 500, 700 allows us to confirm that the
dominant phase switches from the 5 to 6-gon in the interval 600 вүӨ n вүӨ 700. This inspection
also confirms that clusters of 5+ -gons coexist with the two dominant phases albeit at a much lower
probability.
For sufficiently low values of n, we encounter two issues in establishing phase occupancy.

      1. Other higher loss phases such as variants of the 4-gon with large negative biases, and poten-
         tially other higher energy phases that we have not characterised start to have non-negligible
         occupancy.
      2. As n becomes lower, the posterior distribution becomes less concentrated. This means that
         significantly more posterior mass, and hence a higher fraction of MCMC samples, is ac-
         counted for by regions of parameter space that are further away from critical points. These
         points may be close to the boundaries between different regions, increasing the chance of
         misclassification, or they may bear little resemblance to the critical point associated with
         the region they are classified into.

For n > 400, from inspecting t-SNE clusters, the above issues do not arise: the samples are close
to known critical points, and the frequency of unclassified вҖңotherвҖқ samples is low enough that it
wonвҖҷt significantly affect the relative frequency of the dominant phases. Furthermore, we also do
not observe many samples that are close to high loss 4-gon variants. This supports the prediction

                                                     26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


depicted in the extended theoretical occupancy curve shown in Figure F.1 which suggests that these
4-gon variants only show up in the n < 400 regime.
We caution the reader in regards to interpreting the phase occupancy diagrams for the range 100 <
n < 400 where one or more of the issues above could affect the empirical frequency.


Figure F.2: t-SNE plots of MCMC samples from the posterior at a range of sample sizes n encom-
passing the phase transition from the 5-gon to the 6-gon.


F.3   MCMC H EALTH

MCMC sampling for high dimensional posterior distributions is challenging. In our case there is
the added challenge of the posterior being multi-modal (the posterior density has local maxima at
the dominant phases) where the modes are not points, but submanifolds of varying codimension.
To ensure that the proportion of MCMC samples that falls into Wk,Пғ is a good reflection of the
probability of Wk,Пғ , we need to make sure that our Markov chains are well mixed.
For this purpose, we produce and check two different types of diagnostic plots for each MCMC run:

      вҖў Theoretical loss trace plots. We plot the theoretical loss of each MCMC sample against
        its sample index which orders the samples in each MCMC chain in increasing order of
        MCMC iterations required to generate the sample. An unhealthy MCMC chain will show
        up on such a plot as points occupying a very narrow band of theoretical loss values.
      вҖў Phase type trace plots. On the same trace plots, we color each sample by their phase
        classification. Successful posterior sampling should produce samples in each phase with a


                                               27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         frequency that is roughly the same as the posterior probability of that phase. While we do
         not know the true probability of a given phase, we can cross reference each MCMC chain
         with other chains performing sampling on the same posterior to see that every MCMC
         chain visits phases discovered by any other MCMC chain. An unhealthy MCMC chain
         will show up on such a plot as a chain that only contains samples of one phase type when
         there is more than one phase type observed across all chains.

Figure F.3 shows a examples of such diagnostic trace plots for a few experiments (with c = 6 and
matching those in Figure F.2) at n = 300, 1000. All six chains run in these experiments are plotted
on the same plot and distinguished by color. At the higher sample size n = 1000, we expect and
do indeed observe that a particular phase, the 6-gon, dominates the posterior but every chain visits
sub-dominant phases as well.
The diagnostics detect no sign of problems for the experiments used to establish the phase occu-
pancy curves in Figures 2, F.5 and F.6. However, we do observe that MCMC fails for sample sizes
n significantly greater than those we report in this paper. With large sample sizes, the posterior dis-
tribution becomes highly concentrated at each phase, posing a significant challenge for an MCMC
chain to escape its starting point (controlled by random initialization and the trajectory of the burn-in
phase). Figure F.4 shows an example at n = 4000, where we see

       вҖў A chain (colored pink) which, for many iterations, produces samples in a very narrow band
         of loss.
       вҖў Most chains have a starting point falling into the 5+ -gon phase and rarely escape (only the
         red chain found the lower loss 6-gon region).
       вҖў The proportion of 6-gons is mostly determined by how many chains have their starting
         point already in the 6-gon phase. In this run, this proportion is dominated by the last
         orange chain.


                                                   28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure F.3: Trace plots displaying theoretical loss of the MCMC samples ordered by their MCMC
iteration number and colored by MCMC chain index (top) and the same scatter plot but colored by
phase classification (bottom).


                               Figure F.4: Unhealthy trace plots.


                                              29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.4   T HEORY AND EXPERIMENTS FOR c = 4 AND c = 5

In this section we repeat the analysis of Section 4.2 for c = 4 and c = 5 with the same experimental
setup as explained at the beginning of that section. When c = 4 the 4-gon is a true parameter (it has
zero loss) and any 3-gon is not, so the theory predicts that the 4-gon must dominate the posterior for
all n, as seen in Figure F.5.

                      Critical point   Local learning coefficient О»    Loss L
                          4-gon                4, 4.5, 5, 5.5            0

                                       Table F.1: r = 2, c = 4


                 Figure F.5: r = 2, c = 4. The standard 4-gon dominates for all n.

When c = 5 the theory and experimental curves in Figure F.6 show the 4 вҶ’ 5 transition. Note
that 4+ is correctly predicted to never dominate the posterior despite having lower energy than the
standard 4-gon.

                     Critical point    Local learning coefficient О»    Loss L
                         4-gon                 4, 4.5, 5, 5.5          0.06667
                                                                               .
                        4+ -gon                5, 5.5, 6, 6.5          0.05667
                        5вҲ’ -gon                      7                 0.01583

                                       Table F.2: r = 2, c = 5


Figure F.6: Proportion of Bayesian posterior density concentrated in regions Wk,Пғ associated to
k-gons, as a function of the number n of samples for r = 2, c = 5.

We note that the classification of MCMC samples in c = 4, 5 described in this section is slightly
different from what was described for c = 6 in Section 4.2. The main reason being that we need to
handle variants of the 4-gon more carefully in c = 4, 5.

       вҖў For c = 4, we classify a sample (W, b) only by the number of vertices on the convex
         hull formed by the column vectors with no additional subcategories defined by the number


                                                 30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        of positive biases. Theoretically we know that there are no critical 4-gons with positive
        bias and the standard 4-gon is a critical point with all zero bias and is thus susceptible to
        misclassification even with slight perturbation when the the number of positive biases is
        counted.
      вҖў For c = 5, the situation is similar except for one extra case where need to allow for the
        possibility of a 4+ -gon. A sample (W, b) is classified as a 4+ -gon when it has 4 vertices in
        its convex hull, and if bi > 0 then li = вҲҘWi вҲҘ < 0.5.

In the cases c = 4, 5 we also manually verify the dominant phases by visually inspecting t-SNE
clusters of MCMC samples at multiple sample sizes.


                                                 31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G    P OTENTIAL IN LOCAL COORDINATES
Proof of Lemma 3.1. By definition
                               пЈ«
                            1 X 1
                                  Z
                 L(W, b) = пЈӯ         ReLU(Wj В· Wi xi + bj )2 dxi
                            c      0   iМё=j
                                       c Z 1
                                                                                          !
                                       X                                     2
                                   +              xi вҲ’ ReLU(вҲҘWi вҲҘ2 xi + bi ) dxi              .
                                       i=1    0

Let i, j вҲҲ {1, . . . , c} be such that i Мё= j. To compute the integral
                                      Z 1
                                           ReLU(Wj В· Wi xi + bj )2 dxi ,
                                     0
we first find the region in [0, 1] on which Wj В· Wi xi + bj вүҘ 0. Let
                               Dj,i = {xi вҲҲ [0, 1] | Wj В· Wi xi + bj вүҘ 0}.

      1. If Wj В· Wi > 0 and вҲ’Wj В· Wi вүӨ bj вүӨ 0, then

                                                  вҲ’bj
                                       Dj,i =           ,1 .
                                                Wj В· Wi

      2. If Wj В· Wi > 0 and bj вүӨ вҲ’Wj В· Wi , then
                                                           Dj,i = вҲ….

      3. If Wj В· Wi = 0 and bj = 0, then
                                                   Dj,i = [0, 1].
           Note that in this case, Wj В· Wi xi + bj = 0 for all xi вҲҲ [0, 1].
      4. If Wj В· Wi = 0 and bj < 0, then
                                                           Dj,i = вҲ….
      5. If Wj В· Wi < 0 and bj вүӨ 0, then
                                                           Dj,i = вҲ….
      6. If Wj В· Wi > 0 and bj > 0, then
                                                      Dj,i = [0, 1].
      7. If Wj В· Wi = 0 and bj > 0, then
                                                      Dj,i = [0, 1].
      8. If Wj В· Wi < 0 and bj вүҘ вҲ’Wj В· Wi > 0, then
                                                      Dj,i = [0, 1].

      9. If Wj В· Wi < 0 and вҲ’Wj В· Wi > bj > 0, then

                                                    вҲ’bj
                                       Dj,i = 0,
                                                   Wj В· Wi

Recall the definition of Pj,i , Pi , and Qj,i from (Lemma 3.1). Then for bj вүӨ 0,
     Z 1                                             Z 1
          ReLU(Wj В· Wi xi + bj )2 dxi = Оҙ(Pj,i )                 (Wj В· Wi xi + bj )2 dxi
       0                                                       вҲ’bj /(Wj В·Wi )
                                                                                             1
                                                                  1
                                              = Оҙ(Pj,i )                (Wj В· Wi xi + bj )3
                                                               3Wj В· Wi                      вҲ’bj /(Wj В·Wi )
                                                              1
                                              = Оҙ(Pj,i )            (Wj В· Wi + bj )3 .
                                                           3Wj В· Wi


                                                       32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and for bj > 0,
    Z 1                                         Z вҲ’bj /(Wj В·Wi )
         ReLU(Wj В· Wi xi + bj )2 dxi = Оҙ(Qj,i )                  (Wj В· Wi xi + bj )2 dxi
      0                                                  0
                                                                  Z 1
                                                                        (Wj В· Wi xi + bj )2 dxi

                                             + 1 вҲ’ Оҙ(Qj,i )
                                                                   0
                                                                                       вҲ’bj /(Wj В·Wi )
                                                           1                        3
                                           = Оҙ(Qj,i )             (Wj В· Wi xi + bj )
                                                        3Wj В· Wi                       0
                                                                                                 1
                                                                    1                         3
                                             + 1 вҲ’ Оҙ(Qj,i )               (Wj В· Wi xi + bj )
                                                                 3Wj В· Wi                        0
                                                                   !
                                                               3
                                                      1    вҲ’bj
                                           = Оҙ(Qj,i )
                                                      3 W j В· Wi
                                                              1
                                             + 1 вҲ’ Оҙ(Qj,i ) [(Wj В· Wi )2 + 3(Wj В· Wi )bj + 3b2j ]
                                                               3
It remains to compute
                                Z 1
                                                                 2
                                      xi вҲ’ ReLU(вҲҘWi вҲҘ2 xi + bi ) dxi
                                 0
for each i вҲҲ {1, . . . , c}. We first find the region in [0, 1] on which вҲҘWi вҲҘ2 xi + bi вүҘ 0. Let
                                Di = {xi вҲҲ [0, 1] | вҲҘWi вҲҘ2 xi + bi вүҘ 0}.

      1. If вҲҘWi вҲҘ2 > 0 and вҲ’вҲҘWi вҲҘ2 вүӨ bi вүӨ 0, then

                                                   вҲ’bi
                                         Di =            , 1  .
                                                  вҲҘWi вҲҘ2

      2. If вҲҘWi вҲҘ2 > 0 and bi вүӨ вҲ’вҲҘWi вҲҘ2 , then
                                                         Di = вҲ….
          In this case
                          Z 1                                                  Z 1
                                                                   2                             1
                                xi вҲ’ ReLU(вҲҘWi вҲҘ2 xi + bi )             dxi =         x2i dxi =     .
                            0                                                   0                3

      3. If вҲҘWi вҲҘ2 = 0 and bi = 0, then
                                                     Di = [0, 1].
                                       2
          Note that in this case, вҲҘWi вҲҘ xi + bi = 0 for all xi вҲҲ [0, 1]. So
                           Z 1                                         Z 1
                                                             2                      1
                                xi вҲ’ ReLU(вҲҘWi вҲҘ2 xi + bi ) dxi =           x2i dxi = .
                             0                                           0          3

      4. If вҲҘWi вҲҘ2 = 0 and bi < 0, then
                                                         Di = вҲ….
          In this case
                          Z 1                                                  Z 1
                                                                   2                             1
                                xi вҲ’ ReLU(вҲҘWi вҲҘ2 xi + bi )             dxi =         x2i dxi =     .
                            0                                                   0                3

      5. If вҲҘWi вҲҘ2 > 0 and bi > 0, then
                                                     Di = [0, 1].

      6. If вҲҘWi вҲҘ2 = 0 and bi > 0, then
                                                     Di = [0, 1].


                                                     33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For i with bi вүӨ 0, on Pi ,
         Z 1                                   Z 1
                                         2
              xi вҲ’ ReLU(вҲҘWi вҲҘ2 xi + bi ) dxi =                           (xi вҲ’ вҲҘWi вҲҘ2 xi вҲ’ bi )2 dxi
             0                                             вҲ’bi /вҲҘWi вҲҘ2
                                                                Z вҲ’bi /вҲҘWi вҲҘ2
                                                           +                    x2i dxi
                                                                    0
                                                          Z 1
                                                                                                  2
                                                     =                    (1 вҲ’ вҲҘWi вҲҘ2 )xi вҲ’ bi        dxi
                                                           вҲ’bi /вҲҘWi вҲҘ2
                                                                  вҲ’bi /вҲҘWi вҲҘ2
                                                             1 3
                                                           + xi               .
                                                             3    0
If вҲҘWi вҲҘ =
         Мё 1, then the integral is equal to
                                                                b3i      b3i

                1
                    (1 вҲ’ вҲҘWi вҲҘ2 )2 вҲ’ 3(1 вҲ’ вҲҘWi вҲҘ2 )bi + 3b2i +        +          .
                3                                              вҲҘWi вҲҘ4   вҲҘWi вҲҘ2
If вҲҘWi вҲҘ = 1, then the integral is equal to
                                              1 2
                                               (3b + 2b3i ).
                                              3 i
Since
                                                                       b3i         b3i

                     1              2 2               2         2
             lim         (1 вҲ’ вҲҘWi вҲҘ ) вҲ’ 3(1 вҲ’ вҲҘWi вҲҘ )bi + 3bi +              +
          вҲҘWi вҲҘвҶ’1 3                                                 вҲҘWi вҲҘ4      вҲҘWi вҲҘ2
               1
           = (3b2i + 2b3i ),
               3
We know that in Pi ,
             Z 1
                                               2
                   xi вҲ’ ReLU(вҲҘWi вҲҘ2 xi + bi ) dxi
               0
                                                                   b3i         b3i

                 1
             =        (1 вҲ’ вҲҘWi вҲҘ2 )2 вҲ’ 3(1 вҲ’ вҲҘWi вҲҘ2 )bi + 3b2i +           +            .
                 3                                                вҲҘWi вҲҘ4     вҲҘWi вҲҘ2
For i with bi > 0,
       Z 1                                   Z 1
                                       2                                2
            xi вҲ’ ReLU(вҲҘWi вҲҘ2 xi + bi ) dxi =     xi вҲ’ (вҲҘWi вҲҘ2 xi + bi ) dxi
         0                                            0
                                                        1
                                                                 [(1 вҲ’ вҲҘWi вҲҘ2 ) вҲ’ bi ]3 + b3i

                                                 =           2
                                                  3(1 вҲ’ вҲҘWi вҲҘ )
                                                  1
                                                 = (1 вҲ’ вҲҘWi вҲҘ2 )2 вҲ’ 3(1 вҲ’ вҲҘWi вҲҘ2 )bi + 3b2i

                                                  3
                1
Thus, L(W, b) = 3c H(W, b) as claimed.

Now we introduce a new coordinate system of the parameter space which is used to analyse the local
geometry around a critical point. Let C = {{i, j} | i Мё= j вҲҲ {1, 2, . . . , c}}. For a subset C вҠӮ C,
define a subset WC of Mr,c (R), called a chamber, by
                   WC = {W вҲҲ Mr,c (R) | Wi В· Wj > 0 if and only if {i, j} вҲҲ C}.

Note that

        1. Some subsets C of C define an empty chamber WC = вҲ…. For example, when r = 2 and
           c = 4, the set
                                    C = {{1, 2}, {2, 3}, {3, 4}, {4, 1}} вҠӮ C
           defines an empty chamber because within this set, to satisfy Wi В·Wi+1 > 0, Wi+1 В·Wi+2 >
           0, Wi В·Wi+2 вүӨ 0 we must have that Wi+1 is between Wi and Wi+1 on the circle. Therefore
           we require that the sum of angles between Wi and Wi+1 = 2ПҖ, but each of these 4 angles
           must be more than ПҖ/2 so the configuration isnвҖҷt possible.


                                                     34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      2. if C вҠӮ C defines a nonempty chamber WC containing a W with
                          Wi В· Wj > 0 вҲҖ{i, j} вҲҲ C and Wu В· Wv < 0 вҲҖ{u, v} вҲҲ
                                                                          / C,
         then WC contains the open subset
                {W вҲҲ Mr,c (R) | Wi В· Wj > 0 вҲҖ{i, j} вҲҲ C and Wu В· Wv < 0 вҲҖ{u, v} вҲҲ
                                                                                / C}
         of Mr,c (R);
      3. if C вҠӮ C defines a nonempty chamber WC , then for any Q вҠӮ C,
              {W вҲҲ Mr,c (R) | Wi В· Wj = 0 вҲҖ{i, j} вҲҲ Q and Wu В· Wv > 0 вҮ” {u, v} вҲҲ C\Q}
         defines a boundary of WC ;
      4. for any distinct subsets C, Q of C, WC вҲ© WQ = вҲ…;
      5. the union of all chambers cover Mr,c (R).
Consider a nonempty chamber WC for some C вҠӮ C. Suppose that WC contains an open subset of
Mr,c (R). Let i Мё= j вҲҲ {1, 2, . . . , c}. If {j, i} вҲҲ
                                                    / C, then for all W вҲҲ WC ,
                                                  Оҙ(Pj,i ) = 0.
Thus, in WC Г— Rc , for each i вҲҲ {1, 2, . . . , c}, HiвҲ’ (W, b) (see Lemma 3.1) is given by

               вҲ’
                                 X                       1                   3
             Hi (W, b) =                 Оҙ(Pi,j )             (Wi В· Wj + bi )
                                                     Wi В· Wj
                            jМё=i:{j,i}вҲҲC
                                        3
                                                       b3i

                                          bi
                            + Оҙ(Pi )              +           + (1 вҲ’ Оҙ(Pi )) + Оҙ(Pi )Ni .
                                       вҲҘWi вҲҘ4        вҲҘWi вҲҘ2

Now we focus on the case r = 2. Let W вҲҲ M2,c (R). Then W is contained in some chamber
WC . In the new parametrization (l, Оё), we can describe the chamber WC in a different way. Let
(l1 , . . . , lc , Оё1 , . . . , Оёc ) be the coordinate of W . For each i = 1, . . . , c, a wedge Mij is defined by
                                    (i, i + 1, . . . , i + j вҲ’ 1), if j > 0 and Оёi + В· В· В· + Оёi+jвҲ’1 < ПҖ2 ;

                    Mij =
                                    вҲ…,                             if j = 0 or Оёi + В· В· В· + Оёi+jвҲ’1 вүҘ ПҖ2 ,
where addtions are computed cyclically. For each i = 1, . . . , c, let t(i) denote the integer such that
                                               ПҖ                               ПҖ
                       Оёi + В· В· В· + Оёi+t(i)вҲ’1 < and Оёi + В· В· В· + Оёi+t(i) вүҘ .
                                               2                               2
We use the convention where t(i) = 0 if Оёi вүҘ ПҖ/2. Then Mij = вҲ… for all j вүҘ t(i). So we can list
the set of all wedges M = {Mij } into a table:

                              M11           M12        В·В·В·     В·В·В·        M1t(1)
                              M21           M21        В·В·В·     В·В·В·        M2t(2)
                                ..
                                 .
                                 ..
                                  .
                             M(cвҲ’1)1      M(cвҲ’1)2      В·В·В·     В·В·В·    M(cвҲ’1)t(cвҲ’1)
                              Mc1          Mc2         В·В·В·     В·В·В·      Mct(c)

This set of wedges M describes a chamber WC containing W , where

      C = {1, 2},{1, 3}, . . . , {1, t(1) + 1}, {2, 3}, {2, 4}, . . . , {2, t(2) + 2}, . . . ,
                      . . . , {c вҲ’ 1, c}, . . . , {c вҲ’ 1, t(c вҲ’ 1) + c вҲ’ 1}, {c, 1}, . . . , {c, t(c) + c} ,
and the addtions are computed cyclically. For example, if c = 5, then a 5-gon has coordinate
                                           l1 = l2 = l3 = l4 = l5 ;
                                                                     2ПҖ
                                           Оё1 = Оё2 = Оё3 = Оё4 =          .
                                                                      5
It is contained in the interior of the chamber WC , where
                                 C = {{1, 2}, {2, 3}, {3, 4}, {4, 5}, {5, 1}}.
This chamber is described by the set of wedges:


                                                        35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                        (1)
                                                        (2)
                                                        (3) .
                                                        (4)
                                                        (5)

Now let WC вҠӮ M2,c (R) be a nonempty chamber. Suppose that WC contains an open subset of
M2,c (R). Let M be the set of wedges describing WC . Set
               n                           P                    o
          (1)
      1. TMij = (l, Оё, b) | вҲ’ li li+j cos   kвҲҲMij Оё k   вүӨ b i+j  ;
               n                           P                 o
          (2)
      2. TMij = (l, Оё, b) | вҲ’ li li+j cos   kвҲҲMij Оёk вүӨ bi ;

      3. Ti = {(l, Оё, b) | вҲ’ li2 вүӨ bi };
      4. Sij = {(l, Оё, b) | вҲ’ li lj cos(Оёi + В· В· В· ОёjвҲ’1 ) > bi > 0}.

Then in WC Г— Rc , the TMS potential H(l, Оё, b) in the new parametrization is
                                   c
                                   X
                   H(l, Оё, b) =          Оҙ(bi вүӨ 0)HiвҲ’ (l, Оё, b) + Оҙ(bi > 0)Hi+ (l, Оё, b),           (17)
                                   i=1

where
                                                                          P                   3
                               X            (1)
                                                            liвҲ’j li cos   kвҲҲM(iвҲ’j)j Оёk  + bi
         HiвҲ’ (l, Оё, b) =                 Оҙ(TM(iвҲ’j)j )                     P
                           j:M(iвҲ’j)j вҲҲM
                                                             liвҲ’j li cos    kвҲҲM(iвҲ’j)j Оёk
                                                                 P                    3
                                X          (2)
                                                  li li+j cos        kвҲҲMij Оёk + bi
                           +           Оҙ(TMij )                      P
                             j:Mij вҲҲM
                                                       li li+j cos      kвҲҲMij Оёk

                                                                            b3     b3

                           + Оҙ(Ti ) (1 вҲ’ li2 )2 вҲ’ 3(1 вҲ’ li2 )bi + 3b2i + 4i + 2i + 1 вҲ’ Оҙ(Ti )

                                                                            li     li
and
                                                         вҲ’b3i
                              X
            Hi+ (l, Оё, b) =        Оҙ(Sij )
                                           li lj cos(Оёi + Оёi+1 + В· В· В· ОёjвҲ’1 )
                              jМё=i

                                                               2
                              + 1 вҲ’ Оҙ(Sij ) li lj cos(Оёij ) + 3 li lj cos(Оёij ) bi + 3b2i



                              + (1 вҲ’ li2 )2 вҲ’ 3(1 вҲ’ li2 )bi + 3b2i ,


where Оёij = Оёi + Оёi+1 + В· В· В· + ОёjвҲ’1 is the angle between Wi and Wj .
Remark G.1. If a critical point of H is contained in the interior of a chamber (see Appendix
H.1), then there is an open neighbourhood of the critical point in which H is of the above form.
However, critical points are not always contained in the interior of some chamber. If a critical point
is contained in the boundary of different chambers (see Appendix J and Appendix H.3), then extra
efforts are required for analysing the local geometry around the critical point.


                                                        36
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H     D ERIVATION OF LOCAL LEARNING COEFFICIENTS
H.1     k- GONS WITH NEGTIVE BIAS FOR k = c вҲҲ
                                            / 4Z

In this section, we show that for c вҲҲ {5, 6, 7}, the c-gon with coordinate
                                                            2ПҖ
              l1 = В· В· В· = lc = xвҲ— ,     Оё1 = В· В· В· = Оёc = Оұ =  , b1 = В· В· В· = bc = y вҲ— ,
                                                             c
where the values of xвҲ— and y вҲ— is given in Table H.1, is a non-degenerate critical point of the TMS
potential. Therefore, the local learning coefficient of c-gon is (3c вҲ’ 1)/2.

                                           c      xвҲ—          yвҲ—
                                           5   1.17046     вҲ’0.28230
                                           6   1.32053     вҲ’0.61814
                                           7   1.44839     вҲ’0.96691

                                     Table H.1: Parameters of c-gons.

Let c be an integer greater than or equal to 4. We consider the case where c is not a multiple of 4.
Consider the c-gon with coordinate (lвҲ— , ОёвҲ— , bвҲ— )
                                                       2ПҖ
         lвҲ— : l1 = В· В· В· = lc = x,                         , bвҲ— : b1 = В· В· В· = bc = y,
                                       Оё вҲ— : Оё1 = В· В· В· = Оёc = Оұ =
                                                        c
for some x > 0 and y < 0. The chamber containing c-gons is described by the following wedges
(see Appendix G):

             (1)                 (1, 2)              В·В·В·    В·В·В·                (1, 2, . . . , s)
             (2)                 (2, 3)              В·В·В·    В·В·В·              (2, 3, . . . , s + 1)
              ..                   ..                                                   ..
               .                    .                В·В·В·    В·В·В·                          .
         (c + 1 вҲ’ s)    (c + 1 вҲ’ s, c + 2 вҲ’ s)       В·В·В·    В·В·В·       (c + 1 вҲ’ s, c + 2 вҲ’ s, . . . , c)
         (c + 2 вҲ’ s)    (c + 2 вҲ’ s, c + 3 вҲ’ s)       В·В·В·    В·В·В·      (c + 2 вҲ’ s, c + 3 вҲ’ s, . . . , c, 1)
              ..                  ..                                                ..
               .                   .                 В·В·В·   В·В·В·                       .
           (c вҲ’ 1)             (c вҲ’ 1, c)            В·В·В·   В·В·В·        (c вҲ’ 1, c, 1, . . . , s вҲ’ 2)
             (c)                 (c, 1)              В·В·В·   В·В·В·            (c, 1, 2, . . . , s вҲ’ 1)

where s is the unique integer in the interval 4c вҲ’ 1, 4c . Let Mij be the wedge in the (i, j)-position


in the above table. Then Mij = (i, i + 1, . . . , i + j вҲ’ 1), where additions are computed cyclically.
Then the local TMS potential (see Appendix G) is
                                                                пЈ«              пЈ«               пЈ¶         пЈ¶3
                    X         (1)                   1                               X
     H(l, Оё, b) =         Оҙ(TMij )                 P            пЈӯli li+j cos пЈӯ              Оёk пЈё + bi+j пЈё
                  Mij вҲҲM            l  l
                                      i i+j   cos          Оё
                                                      kвҲҲMij k                      kвҲҲMij
                                                                  пЈ«                пЈ«               пЈ¶      пЈ¶3
                       X          (2)                 1                                 X
                  +         Оҙ(TMij )                  P           пЈӯli li+j cos пЈӯ               Оё k пЈё + bi пЈё
                    Mij вҲҲM               l  l
                                           i i+j cos          Оё
                                                        kвҲҲMij k                       kвҲҲMij
                      c                                                  3       3

                    X                                                  b       b
                  +      Оҙ(Ti ) (1 вҲ’ li2 )2 вҲ’ 3(1 вҲ’ li2 )bi + 3b2i + 4i + 2i + (1 вҲ’ Оҙ(Ti )),
                     i=1
                                                                       li      li

where
               n                           P                     o
          (1)
      1. TMij = (l, Оё, b) | вҲ’ li li+j cos   kвҲҲMij Оёk вүӨ bi+j ;
               n                           P                  o
          (2)
      2. TMij = (l, Оё, b) | вҲ’ li li+j cos   kвҲҲMij Оё k   вүӨ b i  ;
      3. Ti = {(l, Оё, b) | вҲ’ li2 вүӨ bi };


                                                      37
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       4. Оё1 + Оё2 + В· В· В· + Оёc = 2ПҖ.

Consider the open subset of the parameter space defined by
                             пЈ«         пЈ¶                       пЈ«      пЈ¶
                               X                                 X
                вҲ’li li+j cos пЈӯ      Оёk пЈё < bi+j , вҲ’li li+j cos пЈӯ   Оёk пЈё < bi
                                        kвҲҲMij                                    kвҲҲMij

for all Mij and
                                                       вҲ’li2 < bi
for all i = 1, . . . , c. In this open subset, we have
                                                               пЈ«           пЈ«            пЈ¶        пЈ¶3
                              X                   1                            X
            H(l, Оё, b) =                         P            пЈӯli li+j cos пЈӯ         Оёk пЈё + bi+j пЈё
                                   l l
                              Mij i i+j     cos           Оё
                                                    kвҲҲMij k                   kвҲҲMij
                                                                  пЈ«           пЈ«            пЈ¶      пЈ¶3
                                X                   1                            X
                              +                     P            пЈӯli li+j cos пЈӯ         Оёk пЈё + bi пЈё
                                       l
                                Mij i i+j l   cos     kвҲҲMij kОё                  kвҲҲMij
                                  c                                         3
                                                                                 b3i

                                X
                                                2 2          2         2   bi
                              +          (1 вҲ’ li ) вҲ’ 3(1 вҲ’ li )bi + 3bi + 4 + 2 ,
                                 i=1
                                                                           li    li
with constraint Оё1 + Оё2 + В· В· В· + Оёc = 2ПҖ. It follows from the Lagrangian multiplier method that a
point (lвҲ— , ОёвҲ— , bвҲ— ) is a critical point of H(l, Оё, b) with constraint Оё1 + В· В· В· + Оёc = 2ПҖ if and only if
there exists О» вҲҲ R such that for all a = 1, 2, . . . , c,

       1. вҲӮОёвҲӮa                       H(l, Оё, b) = О»;
                 l=lвҲ— ,Оё=Оё вҲ— ,b=bвҲ—

       2. вҲӮlвҲӮa                       H(l, Оё, b) = 0;
                 l=lвҲ— ,Оё=Оё вҲ— ,b=bвҲ—

       3. вҲӮbвҲӮa                       H(l, Оё, b) = 0.
                 l=lвҲ— ,Оё=Оё вҲ— ,b=bвҲ—

We compute the partial derivative of H(l, Оё, b) with respect to ba :
                                                           пЈ«            пЈ«      пЈ¶        пЈ¶2
     вҲӮ                   X                   3                            X
        H(l, Оё, b) =                        P              пЈӯli li+j cos пЈӯ   Оёk пЈё + bi+j пЈё
    вҲӮba                          l l cos              Оё
                            Mij :i+j=a i i+j             kвҲҲMij       k                  kвҲҲMij
                                                                     пЈ«            пЈ«             пЈ¶      пЈ¶2
                              X                     3                                  X
                        +                           P               пЈӯli li+j cos пЈӯ            Оёk пЈё + bi пЈё
                            Mij :i=a li li+j cos       kвҲҲMij Оёk                       kвҲҲMij

                                              3       3
                        вҲ’ 3(1 вҲ’ la2 ) + 6ba + 4 b2a + 2 b2a .
                                              la      la
We list all Mij with i = a and all Mij with i + j = a:

            i=a:               (a)           (a, a + 1)        В·В·В·       В·В·В·   (a, a + 1, . . . , a + s вҲ’ 1)
           i+j =a:           (a вҲ’ 1)       (a вҲ’ 2, a вҲ’ 1)      В·В·В·       В·В·В·   (a вҲ’ s, . . . , a вҲ’ 2, a вҲ’ 1)

Then
                                            пЈ«                 пЈ¶      пЈ«                 пЈ¶
                                                    s              2        s
        вҲӮ                                          X             y         X      1
                            H(l, Оё, b) = x2 пЈӯ3 + 6     cos(jОұ)пЈё + 2 пЈӯ3 + 6             пЈё
       вҲӮba l=lвҲ— ,Оё=ОёвҲ— ,b=bвҲ—                        j=1
                                                                 x         j=1
                                                                               cos(jОұ)

                                                                y2
                                                + y(12s + 6) + 3 4 вҲ’ 3.
                                                                x


                                                          38
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Multiplying both sides of the equation
         пЈ«                    пЈ¶         пЈ«             пЈ¶
                   s                  2    s                              2
                 X                  y     X      1    пЈё + y(12s + 6) + 3 y вҲ’ 3 = 0
      x2 пЈӯ3 + 6      cos(jОұ)пЈё + 2 пЈӯ3 + 6
                 j=1
                                    x     j=1
                                              cos(jОұ)                    x4

by 13 x4 , we have
         пЈ«                  пЈ¶          пЈ«                            пЈ¶
                   s                          s
                 X                            X            1 пЈё
      x6 пЈӯ1 + 2      cos(jОұ)пЈё + x2 y 2 пЈӯ1 + 2                   + 2x4 y(2s + 1) + y 2 вҲ’ x4 = 0.
                    j=1                             j=1
                                                        cos(jОұ)
                 Ps                             Ps 1
Let G(s) = 1 + 2 j=1 cos(jОұ), H(s) = 1 + 2 j=1 cos(jОұ) , M (s) = 1 + 2s. Then we obtain a
parametrized polynomial equation in two variables:
                           x6 G(s) + x2 y 2 H(s) + 2x4 yM (s) + y 2 вҲ’ x4 = 0.
Now we compute the partial derivative of H(l, Оё, b) with respect to la :
                                                        пЈ«            пЈ«        пЈ¶        пЈ¶3
      вҲӮ                вҲӮ X               1                               X
         H(l, Оё, b) =                    P             пЈӯli li+j cos пЈӯ      Оёk пЈё + bi+j пЈё
     вҲӮla              вҲӮla    l l cos               Оё
                               Mij i i+j          kвҲҲMij     k                      kвҲҲMij
                                                                    пЈ«              пЈ«             пЈ¶     пЈ¶3
                              вҲӮ X                  1                                    X
                           +                       P                пЈӯli li+j cos пЈӯ             Оёk пЈё + bi пЈё
                             вҲӮla
                                  Mij i i+j cos
                                  ll                  kвҲҲMij Оёk                         kвҲҲMij

                                                       b3     b3
                           вҲ’ 4(1 вҲ’ la2 )la + 6la ba вҲ’ 4 5a вҲ’ 2 3a .
                                                       la     la
From the list of all Mij with i = a and all Mij with i + j = a, we have
                                           пЈ«           пЈ«          пЈ¶        пЈ¶3
         вҲӮ X                 1                            X
                            P             пЈӯli li+j cos пЈӯ       Оёk пЈё + bi+j пЈё
       вҲӮla        l l cos             Оё
               Mij i i+j           kвҲҲMij    k                    kвҲҲMij
                             P                       2                         P
                                                                                           3
       s 3 l l
       X    a a+j cos           kвҲҲMaj Оёk + ba+j                 la la+j cos
                                                                      kвҲҲMaj kОё   +  b a+j
     =                                          вҲ’                      P
                            la                          la2 la+j cos
       j=1                                                                 kвҲҲMaj Оёk
                            P                    2                    P                       3
           s 3 l
         X      aвҲ’j la cos    kвҲҲM(aвҲ’j)j Оёk + ba        laвҲ’j la cos        kвҲҲM(aвҲ’j)j Оёk + ba
       +                                           вҲ’                      P                     .
                               la                           laвҲ’j la2 cos
         j=1                                                                 kвҲҲM(aвҲ’j)j Оёk

So
                                                                   пЈ«               пЈ«            пЈ¶        пЈ¶3
              вҲӮ                   X               1                                    X
                                                  P                пЈӯli li+j cos пЈӯ           Оёk пЈё + bi+j пЈё
             вҲӮla l=lвҲ— ,Оё=ОёвҲ— ,b=bвҲ—
                                 Mij i i+j cos
                                    ll                kвҲҲMij Оёk                      kвҲҲMij

             s                          2                          3 !
             X      3 x2 cos(jОұ) + y          x2 cos(jОұ) + y
      =2                                    вҲ’
             j=1
                            x                    x3 cos(jОұ)

Similarly,
                                                                     пЈ«              пЈ«            пЈ¶      пЈ¶3
               вҲӮ                   X               1                                    X
                                                   P          пЈӯli li+j cos пЈӯ       Оёk пЈё + bi пЈё
              вҲӮla l=lвҲ— ,Оё=ОёвҲ— ,b=bвҲ—   ll     cos           Оё
                                Mij i i+j           kвҲҲMij k                  kвҲҲMij
                                        2                      3
              s                                                  !
              X      3 x2 cos(jОұ) + y         x2 cos(jОұ) + y
       =2                                 вҲ’
              j=1
                             x                   x3 cos(jОұ)


                                                       39
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Thus,
                                                пЈ«                        пЈ¶     пЈ«                      пЈ¶
                                                       s                                     s
         вҲӮ                                             X                                     X
                             H(l, Оё, b) = x3 пЈӯ4 + 8     cos2 (jОұ)пЈё + xy пЈӯ6 + 12     cos(jОұ)пЈё
        вҲӮla l=lвҲ— ,Оё=ОёвҲ— ,b=bвҲ—                        j=1                         j=1
                                               пЈ«                   пЈ¶
                                                        s
                                            y3 пЈӯ      X        1 пЈё           y3
                                          вҲ’ 3 2+4                    вҲ’ 4x вҲ’ 4 5 .
                                            x         j=1
                                                           cos(jОұ)           x

Multiplying both sides of the equation
         пЈ«                     пЈ¶       пЈ«                пЈ¶      пЈ«                 пЈ¶
                   s                          s              3        s
                 X                           X             y         X      1 пЈё
      x3 пЈӯ 4 + 8     cos2 (jОұ)пЈё + xy пЈӯ6 + 12     cos(jОұ)пЈё вҲ’ 3 пЈӯ2 + 4
                 j=1                         j=1
                                                           x         j=1
                                                                         cos(jОұ)

                      y3
              вҲ’ 4x вҲ’ 4 5 = 0
                      x
by 12 x5 , we have
           пЈ«                  пЈ¶         пЈ«               пЈ¶          пЈ«                                   пЈ¶
                   s                           s                          s
                   X                           X                          X                         1 пЈё
     2x8 пЈӯ1 + 2      cos2 (jОұ)пЈё + 3x6 y пЈӯ1 + 2   cos(jОұ)пЈё вҲ’ x2 y 3 пЈӯ1 + 2
                    j=1                                j=1                                   j=1
                                                                                                 cos(jОұ)
                6         3
           вҲ’ 2x вҲ’ 2y = 0.
                   Ps
Let F (s) = 1 + 2 j=1 cos2 (jОұ). Then we obtain a parametrized polynomial equation in two
variables:
                     2x8 F (s) + 3x6 yG(s) вҲ’ x2 y 3 H(s) вҲ’ 2x6 вҲ’ 2y 3 = 0.
Therefore, we need to determine whether the system of two parametrized polynomial equations in
two variables
                               x6 G(s) + x2 y 2 H(s) + 2x4 yM (s) + y 2 вҲ’ x4 = 0
                              2x8 F (s) + 3x6 yG(s) вҲ’ zy 3 H(s) вҲ’ 2x6 вҲ’ 2y 3 = 0
where
                              Ps       2
        1. F (s) = 1 + 2        j=1 cos (jОұ);
                              Ps
        2. G(s) = 1 + 2         j=1 cos(jОұ);
                              Ps       1
        3. H(s) = 1 + 2         j=1 cos(jОұ) ;

        4. M (s) = 1 + 2s.
have common solutions in R>0 Г— R<0 with вҲ’x2 cos(sОұ) < y or not . Now we compute the partial
derivative of H(l, Оё, b) with respect to Оёa .
                                                    пЈ«            пЈ«      пЈ¶        пЈ¶3
      вҲӮ                  вҲӮ X                  1                    X
         H(l, Оё, b) =                       P       пЈӯli li+j cos пЈӯ   Оёk пЈё + bi+j пЈё
     вҲӮОёa               вҲӮОёa       l l cos        Оё
                                Mij i i+j           kвҲҲMij    k                 kвҲҲMij
                                                                     пЈ«               пЈ«           пЈ¶   пЈ¶3
                                 вҲӮ X                  1                                  X
                              +                       P              пЈӯli li+j cos пЈӯ          Оёk пЈё + bi пЈё .
                                вҲӮОёa
                                     Mij i i+j cos
                                     ll                 kвҲҲMij Оёk                     kвҲҲMij

We list all Mij containing a:

                        Ma1                 Ma2        В·В·В·         В·В·В·         В·В·В·       Mas
                     M(aвҲ’s+1)s
                    M(aвҲ’s+2)(sвҲ’1)       M(aвҲ’s+2)s
                         ..
                          .
                      M(aвҲ’2)3             В·В·В·          В·В·В·       M(aвҲ’2)s
                      M(aвҲ’1)2            M(aвҲ’1)3       В·В·В·        В·В·В·        M(aвҲ’1)s

                                                       40
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Rearrange these wedges in terms of the length:

           length 1:         Ma1
           length 2:         Ma2          M(aвҲ’1)2
            length 3         Ma3          M(aвҲ’1)3           M(aвҲ’2)3
                ..
                 .
        length s вҲ’ 1:      Ma(sвҲ’1)      M(aвҲ’1)(sвҲ’1            В·В·В·       M(aвҲ’s+2)(sвҲ’1)
          length s:         Mas          M(aвҲ’1)s              В·В·В·        M(aвҲ’s+2)s            M(aвҲ’s+1)s

Note that for j = 1, . . . , s, there exactly j wedges of length j containing a. Then
                                                              пЈ«             пЈ«              пЈ¶          пЈ¶3
                   вҲӮ X                     1                                     X
                                          P                 пЈӯli li+j cos пЈӯ              Оёk пЈё + bi+j пЈё
                  вҲӮОёa
                        Mij li li+j cos       kвҲҲMij Оёk                         kвҲҲMij
                                   h           P                           i2       P
                   X          вҲ’3 li li+j cos        kвҲҲMij Оёk + bi+j            sin       kвҲҲMij Оёk
             =                                             P
                Mij :aвҲҲMij                           cos         kвҲҲMij Оё k
                                      P              h                P                          i3
                      X          sin     kвҲҲMij  Оё k    l i l i+j cos      kвҲҲMij    Оё k   + b i+j
                +                                                 P                                 .
                                                li li+j cos    2             Оё
                  Mij :aвҲҲMij                                         kвҲҲMij     k

Then
                                                                      пЈ«             пЈ«            пЈ¶         пЈ¶3
              вҲӮ                   X                  1                                  X
                                                     P    пЈӯli li+j cos пЈӯ      Оёk пЈё + bi+j пЈё
             вҲӮОёa l=lвҲ— ,Оё=ОёвҲ— ,b=bвҲ—   ll      cos      Оё
                                 Mij i i+j      kвҲҲMij k                 kвҲҲMij

           s               2              2                  2              3 !
           X           вҲ’3 x cos (jОұ) + y sin (jОұ) sin (jОұ) x cos (jОұ) + y
       =         jВ·                              +                               .
           j=1
                                cos (jОұ)                  x2 cos2 (jОұ)

Similarly,
                                                                        пЈ«             пЈ«            пЈ¶       пЈ¶3
               вҲӮ                     X                  1                                 X
                                                        P               пЈӯli li+j cos пЈӯ          Оё k пЈё + bi пЈё
              вҲӮОёa l=lвҲ— ,Оё=ОёвҲ— ,b=bвҲ—
                                     Mij li li+j cos      kвҲҲMij Оёk                      kвҲҲMij

            s                               2                                 3 !
            X           вҲ’3 x2 cos (jОұ) + y sin (jОұ) sin (jОұ) x2 cos (jОұ) + y
        =         jВ·                               +                              .
            j=1
                                  cos (jОұ)                 x2 cos2 (jОұ)

Thus,
                                                      s                            2
                                                              вҲ’3 x2 cos (jОұ) + y sin (jОұ)

                  вҲӮ                                  X
                                      H(l, Оё, b) = 2     jВ·
                 вҲӮОёa l=lвҲ— ,Оё=ОёвҲ— ,b=bвҲ—                j=1
                                                                         cos (jОұ)
                                                                                3
                                                      sin (jОұ) x2 cos (jОұ) + y
                                                   +                                ,
                                                             x2 cos2 (jОұ)
which is independent of a. So if the system of polynomial equations
                              x6 G(s) + x2 y 2 H(s) + 2x4 yM (s) + y 2 вҲ’ x4 = 0
                           2x8 F (s) + 3x6 yG(s) вҲ’ x2 y 3 H(s) вҲ’ 2x6 вҲ’ 2y 3 = 0
has a common solution (xвҲ— , y вҲ— ) вҲҲ R>0 Г— R<0 with вҲ’x2 cos(sОұ) < y, then the Lagrangian multi-
plier is
            s                              2                                        3 !
                  вҲ’3 (xвҲ— )2 cos (jОұ) + y вҲ— sin (jОұ) sin (jОұ) (xвҲ— )2 cos (jОұ) + y вҲ—

           X
         2     jВ·                                   +
           j=1
                                 cos (jОұ)                    (xвҲ— )2 cos2 (jОұ)


                                                         41
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and the Lagrangian multipler method implies that the c-gon with coordinate
                                                                                       2ПҖ
             l1 = В· В· В· = lc = xвҲ— ,    b1 = В· В· В· = bc = y вҲ— ,   Оё1 = В· В· В· = Оёc = Оұ =    ,
                                                                                        c
is a critical point of H(l, Оё, b) with constraint Оё1 +В· В· В·+Оёc = 2ПҖ. So it remains to determine whether
the system of two parametrized polynomial equations in two variables
                          x6 G(s) + x2 y 2 H(s) + 2x4 yM (s) + y 2 вҲ’ x4 = 0
                       2x8 F (s) + 3x6 yG(s) вҲ’ x2 y 3 H(s) вҲ’ 2x6 вҲ’ 2y 3 = 0
have common solutions (xвҲ— , y вҲ— ) вҲҲ R>0 Г— RвүӨ0 with вҲ’x2 cos(sОұ) < y or not. We compute the
common solution using Mathematica.

      1. c = 5: in this case, s = 1. Then (xвҲ— , y вҲ— ) вүҲ (1.17046, вҲ’0.28230) is the unique common
         solution such that вҲ’x2 cos(2ПҖ/5) < y. Moreover, the Hessian of H at this 5-gon is non-
         degenerate. So the 5-gon with coordinate:
                                      l1 = l2 = В· В· В· = l5 = x вүҲ 1.17046;
                                                              2ПҖ
                                      Оё1 = Оё2 = В· В· В· = Оё4 =     ;
                                                               5
                                      b1 = b2 = В· В· В· = b5 = y вүҲ вҲ’0.28230,
         is a non-degenerate critical point. So its local learning coefficient is (3c вҲ’ 1)/2 = 7.
      2. c = 6: in this case s = 1. Then (xвҲ— , y вҲ— ) вүҲ (1.32053, вҲ’0.61814) is the unique common
         solution such that вҲ’x2 cos(ПҖ/3) < y. Moreover, the Hessian of H at this 6-gon is non-
         degenerate. So the 6-gon with coordinate:
                                        l1 = l2 = В· В· В· = l6 вүҲ 1.32053;
                                                                ПҖ
                                        Оё1 = Оё2 = В· В· В· = Оё5 = ;
                                                                 3
                                        b1 = b2 = В· В· В· = b6 вүҲ вҲ’0.61814,
         is a non-degenerate critical point. So its learning coefficient is (3c вҲ’ 1)/2 = 8.5.
      3. c = 7: in this case s = 1. Then (xвҲ— , y вҲ— ) вүҲ (1.44839, вҲ’0.96691) is the unique common
         solution such that вҲ’x2 cos(2ПҖ/7) < y. Moreover, the Hessian of H at this 7-gon is non-
         degenerate. So the 5-gon with coordinate:
                                        l1 = l2 = В· В· В· = l7 вүҲ 1.44839;
                                                                2ПҖ
                                        Оё1 = Оё2 = В· В· В· = Оё6 =     ;
                                                                 7
                                        b1 = b2 = В· В· В· = b7 вүҲ вҲ’0.96691,
         is a non-degenerate critical point. So itslocal learning coefficient is (3c вҲ’ 1)/2 = 10.
      4. c = 9: in this case s = 2. There is no common solution.
      5. c = 10: in this case s = 2. There is no common solution.
      6. c = 11: in this case s = 2. There is no common solution.
      7. c = 13: in this case s = 3. There is no common solution.
      8. We checked that for any 9 вүӨ c вүӨ 203 which is not a multiple of 4, there is no common
         solution.

H.2   k- GONS WITH NEGATIVE BIAS FOR k = c вҲҲ 4Z

In this section, we show that for c = 8, the 8-gon with coordinate
                                                             ПҖ
  l1 = l2 = В· В· В· = l8 вүҲ 1.55041, Оё1 = Оё2 = В· В· В· = Оё8 = , b1 = b2 = В· В· В· = b8 вүҲ вҲ’1.29122,
                                                             4
is a non-degenerate critical point of the TMS potential. So the local learning coefficient of 8-gon is
11.5. Let c > 4 being a multiple of 4. A c-gon has Оё-coordinate:
                                                              2ПҖ
                                      Оё1 = Оё2 = В· В· В· = Оёc =     .
                                                               c

                                                    42
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Let s = c/4 вҲ’ 1 вҲҲ Z. Then (s + 1) В· (2ПҖ/c) = ПҖ/2. So

                                               2ПҖ                           ПҖ
             Wi В· Wi+s = li li+s cos (s + 1) В·      = li li+s cos (s + 1) В·    =0
                                                c                           2
for all i = 1, . . . , c. So c-gons are on the boundaries of some chambers.
Since c > 4, s вүҘ 1. Let M = {Mij } be wedges describing a chamber whose boundary contains
c-gons. If bi < 0 for all i = 1, . . . , c, then the TMS potential (see Appendix G) is
                                                                  пЈ«            пЈ«           пЈ¶         пЈ¶3
                    X          (1)                   1                             X
    H(l, Оё, b) =           Оҙ(TMij )                 P             пЈӯli li+j cos пЈӯ        Оёk пЈё + bi+j пЈё
                  Mij вҲҲM              li li+j cos      kвҲҲMij Оёk                   kвҲҲMij
                                                                    пЈ«             пЈ«            пЈ¶      пЈ¶3
                       X           (2)                 1                             X
                  +          Оҙ(TMij )                  P            пЈӯli li+j cos пЈӯ         Оё k пЈё + bi пЈё
                     Mij вҲҲM               l  l
                                            i i+j cos    kвҲҲMij kОё                   kвҲҲMij
                      c
                                                                         b3    b3
                     X
                  +       Оҙ(Ti ) (1 вҲ’ li2 )2 вҲ’ 3(1 вҲ’ li2 )bi + 3b2i + 4i + 2i + (1 вҲ’ Оҙ(Ti )),
                     i=1
                                                                         li    li

where
               n                           P                o
          (1)
      1. TMij = (l, Оё, b) | вҲ’ li li+j cos   kвҲҲMij Оёk вүӨ bi+j ;
               n                           P             o
          (2)
      2. TMij = (l, Оё, b) | вҲ’ li li+j cos   kвҲҲMij Оёk вүӨ bi ;

      3. Ti = {(l, Оё, b) | вҲ’ li2 вүӨ bi };
      4. Оё1 + Оё2 + В· В· В· + Оёc = 2ПҖ.

Consider the c-gon with coordinate
                                                                   2ПҖ
         lвҲ— : l1 = В· В· В· = lc = x,   Оё вҲ— : Оё1 = В· В· В· = Оёc = Оұ =      ,   bвҲ— : b1 = В· В· В· = bc = y
                                                                    c
for some x > 0 and y < 0. Suppose that вҲ’x2 < вҲ’x2 cos(Оұ) < В· В· В· < вҲ’x2 cos(s В· Оұ) < y.
Lemma H.1. The c-gon (lвҲ— , ОёвҲ— , bвҲ— ) has an open neighbourhood in which the TMS potential is
                                                       пЈ«           пЈ«           пЈ¶        пЈ¶3
                    X                   1                              X
       H(l, Оё, b) =                    P             пЈӯli li+j cos пЈӯ         Оёk пЈё + bi+j пЈё
                    Mij li li+j cos       kвҲҲMij Оёk                    kвҲҲMij
                                                          пЈ«           пЈ«           пЈ¶      пЈ¶3
                      X                   1                              X
                    +                     P              пЈӯli li+j cos пЈӯ        Оёk пЈё + bi пЈё
                            l
                      Mij i i+jl     cos    kвҲҲMij kОё                    kвҲҲMij
                        c
                                                                   b3    b3
                      X
                    +         (1 вҲ’ li2 )2 вҲ’ 3(1 вҲ’ li2 )bi + 3b2i + 4i + 2i ,
                      i=1
                                                                   li    li

where Оё1 + Оё2 + В· В· В· + Оёc = 2ПҖ, and M = {Mij } is

            (1)                  (1, 2)           В·В·В·    В·В·В·                (1, 2, . . . , s)
            (2)                  (2, 3)           В·В·В·    В·В·В·              (2, 3, . . . , s + 1)
             ..                    ..                                                ..
              .                     .             В·В·В·    В·В·В·                          .
        (c + 1 вҲ’ s)    (c + 1 вҲ’ s, c + 2 вҲ’ s)     В·В·В·    В·В·В·    (c + 1 вҲ’ s, c + 2 вҲ’ s, . . . , c)
                                                                                                    .
        (c + 2 вҲ’ s)    (c + 2 вҲ’ s, c + 3 вҲ’ s)     В·В·В·    В·В·В·   (c + 2 вҲ’ s, c + 3 вҲ’ s, . . . , c, 1)
             ..                  ..                                           ..
              .                   .               В·В·В·    В·В·В·                   .
          (c вҲ’ 1)             (c вҲ’ 1, c)          В·В·В·    В·В·В·          (c вҲ’ 1, c, 1, . . . , s вҲ’ 2)
            (c)                 (c, 1)            В·В·В·    В·В·В·            (c, 1, 2, . . . , s вҲ’ 1)

                                                   43
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. Since x > 0 and y < 0, there are positive small real numbers Пөx , Пөy such that x вҲ’ Пөx > 0
and y + Пөb < 0. Then
                                               y + Пөb
                                            вҲ’(x + Пөx )2
is a positive number. Then there exists Оі > 0 such that
                                        ПҖ              y + Пөb
                                   cos     вҲ’Оі <                 .
                                         2          вҲ’(x + Пөx )2
Let ПөОё = Оі/(s + 1). Consider the open neighbourhood of (lвҲ— , ОёвҲ— , bвҲ— ) given by
                        (x вҲ’ Пөx , x + Пөx ) Г— (Оұ вҲ’ ПөОё , Оұ + ПөОё ) Г— (y вҲ’ Пөb , y + Пөb ).
Let (l, Оё, b) be a point in this open neighbourhood. Consider for any wedge Mij containing
                                                                                    P      more
than s numbers. Without loss of generality, assume that Mij contain s+1 elements. If kвҲҲMij Оёk >
ПҖ/2, then                                    пЈ«        пЈ¶
                                               X
                                вҲ’li li+j cos пЈӯ    Оё k пЈё > 0 > y + Пөb .
                                                kвҲҲMij
                     P
Otherwise, suppose       kвҲҲMij Оёk вүӨ ПҖ/2. Then
                            пЈ«            пЈ¶                      пЈ«             пЈ¶
                                X                                    X
                                                          2
               вҲ’li li+j cos пЈӯ          Оёk пЈё > вҲ’(x + Пөx ) cos пЈӯ              Оёk пЈё
                               kвҲҲMij                                kвҲҲMij

                                                          2                        2ПҖ
                                             > вҲ’(x + Пөx ) cos (s + 1) Г—               вҲ’ ПөОё
                                                                                    n
                                                                ПҖ
                                             = вҲ’(x + Пөx )2 cos    вҲ’Оі
                                                                2
                                             > y + Пөb
                                             > bi or bi+j .
                  (1)                     (2)
Thus (l, Оё, b) вҲҲ
               / TMij and (l, Оё, b) вҲҲ
                                    / TMij . Thus, the term in H(l, Оё, b) indexed by this Mij disap-
pears. So only Mij containing less than (s + 1) numbers remain in the sum.

It follows from the calculations in (Appendix H.1) that
                                        вҲӮ
                                                            H(l, Оё, b)
                                       вҲӮОёa l=lвҲ— ,Оё=ОёвҲ— ,b=bвҲ—
is independent of a. Moreover, the same calculations show that
                                     вҲӮ
                                                         H(l, Оё, b) = 0
                                    вҲӮba l=lвҲ— ,Оё=ОёвҲ— ,b=bвҲ—
and
                                     вҲӮ
                                                         H(l, Оё, b) = 0
                                    вҲӮla l=lвҲ— ,Оё=ОёвҲ— ,b=bвҲ—
give rise to a system of parametrized polynomial equations in x and y:
                            x6 G(s) + x2 y 2 H(s) + 2x4 yM (s) + y 2 вҲ’ x4 = 0
                         2x8 F (s) + 3x6 yG(s) вҲ’ x2 y 3 H(s) вҲ’ 2x6 вҲ’ 2y 3 = 0
where
                         Ps    2
      1. F (s) = 1 + 2  j=1 cos (jОұ);
                       Ps
      2.   G(s) = 1 + 2 j=1 cos(jОұ);
                       Ps      1
      3.   H(s) = 1 + 2 j=1 cos(jОұ) ;


                                                     44
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      4. M (s) = 1 + 2s.

We compute the common solution using Mathematica.

      1. c = 8: in this case, s = 1. Then (xвҲ— , y вҲ— ) вүҲ (1.55045, вҲ’1.29119) is a common solution
         such that вҲ’x2 cos(ПҖ/4) < y. Moreover, the Hessian of H(l, Оё, b) at this 8-gon is non-
         degenerate. So the 8-gon with coordinate:

                                       l1 = l2 = В· В· В· = l8 вүҲ 1.55045;
                                                               ПҖ
                                       Оё1 = Оё2 = В· В· В· = Оё8 = ;
                                                                4
                                       b1 = b2 = В· В· В· = b8 вүҲ вҲ’1.29119,

         is a non-degenerate critical point. So its local learning coefficient is (3c вҲ’ 1)/2 = 11.5
      2. n = 12: in this case, s = 2. Then (xвҲ— , y вҲ— ) вүҲ (1.03322, вҲ’0.46654) and (xвҲ— , y вҲ— ) вүҲ
         (1.24975, вҲ’0.85483) are common solutions such that вҲ’x2 cos(ПҖ/6) < y.
      3. We plot the level sets of two polynomial equations for 1 вүӨ s вүӨ 50. There is always a
         common solution.

H.3   k- GONS WITH NEGATIVE BIAS FOR k < c

Now for a fixed c, we discuss arbitrary k-gons where k вүӨ c. A k-gon is obtained by shrinking c вҲ’ k
Wi вҖҷs to zero. Without loss of generality, we assume that Wc , WcвҲ’1 , . . . , Wk+1 are shrinking to zero.
So a k-gon is on the boundary of some chamber. Note that different angles between Wi and Wj for
i, j вҲҲ {c вҲ’ k + 1, . . . , c} might give different chambers whose boundary contains the k-gon. The
following example illustrates the idea. Let c = 6 and k = 5. Then there are three different chambers
whose boundary contains the 5-gon.

      1. Consider a family of 6-gons with coordinate l1 = l2 =  l3 =  l4 = l5 = l, l6 = u,
         Оё1 = Оё2 = Оё3 = Оё4 = 2ПҖ                                         ПҖ
                                 5 , Оё5 = Оұ where l, u > 0 and Оұ вҲҲ 0, 10 . This family of 6-gons
         is contained in the chamber described by the following wedges:
                                                   (1)
                                                   (2)
                                                   (3)
                                                   (4)   (4, 5)
                                                   (5)   (5, 6)
                                                   (6)
         The 5-gon is obtained from this family of 6-gons by taking the limit as u вҶ’ 0. So the
         5-gon is on the boundary of this chamber.
      2. Consider another family of 6-gons with coordinate l1 = l2  = l3  = l4 = l5 = l, l6 = u,
         Оё1 = Оё2 = Оё3 = Оё4 = 2ПҖ                                     ПҖ 3ПҖ
                                 5 , Оё5 = Оұ where l, u > 0 and Оұ вҲҲ 10 , 10 . This family of 6-gons
         is contained in the chamber described by the following wedges:
                                                   (1)
                                                   (2)
                                                   (3)
                                                   (4)
                                                   (5)   (5, 6)
                                                   (6)
         The 5-gon is obtained from this family of 6-gons by taking the limit as u вҶ’ 0. So the
         5-gon is on the boundary of this chamber.
      3. Finally, consider the family of 6-gons with coordinate l1 = l2 = l3  = l4 = l5 = l, l6 = u,
         Оё1 = Оё2 = Оё3 = Оё4 = 2ПҖ                                      3ПҖ 2ПҖ
                                 5 , Оё5 = Оұ where l, u > 0 and Оұ вҲҲ 10 , 5 . This family of 6-gons
         is contained in the chamber described by the following wedges:


                                                   45
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                      (1)
                                                      (2)
                                                      (3)
                                                      (4)
                                                      (5)    (5, 6)
                                                      (6)    (6, 1)
         The 5-gon is obtained from this family of 6-gons by taking the limit as u вҶ’ 0. So the
         5-gon is on the boundary of this chamber.
Theorem H.1. Let k вҲҲ Z>4 and s be the unique integer in the interval [ k4 вҲ’ 1, k4 ). If a k-gon with
coordinate
                                                         2ПҖ
                 l1 = В· В· В· = lk = x; Оё1 = В· В· В· = Оёk =     ; b1 = В· В· В· = bk = y
                                                          k
for some x > 0 and y < 0 satisfying

                                                    2ПҖ
                                      вҲ’x2 cos s В·        вүӨy
                                                     k
is a critical point of H(l, Оё, b) with constraint Оё1 + В· В· В· + Оёk = 2ПҖ for c = k, then the k-gons with
coordinate
                            l1 = В· В· В· = lk = x, lk+1 = В· В· В· = lc = 0;
                                                2ПҖ                      2ПҖ
                            Оё1 = В· В· В· = ОёkвҲ’1 =    , Оёk + В· В· В· + Оёc =     ;
                                                 k                       k
                            b1 = В· В· В· = bk = y, bk+1 , . . . , bc < 0,
are critical points of H(l, Оё, b) with constraint Оё1 + В· В· В· + Оёc = 2ПҖ for any c > k.

Proof. We first show that for any bk+1 , . . . , bc < 0 and Оёk , . . . , Оёc вҲҲ [0, 2ПҖ) with Оёk + В· В· В· + Оёc =
2ПҖ/k, the k-gon (lвҲ— , ОёвҲ— , bвҲ— ) with coordinate
                         l1 = В· В· В· = lk = x, lk+1 = В· В· В· = lc = 0;
                                                 2ПҖ
                         Оё1 = В· В· В· = ОёkвҲ’1 = Оұ =     , Оёk , . . . , Оёc вҲҲ [0, 2ПҖ);
                                                  k
                         b1 = В· В· В· = bk = y, bk+1 , . . . , bc < 0
has an open neighbourhood in which only the following types of wedges showing up in H(l, Оё, b):

      1. Mij does not contain any of {k, k + 1, . . . , c} and has length at most s;
      2. Mij contains (k, k + 1, . . . , c) and has length at most s + c вҲ’ k.

Since each coordinate in bвҲ— is less than zero, there is an open neighbourhood B of bвҲ— contained in
Rc<0 . Since l1 = В· В· В· = lk = x > 0 and lk+1 = В· В· В· = lc = 0, there exists an open neighbourhood L
of lвҲ— contained in Rk>0 Г— RcвҲ’kвүҘ0 . If k is not a multiple of 4, then s В· Оұ < ПҖ/2 and (s + 1) В· Оұ > ПҖ/2.
So we can perturb each Оёi to obtain an open neighbourhood Оҳ of ОёвҲ— in which

       вҖў Оёi + В· В· В· + Оёi+sвҲ’1 < ПҖ/2 and Оёi + В· В· В· Оёi+s > ПҖ/2 for {i, i + 1, . . . , i + s} вҠӮ {1, . . . , k вҲ’ 1};
       вҖў Оёi +В· В· В·+ОёkвҲ’1 +Оёk +В· В· В·+Оёc +Оё1 +В· В· В·+ОёsвҲ’1вҲ’k+i < ПҖ/2, Оёi +В· В· В·+ОёkвҲ’1 +Оёk +В· В· В·+Оёc +Оё1 +
         В· В· В·+ОёsвҲ’k+i > ПҖ/2, and ОёiвҲ’1 +Оёi +В· В· В·+ОёkвҲ’1 +Оёk +В· В· В·+Оёc +Оё1 +В· В· В·+ОёsвҲ’1вҲ’k+i < ПҖ/2.

If k is a multiple of 4, then s В· Оұ < ПҖ/2 and (s + 1) В· Оұ = ПҖ/2. So we can perturb each Оёi to obtain
an open neighbourhood Оҳ of ОёвҲ— in which

       вҖў Оёi + В· В· В· + Оёi+sвҲ’1 < ПҖ/2 and Оёi + В· В· В· Оёi+s is closed to ПҖ/2 for {i, i + 1, . . . , i + s} вҠӮ
         {1, . . . , k вҲ’ 1};
       вҖў Оёi +В· В· В·+ОёkвҲ’1 +Оёk +В· В· В·+Оёc +Оё1 +В· В· В·+ОёsвҲ’1вҲ’k+i < ПҖ/2, Оёi +В· В· В·+ОёkвҲ’1 +Оёk +В· В· В·+Оёc +Оё1 +
         В· В· В·+ОёsвҲ’k+i is closed to ПҖ/2, and ОёiвҲ’1 +Оёi +В· В· В·+ОёkвҲ’1 +Оёk +В· В· В·+Оёc +Оё1 +В· В· В·+ОёsвҲ’1вҲ’k+i <
         ПҖ/2.


                                                      46
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Then L Г— Оҳ Г— B is an open neighbourhood of (lвҲ— , ОёвҲ— , bвҲ— ). Since lk+1 = В· В· В· = lc = 0, we can
shrink L so that for every (l, Оё, b) вҲҲ L Г— Оҳ Г— B,
                              пЈ«           пЈ¶                     пЈ«      пЈ¶
                                  X                               X
                 вҲ’li li+j cos пЈӯ        Оёk пЈё > bi , вҲ’li li+j cos пЈӯ   Оёk пЈё > bi+j
                                      kвҲҲMij                            kвҲҲMij

for all Mij with either i вҲҲ {k + 1, . . . , c} or i + j вҲ’ 1 вҲҲ {k, . . . , c вҲ’ 1}, and
                                                  вҲ’li2 > bi
for all i = k + 1, . . . , c. Since

                                                   2ПҖ                 2ПҖ
                   вҲ’x2 < В· В· В· < вҲ’x2 cos (s вҲ’ 1) В·      < вҲ’x2 cos s В·      < y,
                                                    k                  k
we can shrink L Г— Оҳ Г— B so that for every (l, Оё, b) вҲҲ L Г— Оҳ Г— B,
                             пЈ«        пЈ¶                     пЈ«       пЈ¶
                               X                               X
                вҲ’li li+j cos пЈӯ     Оёk пЈё < bi , вҲ’li li+j cos пЈӯ    Оёk пЈё < bi+j
                                      kвҲҲMij                            kвҲҲMij

for all i, j with i, i + j вҲҲ {1, . . . , k} and
                                                  вҲ’li2 < bi
for all i = 1, . . . , k. Since any Mij containing only some of {k, k + 1, . . . , c} has either i вҲҲ
{k + 1, . . . , c} or i + j вҲ’ 1 вҲҲ {k, . . . , c вҲ’ 1}, we know that for Mij containing only some of
{k, k + 1, . . . , c}, we have
                                                (1)                 (2)
                                  (l, Оё, b) вҲҲ
                                            / TMij and (l, Оё, b) вҲҲ
                                                                 / TMij
for all (l, Оё, b) вҲҲ L Г— Оҳ Г— B. We have shown that if Mij contains some of {k, k + 1, . . . , c}, then it
must contain (k, k + 1, . . . , c). Moreover, for k not being a multiple of 4, since

       вҖў Оёi +В· В· В·+ОёkвҲ’1 +Оёk +В· В· В·+Оёc +Оё1 +В· В· В·+ОёsвҲ’1вҲ’k+i < ПҖ/2, Оёi +В· В· В·+ОёkвҲ’1 +Оёk +В· В· В·+Оёc +Оё1 +
         В· В· В·+ОёsвҲ’k+i > ПҖ/2, and ОёiвҲ’1 +Оёi +В· В· В·+ОёkвҲ’1 +Оёk +В· В· В·+Оёc +Оё1 +В· В· В·+ОёsвҲ’1вҲ’k+i < ПҖ/2,

we know that if Mij contains (k, k + 1, . . . , c), then it has length at most s + c вҲ’ k. For k being a
multiple of 4, since

       вҖў Оёi +В· В· В·+ОёkвҲ’1 +Оёk +В· В· В·+Оёc +Оё1 +В· В· В·+ОёsвҲ’1вҲ’k+i < ПҖ/2, Оёi +В· В· В·+ОёkвҲ’1 +Оёk +В· В· В·+Оёc +Оё1 +
         В· В· В·+ОёsвҲ’k+i is closed to ПҖ/2, and ОёiвҲ’1 +Оёi +В· В· В·+ОёkвҲ’1 +Оёk +В· В· В·+Оёc +Оё1 +В· В· В·+ОёsвҲ’1вҲ’k+i <
         ПҖ/2,

by the same argument we use in the proof of Lemma H.1, we know that if Mij contains (k, k +
1, . . . , c), then it has length at most s + c вҲ’ k. Now for Mij not containing any of {k, k + 1, . . . , c},
if k is not a multiple of 4, it follows from

       вҖў Оёi + В· В· В· + Оёi+sвҲ’1 < ПҖ/2 and Оёi + В· В· В· Оёi+s > ПҖ/2 for {i, i + 1, . . . , i + s} вҠӮ {1, . . . , k вҲ’ 1}

that Mij has length at most s. If k is a multiple of 4, it follows from

       вҖў Оёi + В· В· В· + Оёi+sвҲ’1 < ПҖ/2 and Оёi + В· В· В· Оёi+s is closed to ПҖ/2 for {i, i + 1, . . . , i + s} вҠӮ
         {1, . . . , k вҲ’ 1}

and the same argument in Lemma H.1 that Mij has length at most s. Therefore in the open neigh-
bourhood L Г— Оҳ Г— B of (lвҲ— , ОёвҲ— , bвҲ— ), only the following types of wedges showing up in H:

      1. Mij does not contain any of {k, k + 1, . . . , c} and has length at most s;
      2. Mij contains (k, k + 1, . . . , c) and has length at most s + c вҲ’ k.


                                                     47
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                          (1)                (2)
For a = k+1, . . . , c, since (LГ—ОҳГ—B)вҲ©Ta = вҲ…, and (LГ—ОҳГ—B)вҲ©TMij = (LГ—ОҳГ—B)вҲ©TMij = вҲ…
for Mij with either i вҲҲ {k + 1, . . . , c} or i + j вҲ’ 1 вҲҲ {k, . . . , c вҲ’ 1}, we know that
                                     вҲӮ
                                                         H(l, Оё, b) = 0
                                    вҲӮba l=lвҲ— ,Оё=ОёвҲ— ,b=bвҲ—
and
                                    вҲӮ
                                                        H(l, Оё, b) = 0.
                                   вҲӮla l=lвҲ— ,Оё=ОёвҲ— ,b=bвҲ—

For a = 1, . . . , k, since
                                                              2ПҖ
                   l1 = В· В· В· = lk = x;   Оё1 = В· В· В· = Оёk =      ;   b1 = В· В· В· = bk = y
                                                               k
is a critical point of the TMS potential for c = k, we know that
                                     вҲӮ
                                                         H(l, Оё, b) = 0
                                    вҲӮba l=lвҲ— ,Оё=ОёвҲ— ,b=bвҲ—
and
                                    вҲӮ
                                                        H(l, Оё, b) = 0.
                                   вҲӮla l=lвҲ— ,Оё=ОёвҲ— ,b=bвҲ—
For a = 1, . . . , c, we have
                вҲӮ
                                    H(l, Оё, b)
               вҲӮОёa l=lвҲ— ,Оё=ОёвҲ— ,b=bвҲ—
                s                               2                             3 !
               X        вҲ’3 x2 cos (jОұ) + y sin (jОұ) sin (jОұ) x2 cos (jОұ) + y
            =2     jВ·                              +
               j=1
                                     cos (jОұ)              x2 cos2 (jОұ)

which is independent of a. Therefore, by Lagrangian multiplier method, the k-gon (lвҲ— , ОёвҲ— , bвҲ— ) is a
critical point of H(l, Оё, b) with constraint Оё1 + В· В· В· + Оёc = 2ПҖ.

In the previous example, we see that for n = 6, there are three different chambers whose boundary
contains the 5-gon. As different chambers give different explicit form of H, one might think H
is not differentiable at the 5-gon. However, in our proof, we show that the 5-gon has an open
neighbourhood in which H has the explicit form
                                                    пЈ«            пЈ«             пЈ¶         пЈ¶3
                  X                  1                              X
                                    P               пЈӯli li+j cos пЈӯ          Оёk пЈё + bi+j пЈё
                Mij вҲҲM li li+j cos     kвҲҲMij  Оё k                 kвҲҲM    ij

                                                      пЈ«            пЈ«               пЈ¶      пЈ¶3
                     X                 1                                X
                +                      P              пЈӯli li+j cos пЈӯ           Оё k пЈё + bi пЈё
                   Mij вҲҲM li li+j cos    kвҲҲMij Оёk                      kвҲҲMij

                    5
                                                             b3i   b3i
                   X
                               2 2           2          2
                +       (1 вҲ’ li ) вҲ’ 3(1 вҲ’ li )bi + 3bi + 4 + 2 + 1,
                   i=1
                                                             li    li

where Оё1 + В· В· В· + Оё6 = 2ПҖ and M consists of the following wedges:

                                                   (1)
                                                   (2)
                                                   (3) .
                                                   (4)
                                                  (5, 6)

So H is actually analytic at the 5-gon.


                                                    48
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Corollary H.1. Let k вҲҲ Z>4 and s be the unique integer in the interval [ k4 вҲ’ 1, k4 ). Let H (k) (l, Оё, b)
denote the TMS potential for c = k. Suppose that a k-gon with coordinate
                                                                                 2ПҖ
                       l1 = В· В· В· = lk = x;           Оё1 = В· В· В· = Оёk =             ;      b1 = В· В· В· = bk = y
                                                                                  k
for some x > 0 and y < 0 satisfying

                                                          2      2ПҖ
                                                      вҲ’x cos s В·      вүӨy
                                                                  k
is a critical point of H (k) (l, Оё, b). Let О c,k be the projection defined by
         О c,k : (l1 , . . . , lc , Оё1 , . . . , ОёcвҲ’1 , b1 , . . . , bc ) 7вҶ’ (l1 , . . . , lk , Оё1 , . . . , ОёkвҲ’1 , b1 , . . . , bk ).
Then for c > k, the k-gon with coordinate
                                   l1 = В· В· В· = lk = x, lk+1 = В· В· В· = lc = 0;
                                                       2ПҖ                      2ПҖ
                                   Оё1 = В· В· В· = ОёkвҲ’1 =    , Оёk + В· В· В· + Оёc =     ;
                                                        k                       k
                                   b1 = В· В· В· = bk = y, bk+1 , . . . , bc < 0,
has an open neighbourhood in which
                                      H(l, Оё, b) = H (k) в—Ұ О c,k (l, Оё, b) + (c вҲ’ k).

Proof. Let П„ = (k, k + 1, . . . , c). From the proof of the theorem, we know that for c > k, the k-gon
                                   l1 = В· В· В· = lk = x, lk+1 = В· В· В· = lc = 0;
                                                       2ПҖ                      2ПҖ
                                   Оё1 = В· В· В· = ОёkвҲ’1 =    , Оёk + В· В· В· + Оёc =     ;
                                                        k                       k
                                   b1 = В· В· В· = bk = y, bk+1 , . . . , bc < 0,
has an open neighbourhood in which
                                                                              пЈ«                 пЈ«               пЈ¶             пЈ¶3
                                X                       1                                            X
          H(l, Оё, b) =                                  P                     пЈӯli li+j cos пЈӯ                 Оёk пЈё + bi+j пЈё
                             Mij вҲҲM li li+j cos               kвҲҲMij Оёk                             kвҲҲMij
                                                                                  пЈ«                 пЈ«               пЈ¶         пЈ¶3
                                   X                        1                                           X
                            +                               P                   пЈӯli li+j cos пЈӯ                  Оё k пЈё + bi пЈё
                                Mij вҲҲM li li+j cos kвҲҲMij Оёk                kвҲҲMij

                               k
                                                                   b3i b3i
                              X
                                         2 2          2         2
                            +      (1 вҲ’ li ) вҲ’ 3(1 вҲ’ li )bi + 3bi + 4 + 2 + (c вҲ’ k),
                              i=1
                                                                    li  li

where Оё1 + В· В· В· + Оёc = 2ПҖ and M is

                (1)                          (1, 2)                   В·В·В·       В·В·В·                (1, 2, . . . , s)
                (2)                          (2, 3)                   В·В·В·       В·В·В·              (2, 3, . . . , s + 1)
                 ..                            ..                                                           ..
                  .                             .                     В·В·В·       В·В·В·                          .
            (k вҲ’ s)               (k вҲ’ s, k вҲ’ s + 1)                  В·В·В·       В·В·В·          (k вҲ’ s, . . . , k вҲ’ 1)
                                                                                                                          .
          (k вҲ’ s + 1)           (k вҲ’ s + 1, k вҲ’ s + 2)                В·В·В·       В·В·В·       (k вҲ’ s + 1, . . . , k вҲ’ 1, П„ )
          (k вҲ’ s + 2)           (k вҲ’ s + 1, k вҲ’ s + 2)                В·В·В·       В·В·В·      (k вҲ’ s + 1, . . . , k вҲ’ 1, П„, 1)
               ..                          ..                                                           ..
                .                           .                         В·В·В·       В·В·В·                      .
                (П„ )                         (П„, 1)                   В·В·В·       В·В·В·              (П„, 1, . . . , s вҲ’ 1)

Let H (k) (l1 , . . . , lk , Оё1 , . . . , ОёkвҲ’1 , b1 , . . . , bk ) denote the TMS potential for c = k. Consider the
projection
         О c,k : (l1 , . . . , lc , Оё1 , . . . , ОёcвҲ’1 , b1 , . . . , bc ) 7вҶ’ (l1 , . . . , lk , Оё1 , . . . , ОёkвҲ’1 , b1 , . . . , bk ).


                                                                     49
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Since                             X
                                        Оёi = 2ПҖ вҲ’ (Оё1 + В· В· В· + ОёkвҲ’1 ),
                                  iвҲҲП„
we have
                                 H(l, Оё, b) = H (k) в—Ұ О c,k + (c вҲ’ k).


Since the c-gons are non-degenerate (modulo O(c)-action) critical points for c = 5, 6, 7, 8, the
corollary implies that for c > k and k вҲҲ {5, 6, 7, 8}, the k-gon is a degenerate critical point but it
is minimally singular in the sense of the potential H being locally a sum of squares with all squares
having positive coefficients around the k-gon. We can compute the local learning coefficient of
each k-gon for k = 5, 6, 7, 8:

                Critical point   Local learning coefficient               L
                      5                       7                  (0.23738 + c вҲ’ 5)/3c
                      6                     8.5                  (0.86746 + c вҲ’ 6)/3c
                      7                      10                  (1.74870 + c вҲ’ 7)/3c
                      8                     11.5                 (2.77311 + c вҲ’ 8)/3c

                    Table H.2: Local learning coefficients and losses for k-gons


                                                    50
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I     I NCLUDING POSITIVE BIASES
In this section, we discuss the k Пғ+ -gon defined in Section 3.2. We show that for c = 6, 5+ -gon
is a critical point and its local learning coefficient is 8. We also show that in general k Пғ+ -gons
are critical points. Let WC be a nonempty chamber. Suppose that WC contains an open subset of
M2,c (R). Let M be the set of wedges describing WC . Recall that the local TMS potential is given
by (17) in Appendix G. LetвҖҷs first discuss c = 6. Consider the 5-gon (lвҲ— , ОёвҲ— , bвҲ— ) with coordinate
                          lвҲ— : l1 = В· В· В· = l5 = x вүҲ 1.17046, l6 = 0;
                                                  2ПҖ             2ПҖ
                          Оё вҲ— : Оё1 = В· В· В· = Оё4 =    , Оё5 + Оё6 =    ;
                                                   5              5
                          bвҲ— : b1 = В· В· В· = b5 = y вүҲ вҲ’0.28230, b6 = z вҲҲ R>0 .
In Appendix H.3, we see that depending on the value of Оё5 , there are three different chambers whose
boundary containing the 5-gon, but for the negative bias case (bi < 0 for all i = 1, . . . , c), there is
an open neighbourhood in which the local TMS potential is smooth (Corollary H.1). Now we claim
that this holds for the general case, i.e. there is an open neighbourhood of the 5-gon in which the
local TMS potential is smooth. Since l6 = 0 and bi < 0 for all i = 1, . . . , 5, we know that
                         вҲ’ l6 l1 cos(Оё6 ) = 0 > b1 , l6 l2 cos(Оё6 + Оё1 ) = 0 > b2 ,
                         вҲ’ l5 l6 cos(Оё5 ) = 0 > b5 , вҲ’l4 l6 cos(Оё4 + Оё5 ) = 0 > b4
So there is an open neighbourhood U of the 5-gon in which these inequalities hold. Thus, in U , the
wedges appearing in the local TMS potential are

                                                      (1)
                                                      (2)
                                                      (3) .
                                                      (4)
                                                     (5, 6)

Moreover, since b6 > 0, we have
                                   вҲ’l6 li cos(Оё6 + В· В· В· + ОёiвҲ’1 ) = 0 < bi ,
for all i = 1, . . . , 5. We can shrink U so that these inequalities hold in U . Thus, in U , Оҙ(S6j ) = 0
for all j = 1, . . . , 5. Therefore, the local TMS potential is
    4                                              3                                                       3
   X           1                                                     1
                           li li+1 cos(Оёi ) + bi +                              l5 l1 cos(Оё5 + Оё6 ) + b5
        ll
   i=1 i i+1
               cos(Оёi )                                  l5 l1 cos(Оё5 + Оё6 )
        4                                                3                                                       3
      X            1                                                      1
   +                           li li+1 cos(Оёi ) + bi+1 +                               l5 l1 cos(Оё5 + Оё6 ) + b1
           ll
      i=1 i i+1
                   cos(Оёi )                                      l5 l1 cos(Оё5 + Оё6 )
        5
                                                     b3i     b3i
      X
                     2 2              2         2
   +        (1 вҲ’ li ) вҲ’ 3(1 вҲ’ li )bi + 3bi + 4 + 2
      i=1
                                                     li      li
        5
      X                                      2
             l6 li cos(Оё6 + В· В· В· + ОёiвҲ’1 ) + 3 l6 li cos(Оё6 + В· В· В· + ОёiвҲ’1 ) b6 + 3b26

   +
      i=1
    + (1 вҲ’ l62 )2 вҲ’ 3(1 вҲ’ l62 )b6 + 3b26 .


Let
                              4                            3                                   3
                             X     li li+1 cos(Оёi ) + bi          l5 l1 cos(Оё5 + Оё6 ) + b5
                ОҰ(l, Оё, b) =                                  +
                             i=1
                                        li li+1 cos(Оёi )               l5 l1 cos(Оё5 + Оё6 )
                              4                                3                                  3
                             X     li li+1 cos(Оёi ) + bi+1            l5 l1 cos(Оё5 + Оё6 ) + b1
                           +                                     +
                             i=1
                                         li li+1 cos(Оёi )                  l5 l1 cos(Оё5 + Оё6 )
                              5
                                                                               b3i   b3i
                             X
                                            2 2            2           2
                           +      (1 вҲ’ li ) вҲ’ 3(1 вҲ’ li )bi + 3bi + 4 + 2 ,
                             i=1
                                                                               li    li


                                                        51
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and
                      5
                      X                                                 2
                                                                            + 3 l6 li cos(Оё6 + В· В· В· + ОёiвҲ’1 ) b6 + 3b26

      ОЁ(l, Оё, b) =              l6 li cos(Оё6 + В· В· В· + ОёiвҲ’1 )
                       i=1
                  + (1 вҲ’ l62 )2 вҲ’ 3(1 вҲ’ l62 )b6 + 3b26 ,


Then the local TMS potential is
                                             H(l, Оё, b) = ОҰ(l, Оё, b) + ОЁ(l, Оё, b).
Note that Corollary (H.1) implies that ОҰ(l, Оё, b) = H (5) в—Ұ О 6,5 (l, Оё, b), where H (5) is the TMS
potential for n = 5 and О 6,5 is the projection
            О 6,5 : (l1 , . . . , l6 , Оё1 , . . . , Оё5 , b1 , . . . , b6 ) 7вҶ’ (l1 , . . . , l5 , Оё1 , . . . , Оё4 , b1 , . . . , b5 ).
Thus, for all a = 1, . . . , 6,
                     вҲӮ                                    вҲӮ
                                         ОҰ(l, Оё, b) = 0,                      ОҰ(l, Оё, b) = 0,
                    вҲӮla l=lвҲ— ,Оё=ОёвҲ— ,b=bвҲ—                 вҲӮba l=lвҲ— ,Оё=ОёвҲ— ,b=bвҲ—
and
                                                   вҲӮ
                                                                       ОҰ(l, Оё, b)
                                                  вҲӮОёa l=lвҲ— ,Оё=ОёвҲ— ,b=bвҲ—
is independent of i. For a = 1, . . . , 5,
                   вҲӮ
                      ОЁ(l, Оё, b) = 2 l6 la cos(Оё6 + В· В· В· + ОёaвҲ’1 ) l6 cos(Оё6 + В· В· В· + ОёaвҲ’1 )
                  вҲӮla
                                     + 3l6 cos(Оё6 + В· В· В· + ОёaвҲ’1 )b6 .
Since l6 = 0 for the 5-gon, for all a = 1, . . . , 5,
                                               вҲӮ
                                                                   ОЁ(l, Оё, b) = 0.
                                              вҲӮla l=lвҲ— ,Оё=ОёвҲ— ,b=bвҲ—
Compute
                                       ( 5
                вҲӮ                       X
                   ОЁ(l, Оё, b) =                  2 l6 li cos(Оё6 + В· В· В· + ОёiвҲ’1 ) li cos(Оё6 + В· В· В· + ОёiвҲ’1 )
               вҲӮl6                         i=1
                                                                                        )
                                           + 3li cos(Оё6 + В· В· В· + ОёiвҲ’1 )b6                  вҲ’ 4(1 вҲ’ l62 )l6 + 6l6 b6 .

Then
                                         5
  вҲӮ                                    X                         2ПҖ
                      ОЁ(l, Оё, b) = 3xz     cos Оё6 + (i вҲ’ 1) В·
 вҲӮl6 l=lвҲ— ,Оё=ОёвҲ— ,b=bвҲ—                  i=1
                                                                  5
                                         5
                                       X                            2ПҖ                             2ПҖ
                                 = 3xz     cos(Оё6 ) cos (i вҲ’ 1) В·         вҲ’ sin(Оё6 ) sin (i вҲ’ 1) В·
                                       i=1
                                                                     5                              5
                                                   5
                                                  X                  2ПҖ
                                 = 3xz cos(Оё6 )       cos (i вҲ’ 1) В·
                                                  i=1
                                                                       5
                                               5
                                              X                  2ПҖ
                                   вҲ’ sin(Оё6 )     sin (i вҲ’ 1) В·
                                              i=1
                                                                  5

                                 = 3xz cos(Оё6 ) В· 0 вҲ’ sin(Оё6 ) В· 0

                                         = 0.


                                                                      52
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For a = 1, . . . , 5,
                                              вҲӮ
                                                 ОЁ(l, Оё, b) = 0.
                                             вҲӮba
Compute
                               5
              вҲӮ               X
                                  3 l6 li cos(Оё6 + В· В· В· + ОёiвҲ’1 ) + 6b6 вҲ’ 3(1 вҲ’ l62 ) + 6b6 .

                 ОЁ(l, Оё, b) =
             вҲӮb6              i=1

Then
                                                               5
                                                               X
                           вҲӮ
                                               ОЁ(l, Оё, b) =            6z       вҲ’ 3 + 6z
                          вҲӮb6 l=lвҲ— ,Оё=ОёвҲ— ,b=bвҲ—                   i=1
                                                           = 36z вҲ’ 3.
So
                                      вҲӮ
                                                          ОЁ(l, Оё, b) = 0
                                     вҲӮb6 l=lвҲ— ,Оё=ОёвҲ— ,b=bвҲ—
                    1
if and only if z = 12 . Note that
                                               вҲӮ
                                                  ОЁ(l, Оё, b) = 0
                                              вҲӮОё5
as Оё5 is not in ОЁl,Оё,b . For a = 1, . . . , 4,
                                5
           вҲӮ                   X
               ОЁ(l, Оё, b) =            вҲ’ 2 l6 li cos(Оё6 + В· В· В· + ОёiвҲ’1 ) l6 li sin(Оё6 + В· В· В· + ОёiвҲ’1 )
          вҲӮОёa                i=a+1

                                  вҲ’ 3l6 li sin(Оё6 + В· В· В· + ОёiвҲ’1 )b6 .

Since for the 5-gon, l6 = 0, then for a = 1, . . . , 4,
                                      вҲӮ
                                                          ОЁ(l, Оё, b) = 0.
                                     вҲӮОёa l=lвҲ— ,Оё=ОёвҲ— ,b=bвҲ—
Compute
                              5
             вҲӮ               X
                ОЁ(l, Оё, b) =      вҲ’ 2 l6 li cos(Оё6 + В· В· В· + ОёiвҲ’1 ) l6 li sin(Оё6 + В· В· В· + ОёiвҲ’1 )
            вҲӮОё6              i=1

                                 вҲ’ 3l6 li sin(Оё6 + В· В· В· + ОёiвҲ’1 )b6 .

Since for the 5-gon, l6 = 0, then
                                      вҲӮ
                                                          ОЁ(l, Оё, b) = 0.
                                     вҲӮОё6 l=lвҲ— ,Оё=ОёвҲ— ,b=bвҲ—
Therefore, the 5-gon with coordinate
                             lвҲ— : l1 = В· В· В· = l5 = x вүҲ 1.17046, l6 = 0;
                                                     2ПҖ             2ПҖ
                             ОёвҲ— : Оё1 = В· В· В· = Оё4 =     , Оё5 + Оё6 =    ;
                                                      5              5
                                                                                   1
                             bвҲ— : b1 = В· В· В· = b5 = y вүҲ вҲ’0.28230, b6 =                ;
                                                                                   12
is a critical point of H(l, Оё, b). Note that this is the 5+ -gon defined in Section 3.2. We claim that
the TMS potential is minimally singular in some neighbourhood of 5+ -gon and compute its local
learning coefficient.
Lemma I.1. For c = 6, the 5+ -gon with coordinate (lвҲ— , ОёвҲ— , bвҲ— ) has an open neighbourhood in
which the TMS potential is minimally singular. Moreover, its local learning coefficient is 8.


                                                      53
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. Note that the Hessian of H at the 5+ -gon (lвҲ— , ОёвҲ— , bвҲ— ) has all positive eigenvalues except one
zero eigenvalue in the Оё5 -direction. Note that there is an open subset U of the parameter space such
that the connected 1-dimensional space:

                                        вҲ—       вҲ—                  2ПҖ              2ПҖ
                   C = (l, Оё, b) | l = l , b = b , Оё1 = В· В· В· Оё4 =    , 0 вүӨ Оё5 вүӨ
                                                                    5               5
is the set of critical points of H in U . Moreover, since for all (l, Оё, b) вҲҲ C, the Hessian of H at
(l, Оё, b) is non-degenerate in the direction normal to T(l,Оё,b) C, H|U is a Morse-Bott function with
index 0. It follows from the Morse-Bott lemma that H is minimally singular in U and the local
learning coefficient is (17 вҲ’ 1)/2 = 8.

Now we discuss the k Пғ+ -gons (in Section 3.2) for k < c. Let B + вҠӮ {k + 1, . . . , c}. Let Пғ = |B + |.
Consider the k-gon (lвҲ— , ОёвҲ— , bвҲ— ) with coordinate
               lвҲ— :l1 = В· В· В· = lk = x > 0, lk+1 = В· В· В· = lc = 0;
                                           2ПҖ                     2ПҖ
               ОёвҲ— :Оё1 = В· В· В· = ОёkвҲ’1 =        , Оёk + В· В· В· + Оёc =    ;
                                            c                      c
               bвҲ— :b1 = В· В· В· = bk = y < 0,
                                                      / B + and bi = z > 0 if i вҲҲ B + .
                for i = k + 1, . . . , c, bi < 0 if i вҲҲ
Theorem I.1. There is an open neighbourhood of (lвҲ— , ОёвҲ— , bвҲ— ) in which the TMS potential is
                                                                      X
             H(l, Оё, b) = H (k) в—Ұ О c,k (l, Оё, b) + c вҲ’ (k + Пғ) +          Hi+ (l, Оё, b),


                                                                                              iвҲҲB +
where
      1. H (k) is the TMS potential for c = k;
      2. О c,k is the projection:
            О c,k : (l1 , . . . , lc , Оё1 , . . . , ОёcвҲ’1 , b1 , . . . , bc ) 7вҶ’ (l1 , . . . , lk , Оё1 , . . . , ОёkвҲ’1 , b1 , . . . , bk );
      3. for each i вҲҲ B + ,
                                                  X                         2

                             Hi+ (l, Оё, b) =                li lj cos(Оёij ) + 3 li lj cos(Оёij ) bi + 3b2i


                                                   jМё=i

                                     + (1 вҲ’ li2 )2 вҲ’ 3(1 вҲ’ li2 )bi + 3b2i ,


          where Оёij denote the angle between Wi and Wj .

Proof. This follows from applying the same argument in the c = 6 case.
Theorem I.2. Let k вҲҲ Z>4 and s be the unique integer in the interval [ k4 вҲ’ 1, k4 ). If a k-gon with
coordinate
                                                             2ПҖ
                   l1 = В· В· В· = lk = x; Оё1 = В· В· В· = Оёk =       ; b1 = В· В· В· = bk = y
                                                              k
for some x > 0 and y < 0 satisfying

                                                      2ПҖ
                                         вҲ’x2 cos s В·          вүӨy
                                                       k
is a critical point of H(l, Оё, b) with constraint Оё1 + В· В· В· + Оёk = 2ПҖ for c = k, then for any integer
0 вүӨ Пғ вүӨ c вҲ’ k, the k Пғ+ -gons defined in Section 3.2 are critical points of H(l, Оё, b) with constraint
Оё1 + В· В· В· + Оёc = 2ПҖ for any c > k.

Proof. This follows from applying the same argument in the c = 6 case.
Remark I.1. In Lemma I.1, we show that the 5+ -gon for c = 6 is minimally singular and compute
the local learning coefficient. In general, we do not know whether the k Пғ+ -gons are minimally
singular or not for c > k. However, given a k Пғ+ -gon, the method to check whether it is minimally
singular or not is the same as the method used in Lemma I.1. We compute the Hessian of the TMS
potential at each k Пғ+ -gon. Then check that the Hessian of the TMS potential is non-degenerate in
the direction normal to the tangent space of k Пғ+ -gons. If this is the case, then we conclude that the
k Пғ+ -gon is minimally singular by Morse-Bott lemma.


                                                                   54
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


J     4- GONS
In this section we discuss 4-gons. The subtlety here is that the TMS potential is not smooth at 4-gons.
In particular, the directional Hessian of the TMS potential at 4-gons depends on the direction.

J.1     c=4

J.1.1    S TANDARD 4- GON
For c = 4, consider the (standard) 4-gon (lвҲ— , ОёвҲ— , bвҲ— ), where
                                                ПҖ ПҖ ПҖ ПҖ
                      lвҲ— = (1, 1, 1, 1), ОёвҲ— =      , , ,        , bвҲ— = (0, 0, 0, 0).
                                                 2 2 2 2
Since H(l, Оё, b) вүҘ 0 and H(lвҲ— , ОёвҲ— , bвҲ— ) = 0, we know the 4-gon is a global minimum. LetвҖҷs work out
the explicit form of H around the 4-gon (lвҲ— , ОёвҲ— , bвҲ— ). Since cos(ПҖ/2) = 0, the 4-gon is at boundary
of some chambers. Let M = {Mij } be a chamber whose boundary contains the 4-gon (lвҲ— , ОёвҲ— , bвҲ— ).
We claim that each wedge Mij is either empty or contains one number. Assume, by contradiction,
there is a Mij in M contains more than one number. Then we show that the 4-gon (lвҲ— , ОёвҲ— , bвҲ— ) is not
in the boundary of the chamber described by M. Let ПөОё вҲҲ R>0 be such that
                                                           ПҖ
                                             ПҖ вҲ’ 2ПөОё > .
                                                           2
                  вҖІ    ПҖ      ПҖ

Then for any Оё, Оё вҲҲ 2 вҲ’ Пө, 2 + Пө ,
                                       ПҖ          ПҖ                      ПҖ
                             Оё + ОёвҖІ >    вҲ’ ПөОё + вҲ’ ПөОё = ПҖ вҲ’ 2ПөОё > .
                                       2          2                      2
Let Пөl вҲҲ R>0 be such that 1 вҲ’ Пөl > 0. So (lвҲ— , ОёвҲ— , bвҲ— ) has an open neighbourhood given by
                                                  ПҖ         ПҖ       3
                           (1 вҲ’ Пөl , 1 + Пөl )4 Г—     вҲ’ ПөОё , + ПөОё Г— R 4
                                                   2         2
which does not intersect the interior of the chamber described by M. Thus, (lвҲ— , ОёвҲ— , bвҲ— ) is not in the
boundary of the chamber described by M when some of Mij in M contains more than one element.
So each wedge Mij in M contains at most one element. Because of the permutation symmetry, there
are three possible M:

                                                                                    (1)
                                               (1)                 (1)
                M1 =      (1) ,     M2 =           ,        M3 =       ,   M4 =     (2) .
                                               (2)                 (3)
                                                                                    (3)

Since вҲ’12 < 0, (lвҲ— , ОёвҲ— , bвҲ— ) has an open neighbourhood in which
                                                  вҲ’li2 < bi
for i = 1, 2, 3, 4. Since cos(ПҖ) = вҲ’1 < 0, the 4-gon (lвҲ— , ОёвҲ— , bвҲ— ) has an open neighbourhood in
which for all i = 1, 2, 3, 4, if bi > 0, then
                                        li li+2 cos(Оёi + Оёi+1 ) < вҲ’bi .
Recall the formula 17 for the local TMS potential in Section G. The 4-gon (lвҲ— , ОёвҲ— , bвҲ— ) has an open
neighbourhood in which the local TMS potential is
                                  4
                                  X
                   H(l, Оё, b) =         Оҙ(bi вүӨ 0)HiвҲ’ (l, Оё, b) + Оҙ(bi > 0)Hi+ (l, Оё, b),               (18)
                                  i=1

where
                                                              3                                    3
                           (1)       liвҲ’1 li cos(ОёiвҲ’1 ) + bi          (2)   li li+1 cos(Оёi ) + bi
        HiвҲ’ (l, Оё, b) = Оҙ(TM(iвҲ’1)1 )                            + Оҙ(TMi1 )
                                        liвҲ’1 li cos(ОёiвҲ’1 )                       li li+1 cos(Оёi )
                                                                  3    3

                                                                b    b
                       + (1 вҲ’ li2 )2 вҲ’ 3(1 вҲ’ li2 )bi + 3b2i + 4i + 2i ,
                                                                li   li


                                                       55
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and
                                              вҲ’b3i

        Hi+ (l, Оё, b) = Оҙ(Si(i+1) )
                                      li li+1 cos(Оёi )

                                                                2                      2
                        + 1 вҲ’ Оҙ(Si(i+1) ) li li+1 cos(Оёi ) + 3 li li+1 cos(Оёi ) bi + 3bi

                                      вҲ’b3i

                        +
                            li li+2 cos(Оёi + Оёi+1 )
                                                   вҲ’b3i

                        + Оҙ(Si(i+3) )
                                          li li+3 cos(Оёi+3 )

                                                                   2                       2
                        + 1 вҲ’ Оҙ(Si(i+3) ) li li+3 cos(Оёi+3 ) + 3 li li+3 cos(Оёi+3 ) bi + 3bi

                        + (1 вҲ’ li2 )2 вҲ’ 3(1 вҲ’ li2 )bi + 3b2i
We checked that each term in HiвҲ’ (l, Оё, b) and Hi+ (l, Оё, b) has gradient zero when approaching
(lвҲ— , ОёвҲ— , bвҲ— ) in the region specified by the indicator function associated with it. Thus, the TMS po-
tential is differentiable at the (lвҲ— , ОёвҲ— , bвҲ— ), and (lвҲ— , ОёвҲ— , bвҲ— ) is a critical point. However, the TMS
potential is not continuously differentiable twice, i.e. there are different directions in which direc-
tional Hessians are different. We checked that (lвҲ— , ОёвҲ— , bвҲ— ) is minimally singular in each subspace
with nonempty interior containing (lвҲ— , ОёвҲ— , bвҲ— ) in the boundary. So we obtain a list {4, 4.5, 5, 5.5} of
local learning coefficient when approached from these different subspaces.

J.1.2     4П•вҲ’ - GON
Let B вҲ’ вҠӮ {1, 2, 3, 4} and П• = |B вҲ’ |. Consider the 4П•вҲ’ -gon (Section 3.2) with coordinate
                                                    ПҖ
                         ОёвҲ— :Оё1 = Оё2 = Оё3 = Оё4 = ;
                                                    2
                         bвҲ— :bi < 0 if i вҲҲ B вҲ’ and bi = 0 if i вҲҲ
                                                               / BвҲ’;
                               lвҲ— :0 < li2 < вҲ’bi if i вҲҲ B вҲ’ and li = 1 if i вҲҲ
                                                                            / BвҲ’.
Since cos(ПҖ/2) = 0, the 4П•вҲ’ -gon is on the boundary of some chambers. Let M = {Mij } be a
chamber whose boundary contains 4П•вҲ’ -gon. Using the same arguments in Section J.1.1, we know
that each Mij is either empty or contains one number. Because of the O(2)-symmetry, there are four
possible M:

                                                                                                   (1)
                                                      (1)                 (1)
                   M1 =        (1) ,       M2 =           ,        M3 =       ,         M4 =       (2) .
                                                      (2)                 (3)
                                                                                                   (3)

      / B вҲ’ , we have li2 = 1 > 0 = bi . For i вҲҲ B вҲ’ , we have вҲ’li2 > bi , вҲ’li li+1 cos(Оёi ) = 0 > bi ,
For i вҲҲ
and вҲ’liвҲ’1 li cos(ОёiвҲ’1 ) = 0 > bi . Since cos(ПҖ) = вҲ’1 < 0, the 4П•вҲ’ -gon has an open neighbourhood
in which for all i = 1, 2, 3, 4, if bi > 0, then
                                              li li1 cos(Оёi + Оёi+1 ) < bi .
          П•вҲ’
So the 4       -gon has an open neighbourhood in which the local TMS potential is
                                       4
                                       X
                      H(l, Оё, b) =           Оҙ(bi вүӨ 0)HiвҲ’ (l, Оё, b) + Оҙ(bi > 0)Hi+ (l, Оё, b),                          (19)
                                       i=1
where

                / B вҲ’ , then
        1. if i вҲҲ
                                                                               3                                        3
                                  (1)               liвҲ’1 li cos(ОёiвҲ’1 ) + bi             (2)      li li+1 cos(Оёi ) + bi
               HiвҲ’ (l, Оё, b) = Оҙ(TM(iвҲ’1)1 )                                        + Оҙ(TMi1 )
                                                       liвҲ’1 li cos(ОёiвҲ’1 )                             li li+1 cos(Оёi )
                                                                  b3i b3i

                                        2 2          2         2
                                + (1 вҲ’ li ) вҲ’ 3(1 вҲ’ li )bi + 3bi + 4 + 2 ,
                                                                   li  li


                                                              56
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          and
                                                   вҲ’b3i

            Hi+ (l, Оё, b) = Оҙ(Si(i+1) )
                                           li li+1 cos(Оёi )

                                                                     2                      2
                             + 1 вҲ’ Оҙ(Si(i+1) ) li li+1 cos(Оёi ) + 3 li li+1 cos(Оёi ) bi + 3bi

                                           вҲ’b3i

                             +
                                 li li+2 cos(Оёi + Оёi+1 )
                                                        вҲ’b3i

                             + Оҙ(Si(i+3) )
                                               li li+3 cos(Оёi+3 )

                                                                        2                       2
                             + 1 вҲ’ Оҙ(Si(i+3) ) li li+3 cos(Оёi+3 ) + 3 li li+3 cos(Оёi+3 ) bi + 3bi

                             + (1 вҲ’ li2 )2 вҲ’ 3(1 вҲ’ li2 )bi + 3b2i ;
      2. if i вҲҲ B вҲ’ , then
                                                     HiвҲ’ (l, Оё, b) = 1,
          and
                                                     Hi+ (l, Оё, b) = 0.

If П• = 4, then the 4П•вҲ’ -gon has an open neighbourhood in which the TMS potential is the zero
function, hence it is a critical point with local learning coefficient 0. For 0 вүӨ П• вүӨ 3, we checked
that each term in HiвҲ’ (l, Оё, b) and Hi+ (l, Оё, b) has gradient zero when approaching the 4П•вҲ’ -gon in the
region specified by the indicator function associated with it. Thus, the TMS potential is differentiable
at the 4П•вҲ’ -gon, and the 4П•вҲ’ -gon is a critical point. However, the TMS potential is not continuously
differentiable twice, i.e. there are different directions in which directional Hessians are different. We
checked that the 4П•вҲ’ -gon is minimally singular in each subspace with nonempty interior containing
the 4П•вҲ’ -gon in the boundary. So we obtain lists
                    П• = 1 :{3, 3.5, 4, 4.5};
                    П• = 2 :{2, 2.5, 3, 3.5} for B вҲ’ = {i, i + 1}, where i = 1, 2, 3, 4,
                           {2.5, 3, 3.5, 4} for B вҲ’ = {i, i + 2}, where i = 1, 2, 3, 4;
                    П• = 3 :{1, 1.5, 2, 2.5};
                    П• = 4 :{0}.
of local learning coefficient for each when approached from these different subspaces.

J.2   c>4

We analyse four typical 4-gons appearing as critical points of TMS potential in this section. In
particular, we state their coordinates (hence computing their loss), and discuss their local learning
coefficient. Because of the permutation symmetry, we may assume that 4-gons have Оё-coordinate
                                                         ПҖ                     ПҖ
                                 Оё1 = Оё2 = Оё3 = , Оё4 + В· В· В· + Оёc = .
                                                         2                      2
So for given l1 , . . . , lc and biases b1 , . . . , bc , there is a set of 4-gons given by (Оё4 , . . . , Оёc ) with
Оё4 + В· В· В· + Оёc = ПҖ/2. As discussing in Appendix J.1, 4-gons are in the boundary of some chambers.
Let M = {Mij } be wedges describing a chamber containing 4-gons in its boundary. Let П„ =
(4, 5, . . . , c). Applying the same arguments in Appendix H.3 and Appendix J.1, we know that M
can only be a proper subset of {(1), (2), (3), П„ }.
Consider the standard 4-gons with coordinate
                               l1 = l2 = l3 = l4 = 1, l5 = В· В· В· = lc = 0;
                                                ПҖ                       ПҖ
                               Оё1 = Оё2 = Оё3 = , Оё4 + В· В· В· + Оёc = ;
                                                2                       2
                               b1 = b2 = b3 = b4 = 0, bk+1 , . . . , bc < 0.


                                                        57
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem J.1. For a fixed M, let H (4) denote the TMS potential in some neighbourhood of the
standard 4-gon for c = 4 (Appendix J.1.1). Consider the projection
         О c,4 : (l1 , . . . , lc , Оё1 , . . . , ОёcвҲ’1 , b1 , . . . , bc ) 7вҶ’ (l1 , . . . , l4 , Оё1 , . . . , Оё3 , b1 , . . . , b4 ).
The TMS potential in the chamber described by M is

                                     H(l, Оё, b) = H (k) в—Ұ О c,4 (l, Оё, b) + (c вҲ’ k).

Proof. This theorem follows from the same arguments used in Corollary H.1.

Thus, the standard 4-gons are critical points of the TMS potential. Moreover, we obtain a list
{4, 4.5, 5, 5.5} of local learning coefficient when approached from different chambers.
Let B вҲ’ вҠӮ {1, 2, 3, 4}. Let П• = |B вҲ’ |. Consider the 4П•вҲ’ -gons (Section 3.2) with coordinate
                                               ПҖ                     ПҖ
                ОёвҲ— : Оё1 = Оё2 = Оё3 =              , Оё4 + В· В· В· + Оёc =
                                               2                     2
                 bвҲ— :     for i = 1, 2, 3, 4, bi < 0 if i вҲҲ B вҲ’ and bi = 0 if i вҲҲ
                                                                                / BвҲ’,
                          for j = 5, 6, В· В· В· , c, bj < 0;
                 lвҲ— :     for i = 1, 2, 3, 4, 0 < li2 < вҲ’bi if i вҲҲ B вҲ’ and li = 1 if i вҲҲ
                                                                                       / BвҲ’,
                          for j = 5, 6, . . . , c, lj = 0.

Theorem J.2. For a fixed M, let H (4,вҲ’) denote the TMS potential in some neighbourhood of 4П•вҲ’ -
gon for c = 4 (Appendix J.1.2). Consider the projection
         О c,4 : (l1 , . . . , lc , Оё1 , . . . , ОёcвҲ’1 , b1 , . . . , bc ) 7вҶ’ (l1 , . . . , l4 , Оё1 , . . . , Оё3 , b1 , . . . , b4 ).
The TMS potential in the chamber described by M is

                                   H(l, Оё, b) = H (k,вҲ’) в—Ұ О c,4 (l, Оё, b) + (c вҲ’ k).

Proof. This theorem follows from the same arguments used in Corollary H.1.

Thus, the 4П•вҲ’ -gons are critical points of the TMS potential. Moreover, we obtain lists
                     П• = 1 :{3, 3.5, 4, 4.5};
                     П• = 2 :{2, 2.5, 3, 3.5} for B вҲ’ = {i, i + 1}, where i = 1, 2, 3, 4,
                            {2.5, 3, 3.5, 4} for B вҲ’ = {i, i + 2}, where i = 1, 2, 3, 4;
                     П• = 3 :{1, 1.5, 2, 2.5};
                     П• = 4 :{0}.
of local learning coefficient when approached from different chambers.
Now, we discuss when Пғ > 0. We show that all 4Пғ+,П•вҲ’ -gons are critical points for Пғ = 1, 2 and
0 вүӨ П• вүӨ 4. However, we do not know whether these critical points are minimally singular or not.
Let B + вҠӮ {5, 6, . . . , c}. Let Пғ = |B + |. Consider the 4Пғ+ -gons (Section 3.2) with coordinate
                   lвҲ— : l1 = l2 = l3 = l4 = 1 > 0, lk+1 = В· В· В· = lc = 0;
                                               ПҖ                     ПҖ
                   Оё вҲ— : Оё1 = Оё2 = Оё3 = , Оё4 + В· В· В· + Оёc = ;
                                               2                     2
                   bвҲ— : b1 = b2 = b3 = b4 = 0,
                                                                             1
                                                              / B + and bi =
                         for i = 5, 6, . . . , c, bi < 0 if i вҲҲ                 if i вҲҲ B + .
                                                                             2c
Theorem J.3. For a fixed M, let H (4) denote the TMS potential in some neighbourhood of the
standard 4-gon for c = 4 (Appendix J.1.1). Consider the projection
         О c,4 : (l1 , . . . , lc , Оё1 , . . . , ОёcвҲ’1 , b1 , . . . , bc ) 7вҶ’ (l1 , . . . , l4 , Оё1 , . . . , Оё3 , b1 , . . . , b4 ).


                                                                    58
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The TMS potential in the chamber described by M is
                                                                      X
                  H(l, Оё, b) = H (4) в—Ұ О c,4 (l, Оё, b) + c вҲ’ (4 + Пғ) +   Hi+ (l, Оё, b),


                                                                                                 iвҲҲB +

where for each i вҲҲ B + ,
                                            X                         2

                      Hi+ (l, Оё, b) =                 li lj cos(Оёij ) + 3 li lj cos(Оёij ) bi + 3b2i


                                             jМё=i

                                            + (1 вҲ’ li2 )2 вҲ’ 3(1 вҲ’ li2 )bi + 3b2i ,


where Оёij denote the angle between Wi and Wj .

Proof. This follows from the same arguments in Theorem I.1.

Thus, the 4Пғ+ -gons are critical points of the TMS potential. However, we do not know whether
the 4Пғ+ -gons are minimally singular or not. In c = 6 case, we computed the directional Hessian at
4Пғ+ -gon for Пғ = 1, 2 along various directions. For directions we have analysed, the eigenvectors
of the Hessian with negative eigenvalues point in directions that escapes the set where the current
form of the local TMS potential applies. By counting the number of zero eigenvalues, we obtain
a list {6, 6.5, 7, 7.5} of upper bounds for the local learning coefficients for 42+ -gons, and a list of
{5, 5.5, 6, 6.5} of upper bounds of local learning coefficients for 4+ -gons.
Let B вҲ’ вҠӮ {1, 2, 3, 4} and B + вҠӮ {5, 6, В· В· В· , c}. Consider the 4Пғ+,П•вҲ’ -gon (Section 3.2) with coor-
dinate
                                           ПҖ                      ПҖ
              ОёвҲ— : Оё1 = Оё2 = Оё3 = , Оё4 + В· В· В· + Оёc =
                                           2                      2
              bвҲ— : for i = 1, 2, 3, 4, bi < 0 if i вҲҲ B вҲ’ and bi = 0 if i вҲҲ / BвҲ’,
                                                                         1
                                                          / B + and bj =
                     for j = 5, 6, В· В· В· , c, bj < 0 if j вҲҲ                 if j вҲҲ B + ;
                                                                         2c
              lвҲ— : for i = 1, 2, 3, 4, 0 < li2 < вҲ’bi if i вҲҲ B вҲ’ and li = 1 if i вҲҲ / BвҲ’,
                     for j = 5, 6, . . . , c, lj = 0.

Theorem J.4. For a fixed M, let H (4,вҲ’) denote the TMS potential in some neighbourhood of the
4П•вҲ’ -gon for c = 4 (Appendix J.1.2). Consider the projection
          О c,4 : (l1 , . . . , lc , Оё1 , . . . , ОёcвҲ’1 , b1 , . . . , bc ) 7вҶ’ (l1 , . . . , l4 , Оё1 , . . . , Оё3 , b1 , . . . , b4 ).
The TMS potential in the chamber described by M is
                                                                      X
                H(l, Оё, b) = H (4,вҲ’) в—Ұ О c,4 (l, Оё, b) + c вҲ’ (4 + Пғ) +   Hi+ (l, Оё, b),


                                                                                                   iвҲҲB +

where for each i вҲҲ B + ,
                                            X                         2

                      Hi+ (l, Оё, b) =                 li lj cos(Оёij ) + 3 li lj cos(Оёij ) bi + 3b2i


                                             jМё=i

                                            + (1 вҲ’ li2 )2 вҲ’ 3(1 вҲ’ li2 )bi + 3b2i ,


where Оёij denote the angle between Wi and Wj .

Proof. This follows from the same arguments in Theorem I.1.

Thus, the 4Пғ+,П•вҲ’ -gons are critical points of the TMS potential. However, we do not know whether
the 4Пғ+,П•вҲ’ -gons are minimally singular or not.
Remark J.1. For Пғ > 0, we do not have a precise value for the local learning coefficient. In
Appendix K, we provide estimation of local learning coefficients for 4Пғ+,П•вҲ’ -gons.



                                                                     59
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure K.1: Loss trace plots for samples used for О»МӮ produced via SGLD sampling. The left plot show
SGLD chains that are all вҖңhealthyвҖқ and the right plot shows a trajectory that escapes the phase of the
initialising critical point (loss indicated by red horizontal line) to another phase with lower loss. To
obtain the estimates О»МӮ listed in Table K.1, such unhealthy chains are removed from consideration.


K    D ETAILS OF LOCAL LEARNING COEFFICIENT ESTIMATION
In this section, we discuss technical details and caveats about the values of the local learning coeffi-
cient estimates О»МӮ given throughout the paper. It was claimed in Lau et al. (2023) that the О»МӮ algorithm
is valid for comparing or ordering critical points by their level of degeneracy. Obtaining the correct
local learning coefficient can prove challenging. For TMS, we find that

       вҖў The ordering of О»МӮ for different critical points lines up with the theoretical prediction.
       вҖў For critical points with low loss such as 6, 5 and 5+ -gon depicted in Figure A.2, the О»МӮ
         values are close to theoretically derived values.
       вҖў However, for critical points with higher loss, mis-configured SGLD step size used in the
         algorithm can causing the sample path itself to undergo a phase transition to a lower loss
         state. See the diagnostic trace plot on the right of Figure K.1 for an example where SGLD
         trajectory drop to a different phase. This is the reason for negative О»МӮ values shown in Figure
         3, in which we opted to use a uniform set of SGLD hyperparameters since we cannot a
         priori predict which critical point an SGD trajectory will visit.
       вҖў Lowering SGLD step size can ameliorate this issue, at the cost of increasing the required
         number of sampling steps needed.

Table K.1 shows a set of О»МӮ values computed using bespoke SGLD step size (explained below) for
each group of 3 critical points with similar loss (again c.f. Figure A.2. Specifically, we take the
dataset size n = 5000, and SGLD hyperparameters Оі = 0.1, number of steps = 10000.
Furthermore, for each critical point, we run 10 independent SGLD chains and discard any chain
where more than 5% of the samples have loss values that are lower than the critical point itself. The
О»МӮ estimate and the standard deviation are then calculated from the remaining chains. The SGLD
step size is manually chosen so that the majority of chains in each group passes the test above.


                                                   60
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       Critical point   Estimated О»МӮ (std)   SGLD step size
                        вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’
                       4                  0.000 (0.00)         0.0000005
                        +вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’
                       4                  0.540 (0.16)         0.0000005
                        ++вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’
                       4                  0.998 (0.54)         0.0000005
                        вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’
                       4                  1.024 (0.74)         0.000001
                        +вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’
                       4                  1.619 (0.89)         0.000001
                        ++вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’
                       4                  1.899 (0.76)         0.000001
                        вҲ’вҲ’
                       4                  1.689 (0.88)         0.000001
                       4+вҲ’вҲ’               2.096 (1.00)         0.000001
                        ++вҲ’вҲ’
                       4                  2.597 (0.88)         0.000001
                        вҲ’
                       4                  2.991 (0.35)         0.000005
                        +вҲ’
                       4                  3.393 (0.65)         0.000005
                        ++вҲ’
                       4                  4.097 (0.65)         0.000005
                       4                  5.297 (0.04)          0.00001
                        +
                       4                  5.761 (1.53)          0.00001
                        ++
                       4                  6.203 (0.99)          0.00001
                       5                  7.705 (0.85)          0.00005
                       5+                 9.906 (1.27)          0.00005
                       6                  9.027 (0.59)          0.00005

Table K.1: О»МӮ for known critical points in r = 2, c = 6, their standard deviation across viable SGLD
chains and the SGLD step size used.


                                                61
