Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F EATURE ACCENTUATION : R EVEALING ’ WHAT ’ FEA -
TURES RESPOND TO IN NATURAL IMAGES

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review


Figure 1: Illustration of Feature Accentuation. We introduce a novel method for Feature Ac-
centuation, enhancing feature interpretability within images. Diverging from conventional feature
visualization approaches, Feature accentuation operates with image-seeded inputs enabling local
explanations. (Top) Our method can generate perturbations that accentuate a specific class or other
logits. (Bottom) More generally, we propose to accentuate neurons or direction to understand model
representations, (e.g. here, a knot neuron). Notably, this method operates without any auxiliary gen-
erative models or reliance on pretrained robust models and integrates with any pretrained classifier,
offering a novel interpretability method.

                                           A BSTRACT
         Efforts to decode neural network vision models necessitate a comprehensive grasp
         of both the spatial and semantic facets governing feature responses within images.
         Most research has primarily centered around attribution methods, which provide
         explanations in the form of heatmaps, showing where the model directs its atten-
         tion for a given feature. However, grasping where alone falls short, as numerous
         studies have highlighted the limitations of those methods and the necessity to un-
         derstand what the model has recognized at the focal point of its attention. In par-
         allel, Feature visualization offers another avenue for interpreting neural network
         features. This approach synthesizes an optimal image through gradient ascent,
         providing clearer insights into what features respond to. However, feature visual-
         izations only provide one global explanation per feature; they do not explain why
         features activate for particular images. In this work, we introduce a new method to
         the interpretability tool-kit, feature accentuation, which is capable of conveying
         both where and what in arbitrary input images induces a feature’s response. At its
         core, feature accentuation is image-seeded (rather than noise-seeded) feature vi-
         sualization. We find a particular combination of parameterization, augmentation,
         and regularization yields naturalistic visualizations that resemble the seed image
         and target feature simultaneously. Furthermore, we validate these accentuations
         are processed along a natural circuit by the model. We make our precise imple-
         mentation of Feature accentuation available to the community as the Faccent
         library, an extension of Lucent (Kiat, 2020).


                                                 1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


1   I NTRODUCTION
Deciphering the decisions made by modern neural networks presents a significant ongoing chal-
lenge. As the realm of machine learning applications continues to expand, there is an increasing
demand for robust and dependable methods to explain model decisions Doshi-Velez & Kim (2017);
Jacovi et al. (2021). Recent European regulations, such as the General Data Protection Regula-
tion (GDPR) Kaminski (2021) and the European AI Act Kop (2021), underscore the importance of
assessing explainable decisions, especially those derived from algorithms.
In the domain of vision models, a variety of explainability methods have already been proposed
in the literature (Simonyan et al., 2013; Selvaraju et al., 2017c; Smilkov et al., 2017; Sundararajan
et al., 2017; Shrikumar et al., 2017; Zeiler & Fergus, 2014a;b; Springenberg et al., 2014a; Nguyen
et al., 2015; Olah et al., 2017; Fel et al., 2021; Novello et al., 2022). One prominent category of
these methods, known as attribution, generates heatmaps that highlight significant image regions in
influencing a model’s decision. The heatmap can be at the level of individual pixels based on their
gradients (Simonyan et al., 2013; Bach et al., 2015; Baehrens et al., 2010; Smilkov et al., 2017; Sun-
dararajan et al., 2017; Zeiler & Fergus, 2014b; Springenberg et al., 2014b; Srinivas & Fleuret, 2019;
Yang et al., 2020; Montavon et al., 2017), or a coarse-grained map based on intermediate network
activations/gradients (Zhou et al., 2016; Selvaraju et al., 2017b; Chattopadhay et al., 2018; Bae et al.,
2020; Zhou et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2020; desai & Ramaswamy, 2020; Fu et al.; Kim et al., 2021) or
input perturbations (Fel et al., 2021; Novello et al., 2022; Fong & Vedaldi, 2017; Zintgraf et al., 2017;
Petsiuk et al., 2018; Fel et al., 2023b; Ribeiro et al., 2016; Lundberg & Lee, 2017), or even a com-
bination of fine-grained and coarse-grained attribution (Selvaraju et al., 2017b; Rebuffi et al., 2020).

These methods have a wide range of appli-
cations, including improving decision-making,
debugging, and instilling confidence in model
outputs. However, they have notable limitations
and drawbacks, as highlighted in several arti-
cles (Kindermans et al., 2019; Adebayo et al.,
2018a; Slack et al., 2020; Ghalebikesabi et al.,
2021; Fel et al., 2023c; Kim et al., 2022; Hase
& Bansal, 2020; Nguyen et al., 2021; Shen &
Huang, 2020; Sixt et al., 2022). These issues
range from the problem of confirmation bias –
just because an explanation makes sense to a
human doesn’t necessarily mean it reflects the
inner workings of a model – to the more sig-
nificant limitation of these methods – they re-
veal where the model is looking but not what
it has observed. As a result, the research com-
munity is actively exploring new techniques for
conveying the what aspect of model behavior.
In response to these challenges, feature vi-
sualizations emerge as a compelling solution. Figure 2: An iguana excites several class logits
They create images that strongly activate spe- in InceptionV1, but what about the image excites
cific neurons or neuron groups (Szegedy et al., each logit? Attribution maps highlight important
2013; Nguyen et al., 2015; Olah et al., 2017; regions of the image, but not what each logit sees
Ghiasi et al., 2021; 2022). The simplest feature in the region. Feature visualizations yield an ex-
visualization method involves a gradient ascent emplar for each logit, but these are hard to relate
process to find an image that maximizes neu- to the iguana image. Feature accentuation (ours)
ron activation. However, this process can pro- constitutes a powerful intermediary, transforming
duce noisy images, often considered adversar- the iguana into a local exemplar for each class.
ial, without some form of control. To address
this issue, various regularization techniques (Olah et al., 2017; Mahendran & Vedaldi, 2015; Nguyen
et al., 2015; Tyka; Audun) and data augmentations (Olah et al., 2017; Tsipras et al., 2018; Santurkar
et al., 2019; Engstrom et al., 2019; Nguyen et al., 2016b; Mordvintsev et al., 2015) have been pro-
posed, along with the use of generative models (Wei et al., 2015; Nguyen et al., 2016a; 2017).
Despite the promise of these methods, recent research has pointed out their limitations and potential
pitfalls (Zimmermann et al., 2021; Geirhos et al., 2023). It is argued feature visualizations may be


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


misleading, as they can trigger intermediate network features that differ significantly from natural
images; i.e. they produce neuron activation by way of a different circuit. Additionally, a given neu-
ron may return high activation for a broad range of images, many of which cannot be easily related
to the exemplars generated with feature visualization. In many practical settings, it is necessary to
explain why a neuron responds to some particular natural image, such as an image that is misclas-
sified. Thus in practice attribution methods see far more use than feature visualizations, given they
provide image conditional explanations.
A final family of techniques that could serve to explain these difficult edge cases are visual counter-
factual explanations (VCEs) (Goyal et al., 2019; Poyiadzi et al., 2020; Verma et al., 2020). VCEs
attempt to specify an image x′ close to x that explains ’how would x need to change for the model
to consider it an instance of class y?’ Contemporary VCE methods utilize variations of image-
seeded (rather than noise-seeded) feature visualization, thus could potentially be used to explain
what excites a feature in a particular natural image. However, visually compelling VCEs have only
been synthesized in this way using either adversarially trained models (Boreiko et al., 2022; Gaziv
et al., 2023; Madry et al., 2018) or by optimizing under the guidance of an auxiliary generative
model (Augustin et al., 2022). Thus far in the literature, image-seeded feature visualizations of
non-robust models under self-guidance yield one of two results, neither of which constitute a use-
ful explanation. 1) When optimization is unconstrained, unnatural hallucinations appear across the
entire image, similar to those popularized by deepdream (Mordvintsev et al., 2015). 2) When the
optimization is constrained to remain close to the seed image, the synthesized image does not change
in a perceptually salient way, as with classic adversarial attacks (Szegedy et al., 2013; Goodfellow
et al., 2014; Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2016; Akhtar & Mian, 2018).
In the present work we introduce Feature Accentuation, a novel implementation of image-seeded
feature visualization that does not require robust/auxiliary models. Feature accentuation can provide
diverse explanations across both neurons and the images that activate them. Specifically, in this
article:
        • We formally introduce Feature Accentuation, a new post-hoc explainability method that
          reveals both where and what in natural images induces neuron activation.
       • We show for the first time that high quality VCEs can be generated for non-robust models
         with image parameterization, augmentation, and regularization alone, without the use of an
         auxilary generative model.
       • We show that feature accentuations drive neurons through the same circuits as natural im-
         ages, which is not true of conventional feature visualizations. In fact, feature accentuations
         follow a class logit’s prototypical circuit more closely than natural images do!
       • We demonstrate the diverse range of applications feature accentuation facilitates.
       • We release the open-source Faccent Library, an extension of the Lucent (Kiat, 2020) feature
         visualization library for generating naturalistic accentuations.

2   M ETHODS
Notation. Throughout, we consider a general supervised learning setting, with an input space
X ⊆ Rh×w , an output space Y ⊆ Rc and a classifier f : X → Y that maps inputs x ∈ X to a
prediction y ∈ Y. Without loss of generality, we assume that f admits a series of L intermediate
spaces Aℓ ⊆ Rpℓ , 1 < ℓ < L. In this setup, fℓ : X → Aℓ maps an input to an intermeditate
activation a = (a1 , ..., apℓ )T ∈ Aℓ of f . We respectively denote F and F −1 the 2-D Discrete
Fourier Transform (DFT) on X and its inverse. In this article, a feature denotes a vector in a feature
space v ∈ Aℓ and its associated feature detector function is denoted as fv (x) = fℓ (x) · v. Finaly,
|| · || denotes the ℓ2 norm over the input and activation space.
Feature Visualization. Activation maximization attempts to identify some prototypı̂cal input
x∗ = arg maxx fv (x) for any arbitrary feature detector function fv of interest (e.g. a channel
or a logit of a convolutional neural network). To generate meaningful images, as opposed to noisy
ones, a variety of techniques are typically employed, including some that we will also adopt in
our approach. First and foremost, the choice of image parametrization plays a critical role, which
is typically not pixel space but the frequency domain Z ⊆ Ch×w , which give us x = F −1 (z).
This parameterization affords precise control over the image’s frequency components, facilitating
the removal of adversarial high-frequencies. Additionally, this re-parametrization has the effect of

                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


modifying the basins of attraction during optimization, yielding images that exhibit a more natural
appearance. A second commonly employed strategy is the application of transformations at each
gradient step to enhance image robustness. Noise injection or localized image optimization through
cropping are frequently employed in this context. Formally, we denote T as the set of possible
transformations, and τ ∼ T represents a transformation applied to x such that τ (x) ∈ X . Putting
everything together, for a feature detector fv , we associate the optimal feature visualization z ∗ :
                       z ∗ = arg max L(z) with L(z) ≜ (fv ◦ τ ◦ F −1 )(z)
                             z∈Ch×w
However, this feature visualization method presents several challenges: it lacks image specificity
and therefore fails to provide local explanations (for a given point). Most of the time, it converges to
a perceptually similar optima, providing only one visual explanation of the feature detector. Finally,
as we will explore in the Section 3, Geirhos et al. (2023) observe that the generated images follow
circuits which are very different from the circuits followed by natural images, thus raising questions
about the validity of the explanations. We address these issues by introducing Feature accentuation.
2.1 F EATURE ACCENTUATION
We begin by adapting feature visualization through seeding, i.e., initializing this process at z0 =
F −1 (x0 ), where x0 represents the natural image under investigation. In addition to introducing
diversity into the explanations – each image will have a really different accentuation, even for
similar neuron maximization – this approach allows us to commence from a non-OOD (Out-Of-
Distribution) starting point. However, there is no guarantee that during the optimization process the
image will remain natural or be perceived as such by the model. Additionally, if one desires a local
explanation of fv (x0 ), it is possible the synthesized image is processed differently by the model
than the seed image. To address these concerns, we will augment the loss function with a regular-
izer that encourages intermediate activation to be closer to the original one. Formally, we introduce
Feature accentuation loss:
Definition 2.1 (Feature accentuation) The feature accentuation results from optimizing the origi-
nal image x0 such that:                            maintain proximity to the transformed original image
                                                  z                         }|                         {
              ∗                          −1
            z = arg max (fv ◦ τ ◦ F )(z) − λ||(fℓ ◦ τ ◦ F −1 )(z) − (fℓ ◦ τ )(x0 )||
                   z∈Ch×w |          {z       }
                           maximize feature activation

In various image manipulation applications, the regularization term is often defined in terms of pixel
space distance (Santurkar et al., 2019; Augustin et al., 2020; Boreiko et al., 2022). However, for our
specific application, our concern is not the pixel space distance per se, but rather ensuring that the
synthesized image is processed in a manner similar to the seed image by the model. Consequently,
we explore the implications of regularizing based on distances measured in the latent layers of
the model. Here, we draw inspiration from previous work on ”feature inversion” (Mahendran &
Vedaldi, 2015; Olah et al., 2017), in which an image is synthesized to possess the same latent vector
as a target image. The choice of the layer for feature inversion significantly impacts the perceptual
similarity between the synthesized image and the target. Earlier layers tend to produce synthesized
images that are more perceptually similar, as these layers share more mutual information with the
pixel input. Conversely, using later layers introduces differences in the synthesized image to which
the higher-order representations are invariant. We note that a distinctive feature of our approach
compared to previous works is that we apply the same augmentation τ to both the target x0 and the
accentuated image F −1 (z) at each iteration, ensuring a robust alignment with the original image.
Figure 3 illustrates the impact of λ on the feature accentuation process. A smaller value of λ permits
substantial alterations across the entirety of the image. In contrast, a larger λ leads to accentuation
that closely resembles the seed image. The choice of the layer for measuring distance also exerts
an influence on the outcome. Traditional pixel space regularization tends to produce subtle, low-
amplitude patterns distributed across the entire image. Conversely, regularization in the latent space
of the model both constrains and enhances the accentuation to critical regions.
We find that applying regularization in the early layers of the model yields comparable and desirable
outcomes, whereas regularization in later layers leads to distortions resembling those observed in
prior work on feature inversion.
Now that we have established the fundamentals of our approach, the subsequent sections will explore
two additional ingredients that make Feature accentuation shine; the image parametrization and
augmentations.


                                                         4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 3: (Top) Influence of Regularization Strength (λ). With no regularization accentuations
significantly deviate from the original image, while excessive regularization prevents meaningful
alterations to the image. (Bottom) Influence of Regularization Layer (fℓ ) – from pixel space (X )
to a deep layer of InceptionV1 (mixed5). Regularization in pixel space does not enable meaning-
ful image modifications, whereas regularization in excessively deep layers produces hallucinations.
Intermediate regularization accentuates existing image details that drive the logit without injecting
new features across the entire image.
2.2   T HE P ROPER PARAMETERIZATION


Figure 4: Effect of image parameterization. Modern parameterizations such as Fourier and MACO
method enable a more effective management of high frequencies, thereby generating meaningful
perturbations. For the remainder of this article, we choose the Fourier parameterization for the
InceptionV1 model, although MACO can also be employed, albeit with greater constraints and
suitability for deeper models.
We proceed with an examination of the quality of the images generated by Feature accentuation em-
ploying distinct image parameterizations. Our experimentation centers on the InceptionV1 network,
which is well-established in the feature visualization literature. In this evaluation, we contrast three
parameterizations of increasing complexity: pixel, Fourier (Olah et al., 2017; Mordvintsev et al.,
2018), and MACO, introduced in Fel et al. (2023a).
The Fourier parameterization (Mordvintsev et al., 2018; Olah et al., 2017) is a well-recognized se-
lection for feature visualization. It employs weight factors w to emphasize low frequencies and mit-
igate the optimization of high-frequency (adversarial) noise. This parameterization can be expressed
as x = F −1 (z ⊙ w), where ⊙ denotes the Hadamard product. The MACO parameterization, akin to
Fourier, operates by representing the image in frequency domain, but in polar form z = reiφ , thus
allowing optimizing only the phase, φ, while preserving the fixed magnitude spectrum to avoid in-
troducing frequencies absent in natural images. This strict constraint on high frequencies contributes
to the generation of more natural images, particularly in deep models. In the original work, r was
set to match the average magnitude spectrum of the ImageNet training set (Deng et al., 2009). How-
ever, when applying MACO to feature accentuation, we initialize optimization with a target image
x0 , thereby constraining r to the magnitude spectrum of x0 and varying it for each image. Figure 4
presents an example of feature accentuation using the three different parameterizations. Notably, we


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


observe that the pixel parameterization tends to optimize for adversarial noise, as previously noted in
the literature. In contrast, the alternative Fourier and MACO parameterizations introduce perceptible
and semantically meaningful changes to the image. However, we find that the MACO parameteriza-
tion produces slightly noisier and lower contrast visualizations; we believe in this context MACO is
over-constrained. We will therefore use the Fourier parameterization for the rest of the article (see
Appendix for more results).

2.3   T HE APPROPRIATE AUGMENTATION


Figure 5: The effect of random crop augmentations. Square brackets indicate the [minimum,
maximum] permissible dimensions (in %) for the bounding box crop. Smaller crops add definition
to the image, but when only small crops are applied tiny hallucinations appear. We find applying the
full range of crops each batch to produce balanced results.

Fel et al. (2023a) show that random cropping with gaussian and uniform noise are a simple yet
effective set of augmentations for feature visualizations. Where the MACO crop augmentations were
sampled with a center bias in the original work, we sample uniformly for feature accentuations.
We apply 16 random transformations every iteration, averaging L over this batch. We find that
incorporating smaller box crops into this augmentation scheme improves the definition of feature
accentuations, as can be seen in Figure 5.
2.4   A DDING SPATIAL ATTRIBUTION


Figure 6: Accentuating unrelated features in images can lead to significant changes. Accen-
tuations of the most inhibited logits for the iguana image. While the model doesn’t associate any
’schoolbus-like’ features with the iguana, an observer might mistakenly think otherwise due to the
result of feature accentuation. To address this, we suggest incorporating spatial attribution in Section
2.4 as the final ingredient for Feature accentuation.

We have demonstrated that a combination of regularization, parameterization, and augmentation
techniques can produce naturalistic enhancements of image features, which exhibit similarities to
both the original seed image and the target feature. However, let us revisit the primary objective of
our methodology: feature accentuations should elucidate what a feature responds to ”within the seed
image.” What conclusions might one draw from accentuations in this regard? Intuitively, Feature
accentuation maximizes activation by exaggerating important areas of the seed image. Thus, one
might conclude the feature is present in the seed image in precisely those areas that undergo change.
Afterall, we have seen that with the correct implementation presumably unimportant regions of the
image, such as the background, experience minimal perceptual changes when accentuated. How-
ever, it is crucial to observe that an image already exemplifying the target feature will also undergo
no changes when accentuated, since it already represents a local optimum. Conversely, images un-
related to the target feature exhibit substantial changes upon accentuation. For instance, Figure 6


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


illustrates accentuations of the logits most inhibited by the iguana image. Notably, the model does
not associate any ”schoolbus-like” attributes with the iguana, but an observer might erroneously
interpret otherwise based on the corresponding feature accentuation. In light of this consideration,
we propose that the final component of Feature accentuation should encompass spatial attribution,
thereby reintroducing where into the what.
As discussed in Section 1, numerous attribution methods have been in-
troduced in the literature. In this article, we maintain a general perspec-
tive, not favoring any specific algorithm. However, for an attribution
map—computed by any means—to align effectively with the objectives
of feature accentuation, we propose a straightforward modification.
In the typical scenario, an attribution map is represented as a function
φ(fv , x) ⊆ Rh×w , where the values in the attribution map φ(fv , x)
delineate significant spatial regions in x that influence the activation pro-
duced by the feature detector. Visualizing an attribution as a heatmap
necessitates normalization. Typically, normalization occurs with respect
to the values in a single attribution map, rendering the intensity entirely
contingent on the variance of φ(fv , x). As a result, an image containing
prominent features, such as bananas distributed extensively, might un-
dergo normalization that diminishes the impact of these features, lead-
ing to an explanation that does not effectively capture their significance.
Conversely, an image devoid of such features may experience a normal-
ization process that artificially amplifies any minor attributes present.
Consequently, both images can end up with similar explanations, despite
substantial differences in their content and the features of interest (as
shown in Figure 7).
To mitigate this issue and improve the fidelity of feature representations, Figure 7: We introduce a
we propose a “collective” normalization approach, which leverages the normalization across im-
attribution values derived from a comprehensive set of natural images. ages to provide a sensi-
This approach enables a more accurate assessment of feature relevance ble mask for Feature ac-
across diverse contexts, allowing for a finer-grained distinction between centuation.
images with disparate feature compositions. Subsequently, these result-
ing maps can serve as opacity masks for the feature accentuation applied
to the image. As illustrated in Figure 7, this normalization approach enables the possibility that an
image may activate a feature throughout its entirety or not at all.

3    E XPERIMENTS
Circuit Coherence Assessment Feature accentuationproduces perceptually meaningful transfor-
mations, but if they are to constitute good explanations of a model’s responses, it’s important we
validate they are processed by the model in a natural way. To assess this, we adopt an approach
introduced in Geirhos et al. (2023), which measures the degree to which the paths (intermediate
activations) taken by the images align with natural images of the studied class. Formally, to quantify
this concept of “circuit similarity” between two images, xi and xj , we measure the pearson corre-
lation of their hidden vectors, ρ(aℓ,i , aℓ,j ), and average across pairs of images, across all layers ℓ of
the network. As depicted in Figure 8 (A), conventional feature visualization methods perform inad-
equately in this regard. Specifically, it has been demonstrated that for natural images of a class and
his associated feature visualizations, there exists a low correlation across most layers of the network
when compared to the correlation observed among natural images themselves. In contrast, Feature
accentuation capitalizes on its image-seeded approach and regularization techniques to maintain a
notably high level of naturalness in its internal pathways. It even achieves a super-natural score, sig-
nifying a superior inter-correlation with natural images than the correlation observed among natural
images themselves.
Effect of λ. Based on these findings, it is pertinent to investigate the behavior of the pathway in
function of the introduced regularization parameter, λ. Figure 8 (B) illustrates the effect of vary-
ing λ on the naturalness of the pathway. Naturally, we observe that strong regularization compels
the image path to remain close to the natural images, resulting in excellent scores for early layers
but deteriorating scores in later layers. Conversely, moderate regularization allows us to maintain
significantly higher scores compared to unregularized optimization, suggesting the existence of an


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 8: Path similarity of Feature Accentuations. A. We measure path similarity (correlation) of
accentuations and natural images, as compared to the similarity of other synthesized/natural images.
Unlike traditional feature visualization, Feature accentuation for a class follow an internal path
that is similar to natural images of that class, and even closer on average to natural images than the
natural images themselves, hence the term “supernatural images” B. We observe the impact of λ on
this measure, and C. how the path similarity to the seed image is influenced by λ. A high λ value
brings Feature accentuation closer to the original image, while a λ value of zero results in deviation
from naturalistic images towards something resembling feature visualization. This reveals a “sweet
spot” for λ in achieving supernatural images

optimal λ value. Furthermore, in Figure 8 (C), we examine the correlation between the optimized
image and, instead of the distribution of natural images, the seed image. As anticipated, a higher λ
corresponds to a higher correlation. It is noteworthy that, to achieve a strong score in class similarity,
Feature accentuation does not necessarily adhere faithfully to the input image. Instead, it employs
pathways that exist in other images.
Misclassifications Understanding why a model misclassifies inputs is one of the primary aims of
explainability research. Figure 9 demonstrates how exaggerating the predicted logit with Feature
accentuationcan assist in diagnosing misclassifications, helping the user see the same hallucination
as the model.


Figure 9: Feature accentuation enables understanding of failure cases by emphasizing incorrectly
predicted classes, allowing the human user to share in the model’s hallucination. For instance, the
top left example shows a barber shop misclassified as a truck due to the shop’s wrinkled curtain
being mistaken for a truck’s side, while the first example in the bottom row displays an archery
image classified as a chainsaw because the orange-tipped arrows resemble a the handle, and the gray
shafts resemble a saw blade.

Explaining Latent Features A comprehensive understanding of a neural network model must in-
clude its latent features in addition to its logits. However, explaining activations within the latent


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


space poses a greater challenge than explaining activations in the logit space due to the absence
of direct correspondence between latent features and predefined semantic labels. Typically, latent
features are probed using feature visualizations or dataset examples that elicit the highest activa-
tions. Feature accentuations present a novel approach for unveiling the multifaceted manifestations
of a specific latent feature within natural images. Similar to conventional feature visualizations,
this process can be executed with respect to individual neurons, channels, or even arbitrary feature
directions, such as those associated with conceptual dimensions as in (Fel et al., 2022).


Figure 10: Feature accentuation applied to latent channels can reveal the multitude of ways fea-
tures manifest within natural images. In contrast to conventional feature visualization, feature accen-
tuation allows us to amplify the presence of targeted features in real-world images, granting insights
into how they behave in the wild.

4   L IMITATIONS
We have demonstrated the generation of realistic feature accentuations for neural networks using an
improved feature visualization technique. However, it is essential to recognize that creating realistic
images does not automatically guarantee effective explanations of neural networks. Furthermore, to
gain informative insights into the model, especially in identifying spurious features, feature visual-
izations might need to produce images that deviate from the original input, potentially conflicting
with the proposed regularization. Previous research has also shed light on the limitations of feature
visualizations, as observed in well-regarded studies Borowski et al. (2020); Geirhos et al. (2023);
Zimmermann et al. (2021). A prominent critique concerns their limited interpretability for humans.
Research has shown that dataset examples are more effective than feature visualizations for compre-
hending CNNs. This limitation could arises from the lack of realism in feature visualizations and
their isolated application. We strongly advocate for the use of supplementary tools such as attribu-
tion maps and concept-based explanations alongside Feature Accentuation, to build a comprehensive
understanding of neural networks.

5 C ONCLUSION
Understanding why a model detects a particular feature in an image is a pivotal challenge for XAI. In
this article, we introduce Feature Accentuation, a tool designed to exaggerate features in an image to
aid our understanding. This results in meaningful and natural morphisms without resorting to GANs
or robust models, thereby ensuring that the explanations provided by Feature accentuation are
exclusively attributable to the scrutinized model. Our findings demonstrate that the generated images
(i) undergo processing akin to natural images, (ii) can help comprehension of model failure cases
and (iii) internal features. We anticipate that the utilization of Feature accentuation will pave the
way for enhanced XAI methodologies and better understanding of the internal representation of
discriminative vision models.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Julius Adebayo, Justin Gilmer, Michael Muelly, Ian Goodfellow, Moritz Hardt, and Been Kim.
  Sanity checks for saliency maps. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS),
  2018a.
Julius Adebayo, Justin Gilmer, Michael Muelly, Ian Goodfellow, Moritz Hardt, and Been Kim.
  Sanity checks for saliency maps. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018b.
Naveed Akhtar and Ajmal Mian. Threat of adversarial attacks on deep learning in computer vision:
  A survey. Ieee Access, 6:14410–14430, 2018.
M.    Øygard     Audun.             Visualizing     googlenet       classes.                 URL:
 https://www.auduno.com/2015/07/29/visualizing-googlenet-classes/, 2(3).
Maximilian Augustin, Alexander Meinke, and Matthias Hein. Adversarial robustness on in-and out-
 distribution improves explainability. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 228–245.
 Springer, 2020.
Maximilian Augustin, Valentyn Boreiko, Francesco Croce, and Matthias Hein. Diffusion visual
 counterfactual explanations. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:364–377,
 2022.
Sebastian Bach, Alexander Binder, Grégoire Montavon, Frederick Klauschen, Klaus-Robert Müller,
  and Wojciech Samek. On pixel-wise explanations for non-linear classifier decisions by layer-wise
  relevance propagation. Public Library of Science (PloS One), 2015.
Wonho Bae, Junhyug Noh, and Gunhee Kim. Rethinking class activation mapping for weakly
 supervised object localization. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference,
 Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part XV 16, pp. 618–634. Springer, 2020.
David Baehrens, Timon Schroeter, Stefan Harmeling, Motoaki Kawanabe, Katja Hansen, and Klaus-
  Robert Müller. How to explain individual classification decisions. The Journal of Machine Learn-
  ing Research, 11:1803–1831, 2010.
Valentyn Boreiko, Maximilian Augustin, Francesco Croce, Philipp Berens, and Matthias Hein.
  Sparse visual counterfactual explanations in image space. In DAGM German Conference on
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 133–148. Springer, 2022.
Judy Borowski, Roland S Zimmermann, Judith Schepers, Robert Geirhos, Thomas SA Wallis,
  Matthias Bethge, and Wieland Brendel. Exemplary natural images explain cnn activations better
  than state-of-the-art feature visualization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.12606, 2020.
Aditya Chattopadhay, Anirban Sarkar, Prantik Howlader, and Vineeth N Balasubramanian. Grad-
  cam++: Generalized gradient-based visual explanations for deep convolutional networks. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), 2018.
J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei. ImageNet: A Large-Scale Hierarchi-
   cal Image Database. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
   Recognition (CVPR), 2009.
saurabh desai and Harish Guruprasad Ramaswamy. Ablation-cam: Visual explanations for deep
  convolutional network via gradient-free localization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter
  Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), March 2020.
Finale Doshi-Velez and Been Kim. Towards a rigorous science of interpretable machine learning.
  ArXiv e-print, 2017.
Logan Engstrom, Andrew Ilyas, Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, Brandon Tran, and Alek-
  sander Madry. Adversarial robustness as a prior for learned representations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1906.00945, 2019.
Thomas Fel, Remi Cadene, Mathieu Chalvidal, Matthieu Cord, David Vigouroux, and Thomas
  Serre. Look at the variance! efficient black-box explanations with sobol-based sensitivity analy-
  sis. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Thomas Fel, Agustin Picard, Louis Bethune, Thibaut Boissin, David Vigouroux, Julien Colin, Rémi
  Cadène, and Thomas Serre. Craft: Concept recursive activation factorization for explainability.
  Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022.
Thomas Fel, Thibaut Boissin, Victor Boutin, Agustin Picard, Paul Novello, Julien Colin, Drew
  Linsley, Tom Rousseau, Rémi Cadène, Laurent Gardes, et al. Unlocking feature visualization
  for deeper networks with magnitude constrained optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.06805,
  2023a.
Thomas Fel, Mélanie Ducoffe, David Vigouroux, Rémi Cadène, Mikael Capelle, Claire Nicodème,
  and Thomas Serre. Don’t lie to me! robust and efficient explainability with verified perturbation
  analysis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
  tion, pp. 16153–16163, 2023b.
Thomas Fel, Agustin Picard, Louis Bethune, Thibaut Boissin, David Vigouroux, Julien Colin, Rémi
  Cadène, and Thomas Serre. Craft: Concept recursive activation factorization for explainability.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  2711–2721, 2023c.
Ruth C. Fong and Andrea Vedaldi. Interpretable explanations of black boxes by meaningful per-
  turbation. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV),
  2017.
Ruigang Fu, Qingyong Hu, Xiaohu Dong, Yulan Guo, Yinghui Gao, and Biao Li. Axiom-based
  grad-cam: Towards accurate visualization and explanation of cnns.
Guy Gaziv, Michael J Lee, and James J DiCarlo. Robustified anns reveal wormholes between human
  category percepts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.06887, 2023.
Robert Geirhos, Roland S. Zimmermann, Blair Bilodeau, Wieland Brendel, and Been Kim. Don’t
  trust your eyes: on the (un)reliability of feature visualizations, 2023.
Sahra Ghalebikesabi, Lucile Ter-Minassian, Karla DiazOrdaz, and Chris C Holmes. On locality of
  local explanation models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Amin Ghiasi, Hamid Kazemi, Steven Reich, Chen Zhu, Micah Goldblum, and Tom Goldstein. Plug-
 in inversion: Model-agnostic inversion for vision with data augmentations. 2021.
Amin Ghiasi, Hamid Kazemi, Eitan Borgnia, Steven Reich, Manli Shu, Micah Goldblum, An-
 drew Gordon Wilson, and Tom Goldstein. What do vision transformers learn? a visual explo-
 ration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06727, 2022.
Ian J Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial
  examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6572, 2014.
Yash Goyal, Ziyan Wu, Jan Ernst, Dhruv Batra, Devi Parikh, and Stefan Lee. Counterfactual visual
  explanations. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2376–2384. PMLR, 2019.
Peter Hase and Mohit Bansal. Evaluating explainable ai: Which algorithmic explanations help
  users predict model behavior? In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2020.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 770–778. IEEE, 2016. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.90. URL http://ieeexplore.ieee.
  org/document/7780459.
Forrest N. Iandola, Song Han, Matthew W. Moskewicz, Khalid Ashraf, William J. Dally, and Kurt
  Keutzer. Squeezenet: Alexnet-level accuracy with 50x fewer parameters and ¡0.5mb model size,
  2016.
Alon Jacovi, Ana Marasović, Tim Miller, and Yoav Goldberg. Formalizing trust in artificial intel-
  ligence: Prerequisites, causes and goals of human trust in ai. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM
  conference on fairness, accountability, and transparency, pp. 624–635, 2021.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Margot E Kaminski. The right to explanation, explained. In Research Handbook on Information
 Law and Governance. Edward Elgar Publishing, 2021.

Lim Swee Kiat. Lucent, 2020. https://github.com/greentfrapp/lucent.

Jae Myung Kim, Junsuk Choe, Zeynep Akata, and Seong Joon Oh. Keep calm and improve vi-
  sual feature attribution. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
  Vision, pp. 8350–8360, 2021.

Sunnie S. Y. Kim, Nicole Meister, Vikram V. Ramaswamy, Ruth Fong, and Olga Russakovsky.
  HIVE: Evaluating the human interpretability of visual explanations. In Proceedings of the IEEE
  European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2022.

Pieter-Jan Kindermans, Sara Hooker, Julius Adebayo, Maximilian Alber, Kristof T. Schütt, Sven
  Dähne, Dumitru Erhan, and Been Kim. The (Un)reliability of Saliency Methods, pp. 267–
  280. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2019. ISBN 978-3-030-28954-6. doi: 10.1007/
  978-3-030-28954-6 14. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-28954-6_
  14.

Mauritz Kop. Eu artificial intelligence act: The european approach to ai. In Stanford - Vienna
 Transatlantic Technology Law Forum, Transatlantic Antitrust and IPR Developments, Stanford
 University, Issue No. 2/2021. https://law.stanford.edu/publications/eu-artificial-intelligence-act-
 the-european-approach-to-ai/. Stanford-Vienna Transatlantic Technology Law Forum, Transat-
 lantic Antitrust . . . , 2021.

Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep con-
  volutional neural networks. Neural Information Processing Systems, 25, 01 2012. doi:
  10.1145/3065386.

Scott Lundberg and Su-In Lee. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 2017.

Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu.
  Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks. Proceedings of the International
  Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2018.

Aravindh Mahendran and Andrea Vedaldi. Understanding deep image representations by inverting
  them. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  5188–5196, 2015.

Grégoire Montavon, Sebastian Lapuschkin, Alexander Binder, Wojciech Samek, and Klaus-Robert
  Müller. Explaining nonlinear classification decisions with deep taylor decomposition. Pattern
  recognition, 65:211–222, 2017.

Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli, Alhussein Fawzi, and Pascal Frossard. Deepfool: a simple and
  accurate method to fool deep neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on com-
  puter vision and pattern recognition, pp. 2574–2582, 2016.

Alexander Mordvintsev, Christopher Olah, and Mike Tyka. Inceptionism: Going deeper into neural
  networks. 2015.

Alexander Mordvintsev, Nicola Pezzotti, Ludwig Schubert, and Chris Olah. Differentiable image
  parameterizations. Distill, 2018.

Anh Nguyen, Jason Yosinski, and Jeff Clune. Deep neural networks are easily fooled: High confi-
  dence predictions for unrecognizable images. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 427–436, 2015.

Anh Nguyen, Alexey Dosovitskiy, Jason Yosinski, Thomas Brox, and Jeff Clune. Synthesizing the
  preferred inputs for neurons in neural networks via deep generator networks. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 29, 2016a.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Anh Nguyen, Jason Yosinski, and Jeff Clune. Multifaceted feature visualization: Uncovering the
  different types of features learned by each neuron in deep neural networks. Visualization for Deep
  Learning workshop, Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
  2016b.
Anh Nguyen, Jeff Clune, Yoshua Bengio, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and Jason Yosinski. Plug & play
  generative networks: Conditional iterative generation of images in latent space. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 4467–4477, 2017.
Giang Nguyen, Daeyoung Kim, and Anh Nguyen. The effectiveness of feature attribution methods
  and its correlation with automatic evaluation scores. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Paul Novello, Thomas Fel, and David Vigouroux. Making sense of dependence: Efficient black-box
  explanations using dependence measure. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS), 2022.
Chris Olah, Alexander Mordvintsev, and Ludwig Schubert. Feature visualization. Distill, 2017.
Vitali Petsiuk, Abir Das, and Kate Saenko. Rise: Randomized input sampling for explanation of
  black-box models. In Proceedings of the British Machine Vision Conference (BMVC), 2018.
Rafael Poyiadzi, Kacper Sokol, Raul Santos-Rodriguez, Tijl De Bie, and Peter Flach. Face: feasible
  and actionable counterfactual explanations. In Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM Conference on AI,
  Ethics, and Society, pp. 344–350, 2020.
Sylvestre-Alvise Rebuffi, Ruth Fong, Xu Ji, and Andrea Vedaldi. There and back again: Revisiting
  backpropagation saliency methods. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2020.
Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. ”why should i trust you?”: Explaining
 the predictions of any classifier. In Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD), 2016.
Shibani Santurkar, Andrew Ilyas, Dimitris Tsipras, Logan Engstrom, Brandon Tran, and Aleksander
  Madry. Image synthesis with a single (robust) classifier. Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, 32, 2019.
Ramprasaath R Selvaraju, Michael Cogswell, Abhishek Das, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Devi Parikh,
  and Dhruv Batra. Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based local-
  ization. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 618–626,
  2017a.
Ramprasaath R. Selvaraju, Michael Cogswell, Abhishek Das, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Devi Parikh,
  and Dhruv Batra. Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based lo-
  calization. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV),
  2017b.
Ramprasaath R Selvaraju, Michael Cogswell, Abhishek Das, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Devi Parikh,
  and Dhruv Batra. Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based local-
  ization. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 618–626,
  2017c.
Hua Shen and Ting-Hao Huang. How useful are the machine-generated interpretations to general
  users? a human evaluation on guessing the incorrectly predicted labels. In Proceedings of the
  AAAI Conference on Human Computation and Crowdsourcing, volume 8, pp. 168–172, 2020.
Avanti Shrikumar, Peyton Greenside, and Anshul Kundaje. Learning important features through
  propagating activation differences. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine
  Learning (ICML), 2017.
Karen Simonyan, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisserman. Deep inside convolutional networks:
  Visualising image classification models and saliency maps. In Workshop, Proceedings of the
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2013.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Leon Sixt, Martin Schuessler, Oana-Iuliana Popescu, Philipp Weiß, and Tim Landgraf. Do users
  benefit from interpretable vision? a user study, baseline, and dataset. Proceedings of the Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022.
Dylan Slack, Sophie Hilgard, Emily Jia, Sameer Singh, and Himabindu Lakkaraju. Fooling lime
  and shap: Adversarial attacks on post hoc explanation methods. In Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM
  Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, pp. 180–186, 2020.
Daniel Smilkov, Nikhil Thorat, Been Kim, Fernanda Viégas, and Martin Wattenberg. Smoothgrad:
  removing noise by adding noise. In Workshop on Visualization for Deep Learning, Proceedings
  of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2017.
Jost Tobias Springenberg, Alexey Dosovitskiy, Thomas Brox, and Martin Riedmiller. Striving for
  simplicity: The all convolutional net. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6806, 2014a.
Jost Tobias Springenberg, Alexey Dosovitskiy, Thomas Brox, and Martin Riedmiller. Striving for
  simplicity: The all convolutional net. In Workshop Proceedings of the International Conference
  on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2014b.
Suraj Srinivas and François Fleuret. Full-gradient representation for neural network visualization.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Mukund Sundararajan, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi Yan. Axiomatic attribution for deep networks. In
 Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2017.
Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan, Ian Goodfellow,
  and Rob Fergus. Intriguing properties of neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6199, 2013.
Christian Szegedy, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, Pierre Sermanet, Scott Reed, Dragomir Anguelov, Du-
  mitru Erhan, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Andrew Rabinovich. Going deeper with convolutions. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1–9, 2015.
Dimitris Tsipras, Shibani Santurkar, Logan Engstrom, Alexander Turner, and Aleksander Madry.
  Robustness may be at odds with accuracy. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.12152, 2018.
Mike Tyka.   Class visualization with bilateral filters. 2016.         URL: https://mtyka. github.
 io/deepdream/2016/02/05/bilateral-class-vis. html, 2(3).
Sahil Verma, Varich Boonsanong, Minh Hoang, Keegan E Hines, John P Dickerson, and Chirag
  Shah. Counterfactual explanations and algorithmic recourses for machine learning: A review.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.10596, 2020.
Haofan Wang, Zifan Wang, Mengnan Du, Fan Yang, Zijian Zhang, Sirui Ding, Piotr Mardziel, and
  Xia Hu. Score-cam: Score-weighted visual explanations for convolutional neural networks. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition workshops,
  pp. 24–25, 2020.
Donglai Wei, Bolei Zhou, Antonio Torrabla, and William Freeman. Understanding intra-class
  knowledge inside cnn. arXiv preprint arXiv:1507.02379, 2015.
Yiding Yang, Jiayan Qiu, Mingli Song, Dacheng Tao, and Xinchao Wang. Learning propagation
  rules for attribution map generation. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Confer-
  ence, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part XX 16, pp. 672–688. Springer, 2020.
Matthew D Zeiler and Rob Fergus. Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks. In
 Proceedings of the IEEE European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2014a.
Matthew D Zeiler and Rob Fergus. Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks. In
 Proceedings of the IEEE European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2014b.
Bolei Zhou, Aditya Khosla, Agata Lapedriza, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. Learning deep
  features for discriminative localization. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 2921–2929, 2016.


                                                 14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Bolei Zhou, Yiyou Sun, David Bau, and Antonio Torralba. Interpretable basis decomposition for
  visual explanation. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV),
  September 2018.
Roland S Zimmermann, Judy Borowski, Robert Geirhos, Matthias Bethge, Thomas Wallis, and
  Wieland Brendel. How well do feature visualizations support causal understanding of cnn activa-
  tions? Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:11730–11744, 2021.
Luisa M Zintgraf, Taco S Cohen, Tameem Adel, and Max Welling. Visualizing deep neural network
  decisions: Prediction difference analysis. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), 2017.


                                               15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                A PPENDIX FOR F EATURE ACCENTUATION


                        Figure 11: Additional Class-wise accentuations


                                             16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    PATH EXPERIMENT DETAILS
                                              For each of the 5 λs tested (0,.1,.2,.5,10) we generated
                                              1751 accentuations, corresponding to all the correctly
                                              predicted images across 50 random classes in the Im-
                                              agenet (Deng et al., 2009) validation set. We accen-
                                              tuated each image toward its class label for 100 opti-
                                              mization steps using the Adam optimizer, with a .05
                                              learning rate. We used 16 augmentations each opti-
                                              mizition step, cropping with a maximum box size of
                                              .99, and a minimum box size of .05. As an additional
                                              augmentation we add gaussian and uniform noise with
                                              σ = .02 (given initial images normalized to the range
                                              [0,1]) each iteration. We regularized through layer
                                              mixed3a, but note that the optimal regularization layer
                                              seems to interact with the layer of fv . Besides this
                                              and λ, we observe the above hyperparameters produce
                                              quality accentuations in the general case (see section
                                              G).
                                              Within a given class, we get the average pair-wise cor-
                                              relation for each natural image, and similarly the av-
                                              erage correlation of each accentuation to the natural
                                              images (excluding the correlations between accentu-
                                              ations and their natural image pair, which would be
                                              trivially high). The curves depicted in Figure 8 are a
                                              spline interpolation (degree 2), across the underlying
                                              data-points (class-wise average correlations) averaged
                                              into 10 bins. We took this approach so as to convey the
                                              raw data and the general trend simultaneously. A dif-
                                              ficulty with plotting this data stems from the fact that
Figure 12: A. The path similarity of fea-     there is a large amount of variance in the correlation
ture accentuations to natural images, nor-    measure across nearby layers of different architectural
malized such that the zero-line corresponds   type. We can filter out this variance in Figure 8.a and
to the path similarity of natural images to   isolate the effect we are interested in by plotting the
themselves. Banded region corresponds         difference between the correlation measure for accen-
to the +/-1 standard deviation across 50      tuations and natural images in each layer. This version
classes tested. B. Small effect of regular-   of the plot can be seen in Figure 12.a. It requires no
ization layer on path coherence.)             smoothing, but does not convey the absolute magni-
                                              tude of the correlation across layers.
                                                In addition to our experiments with λ, we tested the
effect of regularization layer on the class-wise path similarity metric. We found only a small ef-
fect, with the earliest and latest layers tested (conv2d0 and mixed5a) performing slightly worse, in
agreement with our qualitative evaluation of the corresponding accentuations.
Figure 13 shows a random sample of our super-natural accentuations. These images are processed
by way of hidden vectors that better correlate with those for natural class images than the natural
images correlate with themselves.


                                                 17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 13: A sample of ’super-natural’ class images, which follow a prototypical path through the
model (see section 3).


                                               18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B    MASKING

Here we will briefly expound upon our normalized attribution method, put forward in section 2.4.
For a data sample X we consider a set of attribution maps {φ(fv , x)} | x ∈ X}. Let v represent
the flattened, ordered vector of every scalar attribution in this set. We can then choose a percentile
range (p1 , p2 ), such that values outside the range are fully masked/fully visible in the upsampled
mask, and values in between are partially masked. We can then normalize every element, u, of a
particular attribution map, φ(fv , x), by;
                                     
                                     0
                                                         if u ≤ P (v, p1 )
                                         u−P (v,p1 )
                 N (u; v, p1 , p2 ) = P (v,p2 )−P (v,p1 )
                                                          if P (v, p1 ) < u < P (v, p2 )          (1)
                                     
                                     1                   if u ≥ P (v, p2 )

By setting p1 , the user can control how globally salient a region must be before it constitutes a partial
expression of the feature and can be unmasked. Conversely, by setting p2 , the user determines the
percentile past which a feature is ’fully expressed’, and fully unmasked. As previously stated, this
approach is agnostic to the attribution method used; for example we applied this normalization
approach to gradCAM (Selvaraju et al., 2017a) attribution maps to generate the masks for Figure 9,
but simply used the features activation map itself as our attribution for latent accents in Figure 10,
as convolutional layers are already spatialized.

C    A NOTE ON L EARNING R ATE
We observe learning rate that works for noise-seeded
feature visualizations may be too large for feature
accentuation, causing the visualization to deviate
drastically from the target image in the the initial
steps and never make it back. A smaller learning
rate keeps the visualization perceptually similar to
the seed image.

D  A DDITIONAL
EXAMPLES FOR H YPERPARAMETERS

In the interest of conserving space, we initially uti-
lized a single example image to illustrate the im-
pact of manipulating hyperparameters that we con-
sider pivotal for Feature accentuation. However, to
bolster our demonstration, we present here a series Figure 14: feature visualizations and accen-
of supplementary examples drawn from our com- tuations for ’hummingbird’ at two learning
prehensive testing dataset, aimed at showcasing the rates.
consistent and robust nature of the described effects
across various instances. We deliberately choose to
show some examples multiples times, so the reader
can get a sense for how images change along multi-
ple hyperparameter axes.

Parametrization. The Fourier and MACO parametrization, while undoubtedly more intricate,
emerge as good contenders in generating meaningful perturbations. On the other hand, the Pixel
parametrization method, while comparatively simpler in its approach, easily introduce adversarial
pattern. The seemingly basic alterations to pixel values can yield strikingly impactful results on
latent representation, akin to the subtleties found in adversarial perturbations.

Augmentation. With small crop augmentations, the regularizer and feature detector are essentially
zooming in and making local edits to the image. Unsurprisely, this yields crisper accentuations.
However, small crops can also lead to miniature hallucinatory features scattered throughout the
accentuation, especially problematic given we seek explanations for the original, uncropped image.


                                                   19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                Figure 15: Additional example for our set of image parametrization.


Supplying a uniform mixture of crops each optimization step (as in the fourth column of Figure 16)
seems to regularize against these hallucinations.


                      Figure 16: Additional cropping augmentation examples


Regularization. One of the major hyperparameter influencing our optimization process is λ which
serves as a regularizer. It plays a vital role in striking a balance between accentuation and preserva-
tion of the original data characteristics. More examples are shown confirming that a lower λ value


                                                  20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Figure 17: Additional regularization lambda examples


                       Figure 18: Additional regularization layer examples


can result in more pronounced accentuations, while a higher value tends to maintain the fidelity
of the input data. We find the influence of λ interacts with some other hyperparameters discussed
here, namely the regularization layer and image parameterization. Given this, to facilitate a fair
comparison between different parameterizations/regularization layers we generated accentuations at
λ = 0.05, .1, .5, 1, 5, 10 for each, then chose the most natural looking image.


                                               21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 19: The effects of gaussian and uniform pixel noise as part of the augmentations τ , given
noise with different standard deviations σ.

Effect of the Layer Examining the impact of layer selection within our neural network architec-
ture, we provide additional examples showing the effect of this hyperparameter on Feature accentu-
ation.
The choice of the layer has a notable influence on the perturbation: different layers within our neural
network exhibit distinct tendencies in accentuating specific features or patterns within the input data.
Early layer tends to preserve pixel information while latter seems to allow greater perturbation but
preserve semantic (and often class) information.

Noise To increase robustness of feature visualizations, Fel et al. (2023a) uses the addition of gaus-
sian and uniform pixel noise as part of their augmentation scheme. The effects of such noise can be
seen in Fig 22. We find that feature accentuations work well with no noise, thus we left this augmen-
tation for the appendix. We find that when used in conjuction with or approach to regularization,
adding noise tends to focus the areas in which feature accentuation augments the image. When a
large amount of noise is applied the regularization term fully dominates and no perceptible changes
are made to the image.

E    R ANDOMIZATION S ANITY C HECK
Adebayo et al. (2018b) suggest a sanity check that any good explainability method should pass; an
explanation for logit y of image x should perceptibly change when the network weights are random-
ized. This is because the function that returns y from x, f (x) = y, is very different after weight
randomization, thus it should require a different explanation. The authors show several attribution
techniques fail this sanity check, here we check how feature accentuation fairs. Figure 20 shows
feature accentuations under ’cascading randomization’, where an increasing number of layers are
randomization from top to bottom. We use the same ’junco’ image used in the intial work, but
also accentuate towards 4 different logits, those with the highest activation to the junco image (in
the unrandomized model). We observe that while the original feature visualizations change the im-


                                                  22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


age towards the targeted bird class, randomizing layers pushes the visualization towards seemingly
random tagets. We use a λ 0f .1 for every visualization, and observe that as additional layers are
randomized the regularization term tends to dominate and the accentuations stop altering the image
at all.


Figure 20: The ’cascading randomization’ sanity check from (Adebayo et al., 2018b) performed on
feature accentuation. From left to right: feature accentuation is performed on a model with more
and more layers randomized. From top to bottom: different logit targets (corresponding to different
bird classes) are used as the accentuation target.



F    T HE ’ SENSITIVE REGION ’ FOR λ

While qualitatively evaluating the effects of regularization strength λ, we observe that for a given
image x and feature target fv , proper accentuation requires λ be within a certain ’sensitive region’.
By this we mean, as lambda increases the resultant accentuation eventually becomes perceptually
indistinguishable from the seed image, and conversely as λ exponentially decays towards zero, the
resultant visualizations becomes indistinguishable from the unregularized accentuation. Increasing
lambda within the intermediate region leads to visualizations that perceptually interpolate between
the unregularized accentuation and the seed image. Here we consider how this sensitive region can
be identified automatically, without visual inspection.
Such automation requires we establish a simple metric, measurable in the model, that corresponds
with the perceptual changes induced by changing λ. The simplest candidate is the regularization
term itself, ||fℓ (x∗ ) − fℓ (x0 )||, that is, the distance between the representations of the accentuated
image and the seed image in the regularization layer. In Figure 21.a we show for a single accentua-
tion (iguana -¿ terrapin (turtle)) how changes in this distance correspond to perceptual change. As λ
becomes large/small this distance becomes fixed, as does the appearance of the accentuated image.
This suggests the sensitive region can be found by first measuring the bounding distances for the
accentuation from the seed image (at very small and very large λ), then searching for a λ that yields
a distance between these bounds.
It would be time consuming to search for λ each time we want to run a new accentuation, but fortu-
nately we find that for a given model layer the sensitive region is consistent across images/features.
This can be seen in Figure 21.b; here we pass 50 random images through InceptionV1 and VGG11
(Szegedy et al., 2015), and accentuate each image towards its second highest logit across a range
of regularization strengths. We plot λ on the x-axis as before, and on the y-axis we plot min-max
normalized the accentuation’s distance from the seed image, where the minimums and maximums
correspond to the maximum and minimum distances measured at extreme λs (10−6 , 106 ). We see
that while each model requires a different setting for λ, there is a much smaller effect across images.
As the sensitive region depends on the model and not the image/feature, for many use cases an ap-


                                                   23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


propriate λ must only be found once, and then many different examples can be generated using that
setting, as we have done throughout this work.


Figure 21: In A. we show the correspondence between the appearance of an accentuation at different
λ values and the distance of the accentuation from the seed image in the regularization layer. We
note a sensitive region for lambda in which changes perceptibly alter the level of accentuation. In
B. we observe that the location of this sensitive region differs significantly across models, but not
across images/features in a given model layer.


G    F EATURE ACCENTUATIONS ON OTHER MODELS
Through this work we have focused on the InceptionV1 Mordvintsev et al. (2015) model given its
prevalence in the feature visualization literature, but we find the general recipe put forth in this
work is effective for other models as well. Fig ?? shows the effects of accentuations on several
image/logit pairs for Alexnet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012), VGG11 (Szegedy et al., 2015), SqueezeNet
(Iandola et al., 2016), and ResNet18 (He et al., 2016) models. Regularization λ was set individually
per model, to the ’sensitive region’ as described in section F, and the regularization layer was set to
the ReLU layer in each model closest to 1 model depth. All other accentuation hyperparameters are
fixed across all examples to those hyperparameters described in section A.


                                                  24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Figure 22: Feature accentuations towards logits for other popular Imagenet trained models.


                                               25
