Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EHEARSAL N E RF: D ISENTANGLING DYNAMIC
I LLUMINATIONS IN N EURAL R ADIANCE F IELDS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                 A BSTRACT
         Although there has been significant progress in neural radiance fields, an issue on dynamic
         illumination changes still remains unsolved. Different from relevant works that parameterize
         time-variant/-invariant components in scenes, subjects’ radiance is highly entangled with
         their own emitted radiance and lighting colors in spatio-temporal domain. In this paper,
         we present a new effective method to render and reconstruct neural fields under severe
         illumination changes, named ReHeaRF. Our key idea is to leverage scenes captured under
         stable lighting like rehearsal stages, easily taken before dynamic illumination occurs, to
         enforce geometric consistency between the different lighting conditions. In particular,
         ReHeaRF uses a learnable vector for lighting effects which represents illumination colors in
         a temporal dimension and is used to disentangle projected light colors from scene radiance.
         Furthermore, our ReHeaRF is also able to reconstruct the neural fields of dynamic objects
         by using off-the-shelf interactive masks for key frames. To decouple the dynamic objects,
         we propose a new regularizer, removing dynamic parts with similar colors to the light
         sources. We demonstrate the effectiveness of ReHeaRF by showing robust performances on
         view synthesis under dynamic illumination conditions and outperforming state-of-the-art
         approaches in both quantitative and qualitative evaluations. We submit our source codes
         and video demo as supplementary materials.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) Mildenhall et al. (2020) represent a scene as neural implicit functions and
enable to render photo-realistic images from arbitrary viewpoints. For wider applicability of NeRFs, its
variant representations for dynamic motions Wu et al. (2022); Zhang et al. (2023); Park et al. (2021a;b);
Li et al. (2021); Pumarola et al. (2021); Weng et al. (2022); Peng et al. (2021) have been actively studied.
Existing dynamic radiance fields synthesize sequential frames with novel viewpoints by decoupling static and
dynamic objects Wu et al. (2022); Zhang et al. (2023), topological deformation Park et al. (2021a;b); Li et al.
(2021); Pumarola et al. (2021), and human movements Weng et al. (2022); Peng et al. (2021). It is worth
nothing that the word, ‘dynamic’, refers subjects’ motions only. In this work, we extend the definition of the
‘dynamic’ to varying illuminations as well as subjects’ motions during taking an input video.
Estimating and manipulating scene illuminations, such as intrinsic image decomposition Barrow et al. (1978);
Horn (1974), relighting Debevec et al. (2000); Xu et al. (2018) and shape-from-shading Zhang et al. (1999),
have been considered as one of classical research issues. There is a common assumption in these works
that light sources are stable and predictable. Nevertheless, their main challenge is that the solution is not
unique due to limited image resolution, noise and inaccurate camera geometry. To alleviate the challenges,
prior information, such as depth geometry Chen & Koltun (2013); El Helou et al. (2021); Maier et al. (2017),
lighting directions Somanath & Kurz (2021); Wang et al. (2021b) and segmentation masks Munkberg et al.
(2022), is available, making their inferences more tractable. Despite the significant efforts of the previous
works, there has been no attempt to explicitly handle varying illuminations in NeRFs.

                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                               Baseline(D2NeRF)


                                    Joint Learning
                   NeRF without
                   light handling                                                                                                 𝒕
                                                                                                               Ours
                    Illumination                                                                 Lighting
                      handling                                                                      Motion                        𝒕

Input: Dynamic scene with                             Decoupling dynamic lighting,                             Result: Decoupled
dynamic lighting effects                             dynamic object and static object                            dynamic object


 Reference Frame             Frozen motion + change of light                            Change of motion + frozen light
Figure 1: ReHeaRF jointly optimizes three neural fields for dynamic lighting and static/moving subjects
in a training step. Each field cannot only be rendered independently, but it can also be composited at once
to represent a whole scene. Compared to the baseline Wu et al. (2022), the details from our ReHeaRF are
distinguishable and the rendered colors are well decoupled from the scene lights. We provide a variety of
applications for video editing, such as controlling lighting while stopping motion and vice versa.

As the first step toward addressing this issue, we need to find a proper prior to reduce an ambiguity of dynamic
illuminations in neural fields. Our key observation is that the dynamic illuminations, intense and rapid lighting
intensity and color changes during recording input videos, are created artificially in controlled situations, such
as plays and concerts. As they often come with a rehearsal stage without the dynamic lighting effects before
starting the main stages, we use the video on the rehearsal stage as a prior. Although motions of the dynamic
object in the rehearsal stage are not perfectly aligned with that of the main stage, it is valuable to represent
scene geometry and to disentangle objects’ own colors and the dynamic lighting effects in neural fields.
In this work, we present a ReHearsal prior-based Radiance Fields (ReHeaRF) to synthesize novel viewpoint
images of a scene under dynamic lighting environments. As shown in Fig. 1, our ReHeaRF is designed to
decouple dynamically changing illuminations and dynamic/static objects, simultaneously. To do this, we
exploit the fact that scene geometry is consistent regardless of the lighting changes, except for regions of
moving subjects. Our ReHeaRF first takes both rehearsal and main stage videos as input, and then reconstructs
three neural fields for static, dynamic objects, and dynamic illuminations from lighting effects. With our
ReHeaRF, we can easily implement applications to video editing including motion and lighting controls.
To be specific, we develop a joint optimization for decoupling dynamic illuminations from moving/static
objects in the scene. Without optimizing the dynamic illuminations, decoupling dynamic and static objects
will not be done because the illumination across the scene varies in their neural fields. We thus introduce a
learnable illumination vector to represent time-variant global and local illuminations of scenes. With a neural
field for illuminations, the vector is used for rendering the dynamically changing illuminations over time. To
jointly optimize the neural fields for illuminations and dynamic objects, we then propose a regularization
using the learned illumination vector to enforce the disentanglement between the neural fields. With the
rehearsal prior, we design an additional regularization for robust supervision to decouple static objects and
illuminations. Dynamic objects belonging to the rehearsal stage may hinder the optimization of the neural
field for the static objects. Our regularization alleviates the issue by pushing the decoupling process. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of ReHeaRF by qualitatively and quantitatively evaluating it over state-of-the-art
methods for NeRFs in the dynamic domain, even with a neural network for light effect suppression.

2    R ELATED W ORKS
Dynamic neural scene representations There are three types of works categorizing dynamic neural scene
representations: deformation of non-rigid parts, motions with human priors and decoupling dynamic part.

                                                               2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To represent moving/deformable objects in a scene, D-NeRF Pumarola et al. (2021) proposes neural implicit
representations consisting of deformation fields and canonical fields to handle non-rigid motions. Nerfies Park
et al. (2021a) uses per-frame deformation latent codes, instead of time-stamps. HyperNeRF Park et al. (2021b)
extends the Nerfies to account for topological changes using high-dimensional hyperspace. For human
motions, H-NeRF Xu et al. (2021) and HumanNeRF Weng et al. (2022) use human body templates Alldieck
et al. (2021); Loper et al. (2015) to train the person in a canonical space. RigNeRF Athar et al. (2022) focuses
on the deformation of head-pose and facial expressions using 3D morphable face model Blanz & Vetter
(1999). Here, the template misalignment often has negative impacts on the reconstruction quality. To separate
moving foregrounds from static backgrounds, several works have used priors such as optical flow Li et al.
(2021); Gao et al. (2021) and 3D depth Li et al. (2021); Gao et al. (2021); Xian et al. (2021) and segmentation
masks Zhang et al. (2021); Tschernezki et al. (2021); Li et al. (2023); Jiang et al. (2022). Without any prior
information, D2 NeRF Wu et al. (2022) decouples static and dynamic components and handles shadow effects
of moving objects in a self-supervised manner. NeRFPlayer Song et al. (2023) predicts the sample-wise
probabilities of being static, deforming, and newness in a 4D spaciotemporal space.
However, the previous works assume that a dynamic scene is under stable illumination conditions.
Open4D Bansal et al. (2020) captures sequences in a variety of environments and lighting conditions,
such as performance dances including ballet and theatrical reenactments, but it remains an issue on lighting
and shadows in 4D spatio-temporal representations as future research.
Neural representations for lighting Thanks to the powerful 3D scene and light modeling capacities of
neural implicit representations, there have been widely studied in intrinsic image decomposition Munkberg
et al. (2022); Boss et al. (2021b;a; 2022), relighting Srinivasan et al. (2021); Lyu et al. (2022), and shape-
from-shading Ling et al. (2023); Yang et al. (2022). Works in Munkberg et al. (2022); Boss et al. (2021b;a;
2022) jointly optimize lighting, materials, and scene geometry from multi-view images using neural represen-
tations. Relighting Srinivasan et al. (2021); Lyu et al. (2022) with neural representations deals with global
illuminations, 3D geometry, and material information from a set of images with unconstrained known lighting
locations. NeRV Srinivasan et al. (2021) takes multiple images captured under known lighting conditions
and produces a 3D representation of a scene, enabling to render of novel viewpoint images with arbitrary
lighting directions. ShadowNeuS Ling et al. (2023) uses a shadow ray supervision to reconstruct neural
signed distance fields from single-view images under multiple lighting conditions.
Appearance embedding for NeRF Following generative latent optimization Bojanowski et al. (2018),
many NeRF extensions use trainable latent codes for per-image appearance variations Martin-Brualla et al.
(2021); Turki et al. (2022); Tancik et al. (2022), time-varying components Li et al. (2022b); Park et al.
(2021a;b) and manipulation Schwarz et al. (2020); Wang et al. (2022); Niemeyer & Geiger (2021). NeRF-in-
the-wild Martin-Brualla et al. (2021) proposes a latent appearance modeling to address the scene inconsistency
caused by different lighting conditions of unstructured photo-collections. Mega-NeRF Turki et al. (2022)
and Block-NeRF Tancik et al. (2022) handle the issue in large-scale scenes by embedding scene appearances
like illumination changes according to camera poses into latent codes. DyNeRF Li et al. (2022b) uses NeRF
framework as a baseline and use temporal latent codes, allowing neural fields to be changed in time domain.
CLIP-NeRF Wang et al. (2022) shows editable NeRF with text prompts to manipulate shapes and appearances
of neural fields. GRAF Schwarz et al. (2020) and GIRAFFE Niemeyer & Geiger (2021) present 3D-aware
controllable image synthesis using conditional neural fields.

3   M ETHODOLOGY
Given N sampled points of a camera ray r, NeRFs render view dependent colors C̃ as following the volume
rendering formula:       N                      i−1
                         X                      X
                 C̃(r) =     Ti αi ci s.t. Ti =     exp(−σj δj ), αi = 1 − exp(−σi δi )              (1)
                           i=1                        j=1


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 𝐱                      (Sec. 3.1)
                                                                           ℒr𝑒ℎ
3D               𝜓𝐵        𝑐𝐵 , 𝜎𝐵
coord.                                                                   (Sec. 3.4)
                                            Static objects 𝐵                              Rehearsal stage 𝐶𝑟𝑒ℎ      Main stage 𝐶𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛
              𝜓D           𝑐𝐷 , 𝜎𝐷
 𝐝                                                                                                                           ℒrecon
                                              𝜎𝐿                   Dynamic objects 𝐷              𝑓ℎ (𝐶𝐷 )
View                       (S, V)
dir.                                 𝑓𝑟𝑔𝑏     𝑐𝐿                                                        Rendering
                 𝜓L
                            𝑃𝐻
                                            (Sec. 3.2)
            𝑣ℎ                                                                                ℒℎ (Sec. 3.3)
 𝑡                         σ 𝑃𝐻 𝑣ℎ (t) = 𝐻                         Lighting effects 𝐿                               Volume rendering
Time
Figure 2: An overview of ReHeaRF in training phase. Our ReHeaRF consists of three neural fields whose
outputs are static, dynamic objects and illuminations. Each field takes location (x), viewing direction (d) and
time-stamp (t) for the same sample point as input, except the time-stamp for the static fields. They are used to
infer the radiance and density for each. Particularly, the illumination field predicts the probability PH of the
illumination vector vh corresponding to t. To decouple static/dynamic objects and illumination components
of the main stage video well, two additional regularizations using the rehearsal prior and vh are designed.

where ci and σi denote the spatially-view-dependent radiance and the spatially-dependent density, respectively,
which are calculated by the radiance field for the i-th sample. δ refers a distance between the i-th sample and
the i + 1-th sample.
With the radiance fields of the scene built, we propose a novel neural scene representation pipeline which
decouples components of dynamic lighting effects and objects, depicted in Fig. 2. We first handle dynamic
lighting effects through separate neural fields (Sec. 3.1) with a learnable illumination vector (Sec. 3.2). Then,
we jointly optimize global and local illumination on dynamic (Sec. 3.3) and static objects (Sec. 3.4) with a
regularization using the illumination vector and a rehearsal prior, respectively.

3.1      N E RF FOR DYNAMIC L IGHTING E FFECTS

Our method learns each radiance field for static, dynamic objects and illuminations caused by lighting effects,
as shown in Fig. 2. For decoupling static and dynamic objects, we adopt D2 NeRF Wu et al. (2022) as a
baseline, and compute a density σB and a radiance cB of a static objects B, and a density σD and radiance
cD of dynamic objects D, to build neural scene representation as below:
                         ψB : (x, d) → (σB , cB ), ψD : (x, d, t) → (σD , cD ),                            (2)
             3                                                                       3
where x ∈ R is a 3D spatial coordinate, t ∈ R is a temporal coordinate and d ∈ R is a viewing direction.
To separate the illumination from the main stage video, our ReHeaRF represents lighting effects L, which are
colors formed by light sources. Here, we introduce a learnable illumination vector vh for a self-supervision of
the light illuminations, and a illumination neural field ψL to render time-varying lighting effects. Details for
the illumination vector and rendering the lighting effects with ψL will be described in Sec. 3.2.
We also re-formulate a composite rendering of the baseline Wu et al. (2022) which assumes that placing
objects in the same position is physically impossible. However, the lighting effects exist on the surface of
objects in our problem setup. Considering this property, we formulate a modified version of the composite
rendering by multiplying the normalized transparency map ρ as below:
                                                           N X
                                                           X
                                        C̃main (r, t) =                  Tmain,i ρe,i αe,i ce,i                                  (3)
                                                           i=1       e
                                            i−1 X
                                            X                           αe,i
            s.t.      Tmain,i = exp(−                σe,j δj ), ρe,i = P        and αe,i = 1 − exp(σe,i δi ),                    (4)
                                            j=1    e                     e αe,i



                                                               4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                           Predicted       𝑃𝐻         Sliced
                                                                                                                                          𝑣ℎ
                                                                                   𝜓L       with 𝑡                     on 𝑡
                                                                                                           ⨂                     Illumination
                                                                                                                                     vector
                            Main stage – Rehearsal stage

                                                                                                                Back prop.
            hue selection
Top-𝑘 hue


                                                                                                                 Motion   misaligned
                                                                                           Prediction             Color   matched

            Illumination vector 𝑣ℎ
                                                                       Time      Main stage       Decoupled object          Rehearsal
                (a) Initialization of learnable illumination vector             (b) Illumination vector for lighting effect handling
Figure 3: Visualizations of the procedure how to work the illumination vector. (a) The initialization of the
learnable illumination vector is done by sampling the hue channel of the dynamic lighting from the difference
between the rehearsal and the main stage video. (b) Back propagation from the rendered hue channel is
achieved by computing a weighted sum of the probability PH and the slice of the vh for time t, which finally
optimize the hue channel of the dynamic lighting effects.

where C̃main is the rendered color of the main stage, e ∈ [B, D, L] is a type of components in the main
stage, σe,i and ce,i denote the density and radiance of a component e at i-th sampled point, respectively. In
this equation, ρ plays a role in a normalization term to avoid the color saturation problem by considering the
relative weights of each component in the main stage.
Based on Eq. (1), the colors of the static background B, moving objects D and lighting effects L can be
rendered individually as follows:
                                                                                           N
                                                                                           X
                               C̃L (r, t) = C̃main (r, t) − C̃B (r), s.t. C̃B (r) =              TB,i αB,i cB,i ,                         (5)
                                                                                           i=1
                                                                       N
                                                                       X
                                                and     C̃D (r, t) =         TD,i αD,i cD,i ,                                             (6)
                                                                       i=1
                  Pi−1
where Te,i = exp(− j=1 σe,j δj ). C̃L , C̃B and C̃D are a rendered color of the lighting effects L, the static
background B and the moving objects D in the main stage, respectively.

3.2           L EARNING I LLUMINATION V ECTOR
Artificial lights in the main stage emit highly saturated colors, and the light intensity varies according to a
physical distance between the light source and its projected surface. In contrast, the hue channel of the light
source is invariant to the distance. It means that the hue values are globally similar in the whole scene Zimmer
et al. (2011). Due to this property, we utilize HSV color space to represent the radiance field for lighting
effects, instead of conventional RGB color space.
For hue values H, we formulate vh as a global and learnable component that contains candidate hue
information of illuminations along with the time domain. As shown in Fig. 3 (a), for effectively training vh ,
we initialize the vh by taking centroids of k-means clustering of the hue values that have different colors
between the rehearsal and the main stage scene.
Fig. 3 (b) shows that back propagation across the light effect rendering pipeline updates vh . We compute
outputs of the neural field ψL for volume rendering of the lighting effects; the density σL , saturation channel
S, value channel V of the radiance and a probability vector PH whose number of candidates is k. PH is used
to calculate the hue channel H corresponding to hue values of the vh in a time t as:

                                                                 5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               k
                               X
                         H=          Pi,H vi,h (t),   ψL : (x, d, t) → (S, V, PH , σL )                      (7)
                               i=1
                                             frgb : (H, S, V ) → cL ,                                        (8)
where vi,h (t) is a value sliced over time t and hue index i. Pi,H is the probability corresponding to vi,h (t),
and frgb is a function for HSV to RGB channels. In total, we can render light effects using σL and cL
converted from the HSV values.

3.3   R EGULARIZATION FOR I LLUMINATIONS ON DYNAMIC O BJECTS
As done in the baseline Wu et al. (2022), decoupling dynamic and static components can be achieved with two
separate neural radiance fields. However, it is infeasible to extract dynamic illuminations because the color
changes of the scene do not depend on the motions only, especially for dynamic objects by their time-varying
surface normals. We address this problem by leveraging the illumination vector vh as a prior to identifying
dominant k hue values from colors of rays scattered by the light sources. As shown in Fig. 3 (b), vh facilitates
to account for the illuminations on dynamic objects. If the hue values of pixels belonging to moving objects
are similar to vh , we can mark the pixels as being entangled with the ray colors. In consideration of this
observation, we design a regularization Lh which eliminates the dynamic parts of objects affected by the
lighting effects as follows:
                                         Lh (r, t) = wD (r, t) 1h (r, t)                                     (9)

                                          1, if mini≤k (∥vi,h (t) − fh (C̃D (r, t))∥) < θ
                       s.t. 1h (r, t) =                                                                     (10)
                                          0, otherwise,
                                                             PN
where ∥ · ∥ is the standard Euclidean 1-norm, wD (r, t) = i=1 Tmain,i ρD,i αD,i is the sum of weights for
rendering the color of moving objects D, θ is a threshold for an indicator function 1h and empirically set to
60 ◦ . fH is a function for RGB to hue value. This regularization is only applied to regions of moving objects.

3.4   R EGULARIZATION FOR I LLUMINATIONS ON S TATIC O BJECTS

Apart from the illumination vector vh for dynamic objects, illuminations on static objects should be considered.
The previous works Zhang et al. (2023); Li et al. (2021) focus on decoupling dynamic components from static
objects. However, priors used in the previous works (e.g. depth, optical flow and segmentation mask) may not
work to decouple the dynamic lighting effects because the lighting colors are highly entangled in pixels of
subjects. Instead, we introduce a rehearsal prior taken at the rehearsal stage, which is an easily pre-captured
scene before turning on dynamic lighting effects and provides information for scene geometry and subjects’
original colors. The rehearsal stage video shows the content of dynamic objects which has similar motion
with the main stage, without lighting effects.
We train our radiance fields representing the static objects ψB with the rehearsal prior based on a loss Lreh as
below:
             Lreh (r, t) = ∥Cmain (r, t) − Creh (r, t) − C̃L (r, t)∥22 + ∥Creh (r, t) − C̃B (r)∥22 ,        (11)
where Cmain (r, t) and Creh (r, t) refer the true color of the camera ray r at time t in the main stage and the
rehearsal stage, respectively.
The first term of Lreh means that we supervise illuminations from lighting effects on roughly disentangled
static objects. It enables to decouple the illuminations from the main stage video, even with misaligned pixels
between the rehearsal and the main stage video. The second term in Lreh forces the static neural field ψB to
be trained without the illuminations. Even though there are dynamic objects that are not decoupled with static
objects on the rehearsal stage video, our regularization effectively contributes to decoupling light effects and
static objects. We note that this loss is only applied to the background regions as well.

                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               Light        K-Planes         Semantic        D2 NeRF              Ours
                           suppression                       K-Planes
           Stage 1          8.62 / 0.247    9.07 / 0.493   15.86 / 0.543   12.33 / 0.740      30.04 / 0.889
           Stage 2        10.73 / 0.290     9.19 / 0.427   21.03 / 0.702   11.95 / 0.695      29.48 / 0.840
           Stage 3        10.86 / 0.216     8.81 / 0.420   12.06 / 0.205   16.57 / 0.865      30.13 / 0.816
           Stage 4        13.75 / 0.274    14.98 / 0.601   11.76 / 0.292   19.59 / 0.886      31.21 / 0.856
            Mean          10.99 / 0.257    10.51 / 0.485   15.18 / 0.436   15.11 / 0.797      30.22 / 0.850
             Table 1: Quantitative evaluation with the state-of-the-art methods (PSNR/SSIM).

4     E XPERIMENTS
4.1   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
The neural fields (ψB , ψD and ψL ) of our ReHeaRF are implemented with a hybrid model of K-
Planes Fridovich-Keil et al. (2023). Note that the neural fields can be replaced by other dynamic NeRF
models. A training procedure of ReHeaRF requires a day for 300k iterations with 8,192 batch sizes on a
single RTX 3090 GPU. We train our ReHeaRF with the following loss L :
                      L(r, t) = Lrecon (r, t) + λm Lm (r, t) + λreh Lreh (r, t) + λh Lh (r, t)                (12)
                              s.t.   Lrecon (r, t) = ∥Cmain (r, t) − C̃main (r, t)∥22 ,                       (13)
                                            XN                          XN
                     and Lm (r, t) = MB           Tmain,i ρD,i αD,i + MD         Tmain,i ρB,i αB,i ,          (14)
                                            i=1                            i=1
where MΩ is a mask which indicates a valid region of a component Ω ∈ [B, D]. Using an off-the-shelf
interactive segmentation Cheng et al. (2021) in the offline phase, we identify the valid region MΩ in both
the rehearsal and main videos of our dataset. Lrecon is a reconstruction loss and Lm is a regularizer which
removes regions where the components are disentangled. In our implementation, λm , λreh and λh are
empirically set to 0.01, 0.5 and 0.01, respectively. In the experiments, we set the number of clustering of
k-means algorithm to 5 because of the number of light sources in the main stages.

4.2   DATASETS
Since public datasets for dynamic NeRFs Li et al. (2022b); Broxton et al. (2020) are limited to scenes captured
under stable illuminations, we construct a video dataset for dance stages taken under both stable and dynamic
colored lighting environments. Following the problem setting, our dataset contains pre-captured videos under
the stable lighting conditions before turning on the dynamic illuminations as well as camera parameters
obtained from COLMAP Schönberger & Frahm (2016).
We build a dataset consisting of synchronized multi-view videos whose spatial and temporal resolutions are
2704×1520 and 120 FPS, respectively. For this, we use an array of 20 GoPro HERO cameras and take 10
video clips whose running time is 2.5 seconds. In the experiment, we downsample the spatial resolution by a
factor of 2 and the frame rate to 30 FPS, similar to the previous work Li et al. (2022b).
Note that we do not directly compare our ReHeaRF with other methods on this dataset because, to the best of
our knowledge, our work is the first attempt to decouple dynamic lighting effects from dynamic objects in
NeRFs. Instead, we evaluate the ability to disentangle lighting effects when static parts are only rendered.

4.3   C OMPARISON WITH S TATE - OF - THE - ART M ETHODS
We demonstrate the capability of our ReHeaRF to decouple lighting effects from subjects. As mentioned
earlier, our work is the first attempt to handle dynamic illuminations in NeRF, and we cannot carry out an
apple-to-apple comparison with publicly available neural rendering methods. Therefore, we could make only
a limited evaluation of dynamic lighting effects. To do this, we manually mask out moving objects in scenes

                                                       7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Light suppression       K-Planes          Semantic K-Planes           D2 NeRF            Ours           Ground Truth
Figure 4: Qualitative comparison ours with the state-of-the-art methods. The ground-truth scenes are captured
in the rehearsal stages. Note that we only compare the static background region (2nd row) because moving
objects in the rehearsal scene are considered as outliers in the evaluation on the disentanglement.
                       Mean                              Mean               Table 2: Ablation study. Note that the results
                   PSNR SSIM          (15 frames)    PSNR SSIM              are on static parts only and mearsured for 10
  w/o hue init.    29.12  0.822       +1.0s          28.65  0.793           scenes of our dataset. (Left) The effective-
  w/o Lreh          9.36  0.481       +2.0s          28.53  0.792
  w/o Lh           29.57 0.818        w/o motion     28.10  0.762           ness of each component in our framework;
  w/o ρ            29.12  0.805                                             (Right) Study on mis-syncronization between
  Ours             29.73  0.825       Ours            28.66      0.801      the main and the rehearsal stages.

and evaluate a photo-consistency between the remaining regions of the rehearsal stage and its corresponding
regions of rendered static parts using PSNR and SSIM Wang et al. (2004) metrics. In this experiment, we
compare our ReHeaRF with D2 NeRF, which is our baseline model, and following state-of-the-art methods:
(1) K-Planes Fridovich-Keil et al. (2023): It consists of six planes to represent dynamic motions. By fixing
temporal planes in inference time, it can render static parts only.
(2) Semantic K-Planes: Inspired by SemanticNeRF Zhi et al. (2021), we implement SemanticNeRF by
adding semantic logits, classes for static background, moving objects, and lighting effects, to K-Planes. For
the comparison with Semantic K-Planes, we use masks (MΩ ) and labels associated with lighting effects.
However, labeling lighting effects manually can be challenging. We thus annotate positions of lighting effects
in areas where ISG weights Shuai et al. (2022) are high and dynamic objects are not present.
(3) Light suppression Jin et al. (2022): Additionally, we use light suppression as a comparison method. We
train K-Planes on videos where the light suppression method is applied.
As shown in Table 1, we report the quantitative evaluation result. Since the lighting effects have a significant
impact on PSNR values, if they are incorrectly decoupled, the predicted colors of objects differ from their
original colors. Both K-Planes and D2 NeRF, trained using photo-realistic loss under dynamic lighting, often
predict the average colors of objects over the entire time. On the other hand, as expected, our ReHeaRF
consistently achieves the best performance over the comparison methods.
In Fig. 4, we display an example of the quantitative results in Table 1. Fig. 4 qualitatively shows the huge
performance differences between ours and the competitive methods as well. First, the light suppression
method never works in our dataset because it disrupts the view consistency among multiple cameras. Both
K-Planes and D2 NeRF also suffer from extracting moving objects. We observe that solid objects are treated
as dynamic parts due to the varying light colors over time. Although Semantic K-Planes utilizes semantic
information to decouple dynamic objects, the lighting effects still exist on the surfaces of the objects. As a
result, the varying colored regions by the lighting effects disappear. In contrast to, our ReHeaRF successfully
disentangles these factors while correctly representing each neural field.
Lastly, we show two interesting applications of our work to video manipulations and confocal florescence
microscopy. Please check them in appendix A.1 and A.2 as well as the submitted video.

                                                          8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



Lighting
 effects
Dynamic
 object


               w/o ℒreh   w/o hue initialization   w/o ℒh              Ours                 Effects of ℒh
Figure 5: Visualizations of the results on ablation study. We can see that each component of our ReHeaRF
contributes to the visually pleasing looks. Particularly, when we impose Lh , ReHeaRF shows distinctively
realistic subjects which is decoupled with scene lights.


4.4        A BLATION S TUDY
In Table 2 (Left) and Fig. 5, we demonstrate the effectiveness of the rehearsal prior Lreh , Lh , the hue
initialization and our novel volume rendering (ρ in Eq. (4)). Without Lreh , the dynamic objects and the static
part are trained independently, which learns to render dynamic and static parts at once. In addition, if we
remove similar color regions between objects and the illumination vector using Lh , some parts of dynamic
objects may be missed in the neural field for dynamic objects, and the missed parts are evident when rendering
lighting effects. In Table 2 (Left), we observe that Lh has a positive impact on decoupling lighting effects on
static parts of scenes even though it is related to colors on dynamic objects. Because the illumination vector
accounts for all lighting effects in ReHeaRF framework, the vector representation can be enhanced with Lh ,
which yields better decoupling results on static regions. The hue initialization allows the illumination vector
to effectively learn global information. Therefore, without the hue initialization, the Lh could mistakenly
remove dynamic object parts which are not affected by lighting effects. Lastly, ρ in Eq. (4) is also effective to
disentangle lighting effects. The reason is why ρ breaks the common assumption of NeRF that two objects
cannot be located in the same position.
In addition, we show that our ReHeaRF does not suffer from mis-synchronization between rehearsal and main
stages in Table 2 (Right). We intentionally make mis-synced videos by shifting the time axis of the rehearsal
stages by 1.0 second and 2.0 seconds. We conduct this experiment using 0.5-second (15 frames) video clips
because its time duration is 2.5 seconds and the video used will be shifted by 2.0 at most in our dataset.
Additionally, we only use the first frame of the rehearsal stage video which means no motion information
is used. In this study, we do not observe any significant performance drop due to mis-synchronization and
no motion information. The reason for this is that our ReHeaRF is designed to train only the geometry and
appearance from the rehearsal stage through Lreh .


5          C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we present a novel approach that trains and renders neural fields for dynamic scenes captured
under drastically changing illuminations. The proposed method decouples dynamic lighting effects from
static/moving objects. For this, our key idea is to devise the rehearsal prior, which can be easily taken
before turning on lights for the main stage. In addition, we leverage the light color-adaptive vectors and
the semantic-aware regulerizations to jointly optimize neural fields for static/dynamic objects and varying
illuminations. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method by showing impressive results on
novel view synthesis under dynamic illuminations.
Limitation & Future directions Directions for improvement exist. First, since our work focuses on
dynamic scene representations for short clips, efficient training schemes are needed for long sequence videos.
In addition, we assume that the camera are static during taking videos. For more generality of this work,
solutions to reconstructing neural fields using moving camera setups can be one of interesting future works.

                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Thiemo Alldieck, Hongyi Xu, and Cristian Sminchisescu. imghum: Implicit generative models of 3d human
  shape and articulated pose. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision
  (ICCV), 2021.

ShahRukh Athar, Zexiang Xu, Kalyan Sunkavalli, Eli Shechtman, and Zhixin Shu. Rignerf: Fully controllable
  neural 3d portraits. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), 2022.

Aayush Bansal, Minh Vo, Yaser Sheikh, Deva Ramanan, and Srinivasa Narasimhan. 4d visualization of
  dynamic events from unconstrained multi-view videos. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2020.

Harry Barrow, J Tenenbaum, A Hanson, and E Riseman. Recovering intrinsic scene characteristics. Comput.
  vis. syst, 2(3–26):2, 1978.

Volker Blanz and Thomas Vetter. A morphable model for the synthesis of 3d faces. In Proceedings of the
  26th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, 1999.

Piotr Bojanowski, Armand Joulin, David Lopez-Paz, and Arthur Szlam. Optimizing the latent space of
  generative networks. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2018.

Mark Boss, Raphael Braun, Varun Jampani, Jonathan T Barron, Ce Liu, and Hendrik Lensch. Nerd:
 Neural reflectance decomposition from image collections. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
 Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021a.

Mark Boss, Varun Jampani, Raphael Braun, Ce Liu, Jonathan Barron, and Hendrik Lensch. Neural-pil:
 Neural pre-integrated lighting for reflectance decomposition. In Proceedings of the Neural Information
 Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021b.

Mark Boss, Andreas Engelhardt, Abhishek Kar, Yuanzhen Li, Deqing Sun, Jonathan Barron, Hendrik Lensch,
 and Varun Jampani. Samurai: Shape and material from unconstrained real-world arbitrary image collections.
 In Proceedings of the Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.

Craig M Browning, Samantha Mayes, Samuel A Mayes, Thomas C Rich, and Silas J Leavesley. Microscopy
  is better in color: development of a streamlined spectral light path for real-time multiplex fluorescence
  microscopy. Biomedical Optics Express, 13(7):3751–3772, 2022.

Michael Broxton, John Flynn, Ryan Overbeck, Daniel Erickson, Peter Hedman, Matthew Duvall, Jason
 Dourgarian, Jay Busch, Matt Whalen, and Paul Debevec. Immersive light field video with a layered mesh
 representation. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 39(4):86–1, 2020.

Qifeng Chen and Vladlen Koltun. A simple model for intrinsic image decomposition with depth cues. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2013.

Ho Kei Cheng, Yu-Wing Tai, and Chi-Keung Tang. Modular interactive video object segmentation: Interaction-
  to-mask, propagation and difference-aware fusion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2021.

Paul Debevec, Tim Hawkins, Chris Tchou, Haarm-Pieter Duiker, Westley Sarokin, and Mark Sagar. Acquiring
  the reflectance field of a human face. In Proceedings of the 27th annual conference on Computer graphics
  and interactive techniques, 2000.

                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Majed El Helou, Ruofan Zhou, Sabine Susstrunk, and Radu Timofte. Ntire 2021 depth guided image relighting
 challenge. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
 (CVPR), 2021.

Sara Fridovich-Keil, Giacomo Meanti, Frederik Warburg, Benjamin Recht, and Angjoo Kanazawa. K-planes:
  Explicit radiance fields in space, time, and appearance. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2023.

Chen Gao, Ayush Saraf, Johannes Kopf, and Jia-Bin Huang. Dynamic view synthesis from dynamic monocular
  video. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021.

Yusaku Hontani, Fei Xia, and Chris Xu. Multicolor three-photon fluorescence imaging with single-wavelength
  excitation deep in mouse brain. Science advances, 7(12):eabf3531, 2021.

Berthold KP Horn. Determining lightness from an image. Computer graphics and image processing, 3(4):
  277–299, 1974.

Wei Jiang, Kwang Moo Yi, Golnoosh Samei, Oncel Tuzel, and Anurag Ranjan. Neuman: Neural human
 radiance field from a single video. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV),
 2022.

Yeying Jin, Wenhan Yang, and Robby T Tan. Unsupervised night image enhancement: When layer decompo-
  sition meets light-effects suppression. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision
  (ECCV), 2022.

James Jonkman, Claire M Brown, Graham D Wright, Kurt I Anderson, and Alison J North. Tutorial: guidance
  for quantitative confocal microscopy. Nature protocols, 15(5):1585–1611, 2020.

Lingzhi Li, Zhen Shen, Zhongshu Wang, Li Shen, and Ping Tan. Streaming radiance fields for 3d video
  synthesis. In Proceedings of the Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022a.

Tianye Li, Mira Slavcheva, Michael Zollhoefer, Simon Green, Christoph Lassner, Changil Kim, Tanner
  Schmidt, Steven Lovegrove, Michael Goesele, Richard Newcombe, et al. Neural 3d video synthesis
  from multi-view video. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), 2022b.

Zhengqi Li, Simon Niklaus, Noah Snavely, and Oliver Wang. Neural scene flow fields for space-time view
  synthesis of dynamic scenes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), 2021.

Zhengqi Li, Qianqian Wang, Forrester Cole, Richard Tucker, and Noah Snavely. Dynibar: Neural dynamic
  image-based rendering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), 2023.

Jingwang Ling, Zhibo Wang, and Feng Xu. Shadowneus: Neural sdf reconstruction by shadow ray supervision.
   In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2023.

Matthew Loper, Naureen Mahmood, Javier Romero, Gerard Pons-Moll, and Michael J Black. Smpl: A
 skinned multi-person linear model. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 34(6):1–16, 2015.

Linjie Lyu, Ayush Tewari, Thomas Leimkühler, Marc Habermann, and Christian Theobalt. Neural radiance
  transfer fields for relightable novel-view synthesis with global illumination. In Proceedings of the European
  Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2022.

                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Robert Maier, Kihwan Kim, Daniel Cremers, Jan Kautz, and Matthias Nießner. Intrinsic3d: High-quality
  3d reconstruction by joint appearance and geometry optimization with spatially-varying lighting. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2017.

Ricardo Martin-Brualla, Noha Radwan, Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Jonathan T Barron, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and
  Daniel Duckworth. Nerf in the wild: Neural radiance fields for unconstrained photo collections. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2021.

Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng.
  NeRF: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. In Proceedings of the European
  Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2020.

Jacob Munkberg, Jon Hasselgren, Tianchang Shen, Jun Gao, Wenzheng Chen, Alex Evans, Thomas Müller,
  and Sanja Fidler. Extracting triangular 3d models, materials, and lighting from images. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022.

Michael Niemeyer and Andreas Geiger. Giraffe: Representing scenes as compositional generative neural
 feature fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
 (CVPR), 2021.

Keunhong Park, Utkarsh Sinha, Jonathan T Barron, Sofien Bouaziz, Dan B Goldman, Steven M Seitz, and
  Ricardo Martin-Brualla. Nerfies: Deformable neural radiance fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021a.

Keunhong Park, Utkarsh Sinha, Peter Hedman, Jonathan T Barron, Sofien Bouaziz, Dan B Goldman, Ricardo
  Martin-Brualla, and Steven M Seitz. Hypernerf: A higher-dimensional representation for topologically
  varying neural radiance fields. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 40(6), dec 2021b.

Sida Peng, Yuanqing Zhang, Yinghao Xu, Qianqian Wang, Qing Shuai, Hujun Bao, and Xiaowei Zhou. Neural
  body: Implicit neural representations with structured latent codes for novel view synthesis of dynamic
  humans. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), 2021.

Albert Pumarola, Enric Corona, Gerard Pons-Moll, and Francesc Moreno-Noguer. D-nerf: Neural radiance
  fields for dynamic scenes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), 2021.

Johannes Lutz Schönberger and Jan-Michael Frahm. Structure-from-motion revisited. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2016.

Katja Schwarz, Yiyi Liao, Michael Niemeyer, and Andreas Geiger. Graf: Generative radiance fields for
  3d-aware image synthesis. In Proceedings of the Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.

Qing Shuai, Chen Geng, Qi Fang, Sida Peng, Wenhao Shen, Xiaowei Zhou, and Hujun Bao. Novel view
  synthesis of human interactions from sparse multi-view videos. In Proceedings of ACM SIGGRAPH, 2022.

Gowri Somanath and Daniel Kurz. Hdr environment map estimation for real-time augmented reality. In
 Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2021.

Liangchen Song, Anpei Chen, Zhong Li, Zhang Chen, Lele Chen, Junsong Yuan, Yi Xu, and Andreas Geiger.
  Nerfplayer: A streamable dynamic scene representation with decomposed neural radiance fields. IEEE
  Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 29(5):2732–2742, 2023.

                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Pratul P Srinivasan, Boyang Deng, Xiuming Zhang, Matthew Tancik, Ben Mildenhall, and Jonathan T Barron.
  Nerv: Neural reflectance and visibility fields for relighting and view synthesis. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2021.
Matthew Tancik, Vincent Casser, Xinchen Yan, Sabeek Pradhan, Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan,
 Jonathan T Barron, and Henrik Kretzschmar. Block-nerf: Scalable large scene neural view synthesis. In
 Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022.
Vadim Tschernezki, Diane Larlus, and Andrea Vedaldi. Neuraldiff: Segmenting 3d objects that move in
  egocentric videos. In 2021 International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV), 2021.
Haithem Turki, Deva Ramanan, and Mahadev Satyanarayanan. Mega-nerf: Scalable construction of large-
  scale nerfs for virtual fly-throughs. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022.
Can Wang, Menglei Chai, Mingming He, Dongdong Chen, and Jing Liao. Clip-nerf: Text-and-image driven
  manipulation of neural radiance fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022.
Zhaoqiang Wang, Lanxin Zhu, Hao Zhang, Guo Li, Chengqiang Yi, Yi Li, Yicong Yang, Yichen Ding, Mei
  Zhen, Shangbang Gao, et al. Real-time volumetric reconstruction of biological dynamics with light-field
  microscopy and deep learning. Nature methods, 18(5):551–556, 2021a.
Zhou Wang, Alan C Bovik, Hamid R Sheikh, and Eero P Simoncelli. Image quality assessment: from error
  visibility to structural similarity. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing (TIP), 13(4):600–612, 2004.
Zian Wang, Jonah Philion, Sanja Fidler, and Jan Kautz. Learning indoor inverse rendering with 3d spatially-
  varying lighting. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV),
  2021b.
Chung-Yi Weng, Brian Curless, Pratul P Srinivasan, Jonathan T Barron, and Ira Kemelmacher-Shlizerman.
  Humannerf: Free-viewpoint rendering of moving people from monocular video. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022.
Tianhao Walter Wu, Fangcheng Zhong, Andrea Tagliasacchi, Forrester Cole, and Cengiz Oztireli. D2 nerf:
  Self-supervised decoupling of dynamic and static objects from a monocular video. In Proceedings of the
  Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
Wenqi Xian, Jia-Bin Huang, Johannes Kopf, and Changil Kim. Space-time neural irradiance fields for
 free-viewpoint video. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
 Recognition (CVPR), 2021.
Hongyi Xu, Thiemo Alldieck, and Cristian Sminchisescu. H-nerf: Neural radiance fields for rendering
  and temporal reconstruction of humans in motion. In Proceedings of the Neural Information Processing
 Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Zexiang Xu, Kalyan Sunkavalli, Sunil Hadap, and Ravi Ramamoorthi. Deep image-based relighting from
  optimal sparse samples. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 37(4):1–13, 2018.
Wenqi Yang, Guanying Chen, Chaofeng Chen, Zhenfang Chen, and Kwan-Yee K Wong. S3 -nerf: Neural
 reflectance field from shading and shadow under a single viewpoint. In Proceedings of the Neural
 Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
Boyu Zhang, Wenbo Xu, Zheng Zhu, and Guan Huang. Detachable novel views synthesis of dynamic scenes
  using distribution-driven neural radiance fields. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.00411, 2023.

                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jiakai Zhang, Xinhang Liu, Xinyi Ye, Fuqiang Zhao, Yanshun Zhang, Minye Wu, Yingliang Zhang, Lan Xu,
   and Jingyi Yu. Editable free-viewpoint video using a layered neural representation. ACM Transactions on
   Graphics (TOG), 40(4):1–18, 2021.
Ruo Zhang, Ping-Sing Tsai, James Edwin Cryer, and Mubarak Shah. Shape-from-shading: a survey. IEEE
  Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (TPAMI), 21(8):690–706, 1999.
Shuaifeng Zhi, Tristan Laidlow, Stefan Leutenegger, and Andrew J. Davison. In-place scene labelling
  and understanding with implicit scene representation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
  Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021.
Henning Zimmer, Andrés Bruhn, and Joachim Weickert. Optic flow in harmony. International Journal on
  Computer Vision (IJCV), 93:368–388, 2011.


                                               14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX


                           Original, hue: 60         Frozen Light

                                                                (b) Dynamic motions with the frozen lighting effect
                       Hue:30

                                 Hue
                   Hue:120
                      Hue:180                       Frozen Motion
          (a) Controllable light                                (c) Dynamic lighting effects with the frozen motion
Figure 6: Applications of ReHeaRF to video manipulation. (a) We can change the light colors after recording
the video. (b) Our ReHeaRF produces the natural-looking dance video under artificially stopping the light
effects. (c) We show a video with the frozen motion, but the light sources still work. Please check our
supplementary video.


A.1   A PPLICATION 1: V IDEO M ANIPULATION

Accurate disentanglement of neural fields for dynamic lighting effects and scene objects in the time domain
can facilitate many applications. As examples, we show video editing applications such as the slow motion
and time stop effect (a.k.a bullet-time) by manipulating the temporal flow of the decoupled neural fields.
A controllable light effect that tunes light colors after taking the video is one of the applications of our
ReHeaRF. Thanks to the accurate neural representation for dynamic lights, we can artificially direct the
various light color effects in Fig. 6(a). Another interesting application is to freeze the subject’s motion and
light colors. As shown in Fig. 6(b) and (c), since the illumination neural fields are supervised independently
for the motion and geometry of the subject, we can easily produce the videos that show natural-looking
motions in artificially fixed light conditions and vice versa.

A.2   A PPLICATION 2: C ONFOCAL FLUORESCENCE MICROSCOPY

                                 Confocal fluorescence microscope                           ReHeaRF
            Illumination          various wavelength LEDs/Lasers              dynamic illuminations at a concert hall
            Sensor                        multiple detectors                              multiple cameras
            Subject                     live cells and tissues                               performers
            Output           3D volume rendering of live cells and tissues   radiance fields for components of a scene
Table 3: Similarity of input/output configurations between confocal fluorescence microscopy and ReHeaRF.

We demonstrate that our ReHeaRF can also be extended to other domains. As an example, we show a potential
application to a confocal fluorescence microscope. Before describing the feasible scenario of our framework,
we would like to introduce a concept of the confocal fluorescence microscope.
The confocal fluorescence microscope is an optical microscope to scan cells and tissues and to be used for
studying the properties of them. As the name suggests, the microscopes use the fluorescence to generate an
image with much higher intensity light sources which excite fluorescent species in a sample of interest. And,
the confocal fluorescence microscope is devised to take higher resolutions and contrast images than that of the
fluorescence microscope by blocking out-of-focus lights in image formulations. Capturing multiple 2D images

                                                           15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    (a) Activation depending on the wavelengths (b) Multi-view observation (c) Volume Rendering
Figure 7: Applying ReHeaRF framework to confocal fluorescence microscopy. (a) Each sample type exhibits
different activations according to the wavelengths of exposed lights. (b) Through multi-view observation such
as light field microscopy, we can generate multi view images which can be used to train ReHeaRF. (c) We
can render the 3D volume of the subject. Please check our supplementary video.



at either different depths Wang et al. (2021a) or various viewpoints (i.e. light field microscopy Browning et al.
(2022)) in a sample enables 3D reconstruction and volume rendering of its structure. In particular, it becomes
essential to investigate spatial arrangement of live cells and tissues with high precision in sciences, which is
useful for assigning the localization to specific cellular compartments or finding out the relationships between
them Jonkman et al. (2020).
In total, we claim that the system configuration, inputs and outputs of the confocal fluorescence microscopes
are very similar with those of our Rehearsal NeRF as described in Table 3:
Following this scenario of the confocal fluorescence microscope, we provide an example to demonstrate the
potential application. In Hontani et al. (2021), a set of images for a mouse brain captured using a fluorescence
microscopy is available. Using the images, we first make a composite image and then project it onto a regular
grid for the multiview image acquisition, which becomes the input of our ReheaRF. By training ReHeaRF
with these images, we can synthesize novel views of specific cells or entire of cells. As shown in Fig. 7, our
ReheaRF achieves the well-reconstructed spatial arrangement of the mouse brain. In the submitted video
demo, we present rendering results that are synthesized by our ReHeaRF; please refer it. If this framework
were extended to a temporal dataset consisting of flourescence microscope images, it could lead to the
discovery of many interesting properties of cells and tissues by expanding into 4D domain (3D + time).


A.3    D IVERSITY OF OUR DATASET


                             Dataset                     # of scenes   # of dynamic subjects   # of backgrounds
            Nerfies Validation Rig Park et al. (2021a)         4                3                      3
               Neural 3D video Li et al. (2022b)               6                1                      2
                  Meet Room Li et al. (2022a)                  3                3                      1
                              Ours                            10                4                      3
            Table 4: Statistic of public datasets for NeRFs with dynamic motion and our dataset


Since the advent of NeRF, new datasets have been taken whenever new problems are defined. We collect a
new dataset with dynamic scenes with changing illumination, a unique situation that has not been addressed
before. Our dataset ensures the diversity with respect to the number of dancers, choreography, costumes, and
backgrounds, compared to the public datasets for NeRFs, as reported in Table 4. Furthermore, our dataset
contains songs corresponding to the dances, which can be useful for multi-modal learning applications such
as motion generation based on music.

                                                         16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                    Stage 1               Stage 2              Stage 3              Stage 4             Stage 5
                               PSNR       SSIM        PSNR      SSIM       PSNR      SSIM       PSNR      SSIM      PSNR      SSIM
       w/o hue init.           26.55      0.798       30.21     0.840      30.47     0.809      29.53     0.823     29.18     0.811
       w/o Lreh                  6.61     0.446        7.20     0.477      13.40     0.558      13.51     0.537      8.32     0.408
       w/o Lh                   28.31     0.811       30.78     0.833      29.65     0.778      31.21     0.846     29.83     0.813
       w/o ρ                    29.14     0.822       29.19     0.825      29.09     0.801      29.69     0.735     29.10     0.794
       Ours                     30.00     0.832       29.46     0.828      30.09     0.802      31.18     0.831     30.08     0.819
                                    Stage 6               Stage 7              Stage 8              Stage 9              Mean
                               PSNR       SSIM        PSNR SSIM            PSNR      SSIM       PSNR      SSIM      PSNR      SSIM
       w/o hue init.            29.19     0.861       29.24     0.805      29.20     0.779      28.55     0.869     29.12     0.822
       w/o Lreh                  7.36     0.467        7.26     0.434       8.29     0.505      12.26     0.496      9.36     0.481
       w/o Lh                   28.00     0.840       29.36     0.794      29.64     0.762      29.38     0.885     29.57     0.818
       w/o ρ                    28.37     0.847       29.90     0.802      28.82     0.740      28.82     0.883     29.12     0.805
       Ours                     29.84     0.867       29.47     0.811      28.83     0.759      28.67     0.872     29.73     0.825
                                  Table 5: Ablation experiments of each component in our framework.

                                       Stage 1              Stage 2             Stage 3              Stage 4            Stage 5
                                   PSNR      SSIM       PSNR      SSIM      PSNR      SSIM       PSNR      SSIM     PSNR      SSIM
       +1.0s                       27.88      0.781     29.18      0.808    29.57      0.752     30.14      0.813   27.78      0.773
       +2.0s                       27.83      0.781     29.61      0.806    29.72      0.778     29.06      0.743   29.10      0.794
       w/o motion                  27.36      0.766     29.17      0.787    28.26      0.704     29.62      0.780   27.10      0.754
       Ours (15 frames)            28.76      0.793     29.36      0.809    30.94      0.817     29.62      0.777   28.12      0.782
                                       Stage 6              Stage 7             Stage 8              Stage 9              Mean
                                   PSNR      SSIM       PSNR SSIM           PSNR      SSIM       PSNR      SSIM     PSNR      SSIM
       +1.0s                       28.05      0.831     28.26      0.756    28.95      0.752     28.01      0.875   28.65      0.793
       +2.0s                       26.79      0.820     28.15      0.758    29.77      0.780     26.80      0.869   28.53      0.792
       w/o motion                  27.10      0.755     26.99      0.815    28.38      0.773     28.72      0.726   28.10      0.762
       Ours (15 frames)            27.57      0.825     27.41      0.764    29.41      0.760     28.70      0.883   28.66      0.801
Table 6: Ablation study on mis-synchronization of motions between rehearsal and main stages. Note that we
only utilize 15 frames (0.5 seconds) on this experiment.

 A.4           A BLATION STUDY: D ETAILS OF ABLATION STUDY IN S EC . 4.4

Since we only report the mean PSNR and SSIM of 9 scenes in Table 2, we provide details of the ablation
study for each scene in Table 5 and Table 6.

 A.5           A BLATION STUDY: HSV COLOR SPACE
HSV(Ours)
RGB


            Lighting Effects       Dynamic Objects        Effects of HSV     Lighting Effects   Dynamic Objects      Effects of HSV
                                           Figure 8: Ablation experiments on HSV color space.

Since the hue channel of the light source is invariant to the distance, we select HSV color space to represent
the illumination vector. When we utilize RGB color space to represent the illumination vector, as shown
in Fig. 8, we observe that the illumination vector suffers from distinguishing lighting effects and dynamic
objects. The reason is why the RGB color space contains hue, saturation and value altogether.

                                                                    17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.6      C ASE 1: M IS - ALIGNMENT BETWEEN MAIN AND REHEARSAL STAGES

                     Aligned View

                                                                 1) Novel View                              2) ReHeaRF
 Input                  Mis-          Input                                        Rendered
                                                                   Synthesis
 Main Stage             aligned       Rehearsal Stage                              Rehearsal Stage
                        View                                        K-Planes

                                                                                                                                Experimental Results
           Figure 9: Handling a large misalignment of cameras between main and rehearsal stage.
Our work assumes that the location of the camera array is fixed during taking both the main and rehearsal
stage videos like real performance scenarios. However, when a large misalignment exists, we can address
the issue using a multi-view video-based view synthesis method. For this, we conduct an experiment with
different camera poses between the rehearsal and live stages. In this experiment, we initially train K-Planes
using rehearsal videos. Subsequently, we utilize the trained K-Planes to synthesize rehearsal videos at the
camera poses of the live videos. The result is displayed in the Fig. 9.

A.7      C ASE 2: H ANDLING C OMPLEX LIGHTING E FFECTS .


        Ground Truth                  Lighting Effects               Dancer            Ground Truth                  Lighting Effects             Dancer
                                  Figure 10: Experimental results on complex lighting effects.

Intuitively, very complex lightings, such as a bulky LED array in the background, may result in performance
drops of the proposed method. However, we experimentally demonstrate that our hue initialization and
illumination vectors in a time domain are beneficial as they provide sufficient information about intense
dynamic lightings. For this, we conduct an experiment with a synthetic dataset simulating a scenario that a
dancer is captured under a bulky back-sided LED array. Note that we assume that there is no saturation on
scenes. We bought commercial Unity assets for both the dancer and stage with the bulky LED array. Our
ReHeaRF successfully decouples the lighting effects by adjusting the hyper-parameter k, which represents
the number of clusters in the k-means algorithm, which is shown in Fig. 10


      Ground Truth                 Ours                 Lighting Effects         Dynamic Objects     Decoupled dynamic lighting effects from dynamic objects
Figure 11: Experimental results when the subjects are captured in front of the bulky LED screen. Please
check our supplementary video.

We also carry out the real-world experiment in scenes in front of a large LED screen, which is commonly
used in concerts as a popular light source. The resolution of the large LED screen we used is 3360 × 1620
(5,443,200 light sources). As displayed in Fig. 11, ReHeaRF effectively separates dynamic lighting effects
from objects in this scene.

                                                                           18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.8     C ASE 3: T HE COLOR OF THE DANCER ’ S CLOTHING IS SIMILAR TO THE SPOTLIGHTS .


                       Spotlight
                        Color
                                                                  Tuning 𝜽𝜽
                        Dancer
                        Color
                                                       𝜃𝜃 = 90°                                      𝜃𝜃 =1.8 °
      (a) Main Stage                  (b) Before Tuning 𝜃𝜃                         (c) After Tuning 𝜃𝜃            (d) Effects of Tuning 𝜃𝜃
Figure 12: Although the color of the dancer’s clothing is similar to the spotlight, ReHeaRF is still working
well by tuning θ of Lh .
In Fig. 5, we demonstrate that Lh effectively decouples lighting effects from dynamic objects. However,
because Lh relies on color differences between dynamic objects and lighting effects, it may encounter
difficulties when the colors of lighting effects and dynamic objects are similar. But, in our framework,
adjusting both the weight parameter λh and the threshold θ which distinguishes lighting effects within the
radiance field of dynamic objects, can effectively address this issue. As an example, in Fig. 12, adjusting θ to
1.8 degrees allows us to effectively decouple dynamic objects from lighting effects.

A.9     C ASE 4: I F THE COMPARISON METHODS USE THE REHEARSAL PRIOR .
      Main stage             Static                  Motion                   Main stage                 Static                Motion


                        Ground Truth                                                       Semantic K-Planes w/ 𝐿𝐿𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟


                       D2NeRF w/ 𝐿𝐿𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟                                                                  Ours
        Figure 13: Qualitative evaluations with the comparison methods with the rehearsal prior Lreh .

In this paper, the comparison methods did not use rehearsal videos because we want to directly compare
ours with them as it is. For fair comparisons, we train the static parts for D2 NeRF and Semantic K-Planes
with rehearsal priors, and compare their rendering qualities. As shown in Fig. 13, with the rehearsal priors,
D2 NeRF still suffers from extracting moving objects, and Semantic K-Planes fails to decouple static object.


                                                              19
