Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


T O GROK OR NOT TO GROK : D ISENTANGLING GENER -
ALIZATION AND MEMORIZATION ON CORRUPTED AL -
GORITHMIC DATASETS

 Darshil Doshi a, b, †       Aritra Das b, *        Tianyu He a, b, *       Andrey Gromov c, a, b
        {ddoshi, aritrad, tianyuh}@umd.edu                                 gromovand@meta.com


                                               A BSTRACT

          Robust generalization is a major challenge in deep learning, particularly when the
          number of trainable parameters is very large. In general, it is very difficult to
          know if the network has memorized a particular set of examples or understood the
          underlying rule (or both). Motivated by this challenge, we study an interpretable
          model where generalizing representations are understood analytically, and are eas-
          ily distinguishable from the memorizing ones. Namely, we consider multi-layer
          perceptron (MLP) and Transformer architectures trained on modular arithmetic
          tasks, where (ξ · 100%) of labels are corrupted (i.e. some results of the modular
          operations in the training set are incorrect). We show that (i) it is possible for the
          network to memorize the corrupted labels and achieve 100% generalization at the
          same time; (ii) the memorizing neurons can be identified and pruned, lowering the
          accuracy on corrupted data and improving the accuracy on uncorrupted data; (iii)
          regularization methods such as weight decay, dropout and BatchNorm force the
          network to ignore the corrupted data during optimization, and achieve 100% ac-
          curacy on the uncorrupted dataset; and (iv) the effect of these regularization meth-
          ods is (“mechanistically”) interpretable: weight decay and dropout force all the
          neurons to learn generalizing representations, while BatchNorm de-amplifies the
          output of memorizing neurons and amplifies the output of the generalizing ones.
          Finally, we show that in the presence of regularization, the training dynamics in-
          volves two consecutive stages: first, the network undergoes grokking dynamics
          reaching high train and test accuracy; second, it unlearns the memorizing repre-
          sentations, where the train accuracy suddenly jumps from 100% to 100(1 − ξ)%.1


1       I NTRODUCTION

The astounding progress of deep learning in the last decade has been facilitated by massive, high-
quality datasets. Annotated real-world datasets inevitably contain noisy labels, due to biases of
annotation schemes (Paolacci et al., 2010; Cothey, 2004) or inherent ambiguity (Beyer et al., 2020).
A key challenge in training large models is to prevent overfitting the noisy data and attain robust
generalization performance. On the other hand, in large models, it is possible for memorization and
generalization to coexist (Zhang et al., 2017; 2021). By and large, the tussle between memorization
and generalization, especially in the presence of label corruption, remains poorly understood.
In generative language models the problem of memorization is even more nuanced. On the one
hand, some factual knowledge is critical for the language models to produce accurate information.
On the other hand, verbatim memorization of the training data is generally unwanted due to privacy
concerns (Carlini et al., 2021). The full scope of the conditions that affect memorization in large
    a
      Condensed Matter Theory Center, University of Maryland, College Park
    b
      Department of Physics, University of Maryland, College Park
    c
      Meta AI
    †
      Corresponding author
    * These authors contributed equally
    1
      Code to reproduce our results is available at https://github.com/d-doshi/Grokking.git


                                                    1
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             Coexistence                      Partial Inversion                   Full Inversion
           100                                      100                                100
accuracy (%)75                                       75                                 75
            50                                       50                                 50
                                            train                              train                               train
            25                              test     25                        test     25                         test
             0                                        0                                  0
                      0    250    500    750 1000         0       200        400             0       200        400
                                 steps                              steps                              steps
                                  (a)                                (b)                                (c)
   Figure 1: Training curves in various phases. All plots are made for networks trained with data-
   fraction α = 0.5 and corruption-fraction ξ = 0.35. (a) No regularization: Coexistence of general-
   ization and memorization – both train and test accuracies are high. (b)(c) Adding weight decay: The
   network generalizes on the test data but does not memorize the corrupted training data, resulting in
   a negative generalization gap! Remarkably, the network predicts the “true” labels for the corrupted
   examples. We term these phases Partial Inversion and Full Inversion, based on the degree of mem-
   orization of corrupted data. (“inversion” refers to test accuracy being higher than train accuracy.)


   language models (LLMs) is still under investigation (Carlini et al., 2022; Tirumala et al., 2022). In
   particular, larger models as well as repeated data (Hernandez et al., 2022) favor memorization.
   In this work, we take an approach to disentangling generalization and memorization motivated by
   theoretical physics. Namely, we focus on simple, analytically tractable, (“mechanistically”) inter-
   pretable models trained on algorithmic datasets. More concretely, we study two-layer Multilayer
   Perceptrons (MLP) trained on modular arithmetic tasks. In this case, the network is trained to learn
   a rule, such as z = (m + n)%p ≡ m + n mod p from a number of examples. These tasks are
   phrased as classification problems. We then force the network to memorize ξ · 100% of the exam-
   ples by corrupting the labels, i.e. injecting data points where (m + n)%p is mapped to z ′ ̸= z. In
   this setting, the generalizing representations are understood qualitatively Nanda et al. (2023); Liu
   et al. (2022) as well as quantitatively, thanks to the availability of an analytic solution for the rep-
   resentations described in Gromov (2023). We empirically show that sufficiently large networks can
   memorize the corrupted examples while achieving nearly perfect generalization on the test set. The
   neurons responsible for memorization can be identified using inverse participation ratio (IPR) and
   pruned away, leading to perfect accuracy on the un-corrupted dataset. We further show that regu-
   larization dramatically affects the network’s ability to memorize the corrupted examples. Weight
   decay, Dropout and BatchNorm all prevent memorization, but in different ways: Weight decay and
   Dropout eliminate the memorizing neurons by converting them into generalizing ones, while Batch-
   Norm de-amplifies the signal coming from the memorizing neurons without eliminating them.

   1.1               P RELIMINARIES

   Grokking modular arithmetic. We consider the modular addition task (m + n) % p. It can be
   learned by a two-layer MLP. Explicitly, the network function takes form
                                   f (m, n) = W ϕ (Win (em ⊕ en )) = W ϕ (U em + V en ) .                             (1)
                                   p
   Here, em , en ∈ R are one hot encoded numbers m, n. “⊕” denotes concatenation of vectors
   (em ⊕ en ∈ R2p ). Win ∈ RN ×2p and W ∈ Rp×N are the first and second layer weight matrices,
   respectively. ϕ is the activation function. Win is decomposed into two N × P blocks: U , V ∈
   RN ×p . U , V serve as embedding vectors for m, n respectively. f (m, n) ∈ Rp is the network-
   output on one example pair (m, n). The targets are one hot encoded answers e(m+n) % p .
   The dataset consists of p2 examples pairs; from which we randomly pick αp2 examples for training2 ,
   and use the other (1 − α)p2 examples as a test set. We will refer to α as the data fraction.
   This setup exhibits grokking: delayed and sudden occurrence of generalization, long after memo-
   rization (Power et al., 2022; Nanda et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2022; Gromov, 2023).
               2
                   Throughout the text, networks are trained with Full-batch AdamW and MSE loss, unless otherwise stated.


                                                                   2
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           100                                   1.00                                                      500
                                                         0.2                before grokking                              before grokking
                                                                                                           400
accuracy (%)


                                                                                                # of neurons
            75                                   0.75    0.1                after grokking                               after grokking
                                                                                                           300
            50                                   0.50    0.0


                                                   IPR
                                                   Ukn
                                       train acc                                                           200
            25                         test acc 0.25     0.1
                                       avg IPR                                                             100
             0                                   0.00    0.2
                     0    25    50      75 100                 0   25        50     75    100                00.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
                               steps                                        n                                            IPR
                                (a)                                         (b)                                          (c)
   Figure 2: Grokking the modular arithmetic task over Z97 with 2-layer MLP, trained with AdamW.
   (a) Sharp transition in test accuracy, long after overfitting. IPR := Ek [IPRk ] monotonically in-
   creases over time, indicating periodic representations. (b) Example row vector (Uk· ) before and
   after grokking. Generalization is achieved through periodic weights (equation 2). (c) Histogram of
   per-neuron IPRs before and after grokking – the distribution shifts to high IPR.


   Periodic weights. Choosing quadratic activation function ϕ(x) = x2 makes the problem analyti-
   cally solvable (Gromov, 2023). Upon grokking, the trained network weights are qualitatively similar
   to the analytical solution presented in Gromov (2023).3 The following analytical expression for the
   network weights leads to 100% generalization (for sufficiently large width)
              − 13                                                  − 13
             2              2π           (u)                        2            2π           (v)
   Uki =             cos       iσ(k) + ϕk      ,          Vkj =            cos      jσ(k) + ϕk      ,
             N               p                                      N             p
               − 13
              2                2π            (u)  (v)
   Wqk =              cos − qσ(k) − ϕk − ϕk             ,
              N                 p
                                                                                                    (2)
   where σ(k) denotes a random permutation of k in SN – reflecting the permutation symmetry of the
                                (u)       (v)
   hidden neurons. The phase ϕk and ϕk are uniformly i.i.d. sampled between (−π, π]. We refer
   the reader to Appendix D for further details about the analytical solution.

   Inverse participation ratio. To characterize the generalizing representations quantitatively, we
   utilize a quantity familiar from the physics of localization: the inverse participation ratio (IPR). Its
   role is to detect periodicity in the weight matrix.
   Let Uk· , Vk· (Wk· ) denote the k th row(column) vectors of the weights U , V (W ). Consider the
   discrete Fourier transforms of these vectors, denoted by Ue k· , Vek· (W
                                                                          fk· ). The Fourier decompositions
   of the periodic rows(columns) of these weights are highly localized. We leverage this to quantify the
   similarity of trained weights to the analytic solution (equation 2). To that end, we define the Inverse
   Participation Ratio (IPR) (Girvin & Yang, 2019; Pastor-Satorras & Castellano, 2016; Gromov, 2023)
   for these vectors: 4
                               !4                           !4                               !4
           (u)        ∥U
                       e k· ∥4            (v)      ∥Vek· ∥4                (w)      ∥Wf·k ∥4
        IPRk :=                   ;   IPRk :=                  ;      IPRk :=                   ;       (3)
                      ∥U
                       e k· ∥2                     ∥Vek· ∥2                         ∥Wf·k ∥2

   where ∥·∥P denotes the LP -norm of the vector. One can readily see from equation 3 that IP R ∈
   [1/p, 1], with higher values for periodic vectors and lower values for non-periodic ones. It is useful
   to quantify the periodicity of each neuron in the hidden layer of the network (indexed by k). We
   define per-neuron IPR by averaging over the weight-vectors connected to the neuron:
                                          1       (u)      (v)       (w)

                                 IPRk :=      IPRk + IPRk + IPRk           .                          (4)
                                          3
   Since trained networks generalize via the periodic features, a larger population of high-IPR neu-
   rons leads to better generalization. To quantify the overall similarity of the trained network to the
   analytical solution (equation 2) we average IPRk over all hidden neurons: IPR := Ek [IPRk ].
               3
                   Periodicity of weights is approximate in trained networks.
               4
                   In general IPR is defined as (∥Uk· ∥2r /∥Uk· ∥2 )2r . We set r = 2, a common choice.


                                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Label corruption. To introduce label corruption, we choose a fraction ξ of the training examples,
and replace the true labels with random labels. The corrupted labels are generated from a uniform
random distribution over all the labels. This is often called symmetric label noise in literature (Song
et al., 2022). This type of label corruption does not introduce label asymmetry.

1.2   R ELATED W ORKS

Grokking Grokking was first reported by Power et al. (2022) for Transformers trained on modular
arithmetic datasets. Liu et al. (2022; 2023) presented explanations for grokking in terms of quality of
representation learning as well as weight-norms. They also found grokking-like behaviours on other
datasets. Nanda et al. (2023); Zhong et al. (2023) reverse-engineered grokked Transformer models
and revealed the underlying learned algorithm. Barak et al. (2022) observed grokking on the sparse-
parity problem, which they attributed to the amplification of the so-called Fourier gap. Merrill et al.
(2023) examined grokking in the sparse-parity setup and attributed it to the emergence of sparse
subnetworks. Žunkovič & Ilievski (2022) discuss solvable models for grokking in a teacher-student
setup. Recently, Notsawo et al. (2023) investigated the loss landscape at early training time and used
it to predict the occurrence of grokking. Varma et al. (2023) demonstrated new grokking-behaviours
by investigating the critical amount of data needed for grokking.

Label Noise Zhang et al. (2017) showed that neural networks can easily fit random labels. A large
body of work has been dedicated to developing techniques for robust training with label noise: ex-
plicit regularization(Hinton et al., 2012; Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015), noise-robust loss functions (Ghosh
et al., 2017), sample selection (Katharopoulos & Fleuret, 2018; Paul et al., 2021), noise modeling
and dedicated architectures (Xiao et al., 2015; Han et al., 2018; Yao et al., 2019) etc. We refer the
reader to recent reviews by Song et al. (2022); Liang et al. (2022) for a comprehensive overview.

Regularization and Pruning Morcos et al. (2018) investigated the interplay between label cor-
ruption and regularization in vision tasks. They showed that BatchNorm (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015)
and Dropout (Hinton et al., 2012) have qualitatively different effects. Dropout effectively reduces
the network-size but does not discourage over-reliance on a few special directions in weights space;
while BatchNorm spreads the generalizing features over many dimensions. Bartoldson et al. (2020)
found that there is a trade-off between stability and generalization when pruning trained networks.

2     G ROKKING WITH LABEL NOISE
Grokking MLP on modular addition dataset is remarkably robust to label corruption. Even without
explicit regularization, the model can generalize to near 100% accuracy with sizable label corrup-
tion. In many cases, the network surprisingly manages to “correct” some of the corrupted examples,
resulting in Inversion (i.e. test accuracy > training accuracy). We emphasise that this is in stark
contrast to the common belief that grokking requires explicit regularization. Adding regularization
makes grokking more robust to label corruption, with stronger Inversion. To quantify these be-
haviours, we observe the training and test performance of the network with varying sizes of training
dataset, amount of label corruption and regularization. We summarize our findings in the form of
empirical phase diagrams (Figure 3), featuring the following phases. More detailed phase diagrams
along with training and test performances are presented in Appendix L.

Coexistence. In the absence of explicit regularization the network generalizes on test data and
memorizes the corrupted training data. In other words, both train and test accuracy are close to
100% despite label corruption.

Partial Inversion. In this phase, the network generalizes on the test data but only memorizes a
fraction of the corrupted training data. Remarkably, the network predicts the “true” labels on the
remaining corrupted examples. In other words, the network corrects a fraction of the corrupted data.
Consequently, we see < 100% train accuracy but near-100% test accuracy, resulting in a negative
generalization gap (Figure 1(b))! We term this phenomenon Partial Inversion; where “inversion”
refers to the test accuracy being higher than train accuracy. Remarkably, partial inversion occurs
even in the absence of any explicit regularization, but only when there is ample training data (left-
most panels in Figure 3(a,b)).


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         Memorization            Memorization                    Memorization         Memorization


                                                     P.I.


                                        ce
                       Partial


                                         n
                                                                            Full


                                      te
                    Inversion                                                                Forgetting


                                       is
                                                    Full                 Inversion


                                    ex
                                 Co
             Coexistence                         Inversion



                (a) Regularization with weight decay. (wd denotes the weight decay value)



        Memorization             Memorization                    Memorization
                                                                                       Confusion

                                                      P.I.
                                            ce


                       Partial
                                          n



                                                                             Full
                                       te


                    Inversion                       Full                                           Full
                                        is


                                                                          Inversion
                                     ex


                                                 Inversion                                      Inversion
                                  Co


              Coexistence



                                     (b) Regularization with Dropout.

Figure 3: Modular Addition phase diagrams with various regularization methods. A larger data
fraction leads to more “correct” examples, leading to higher corruption-robustness. Increasing reg-
ularization, in the form of weight decay or dropout, enhances robustness to label corruption and
facilitates better generalization.


Full Inversion. Upon adding regularization, the network often generalizes on the test set but does
not memorize any of the corrupted examples. This results in training accuracy plateauing close
to 100(1 − ξ)% (ξ is the corruption fraction); while the test accuracy is at 100% (Figure 1(c)).
Increasing regularization enhances this phase (middle columns in Figure 3(a,b)).

Memorization. With very high label corruption and/or very low training data-fraction the network
memorizes all of the training data (corrupted as well as non-corrupted), but does not generalize. We
get close to 100% accuracy on training data, but random guessing accuracy on test data in this phase.

Forgetting. With very high weight decay, the network performs poorly on both training and test
data (right-most panel in Figure 3(a)). However, upon examination of the training curves (Figure
8(a)) we find that the accuracies plummet after the network has generalized! This performance drop
is a result of the norms of weights collapsing to arbitrarily small values (Figure 8(b)). Forgetting
exclusively occurs in grokked networks with activation functions of degree higher than 1 (e.g. we
use ϕ(x) = x2 ) and with adaptive optimizers. (See Appendix E for a detailed discussion.)

Confusion. With very high dropout the network becomes effectively narrow, resulting in reduced
capacity to memorize. Consequently, even in the absence of grokking, the network does not manage
to memorize all the corrupted labels (right-most panel in Figure 3(b)).

2.1   G ENERALIZING AND M EMORIZING S UB - NETWORKS

The generalizing features in our setup are “mechanistically” interpretable (equation 2). As a result,
we can leverage measures of periodicity such as IPR to quantitatively characterize various phases
presented above. It also allows us to analyze the effect of various regularization schemes. To that
end, we state the following hypothesis and extensively examine it with experiments.


                                                             5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                              Partial         Full                           Forgetting /
                            Coexistence                                   Memorization
                                             Inversion      Inversion                         Confusion
      Memorizes
                                 Yes          Partially        No               Yes              No
  corrupted train data
      Generalizes
                                 Yes             Yes           Yes              No               No
      on test data

                             Table 1: Qualitative characterization of phases.


                (a) Regularization with weight decay. (wd denotes the weight decay value)


                     (b) Regularization with Dropout. (dp denotes the Dropout probability)

Figure 4: Distribution of per-neuron IPR for trained networks in various phases. Coexistence phase
has a bimodal IPR distribution, where the high and low IPR neurons facilitate generalization and
memorization, respectively. Regularization with weight decay or Dropout shifts the IPR distribution
towards higher values – Generalizing neurons get more populous compared to memorizing ones;
resulting in more robust generalization and Inversion. All plots are made for networks trained with
data-fraction α = 0.5 and corruption-fraction ξ = 0.35; with various regularization strengths.


Hypothesis 2.1. For a two-layer MLP with quadratic activation trained on (one-hot encoded) mod-
ular addition datasets with label corruption, the high IPR neurons facilitate generalization via
feature-learning whereas the low IPR neurons cause memorization of corrupted training data.

To test Hypothesis 2.1 we study the distribution of per-neuron IPR in various phases, with differ-
ent levels of regularization. In the Coexistence phase, the network simultaneously generalizes and
memorizes the corrupted train data. From Hypothesis 2.1, we expect the presence of both general-
izing and memorizing neurons. Indeed, we find a bi-modal distribution of IPRs in trained networks
(left column of Figure 4). Remarkably, the network not only distinguishes between the tasks of
feature-learning and memorization, it also assigns distinct and independent sub-networks to each.
As mentioned in the previous section, adding regularization in the form of weight decay or Dropout
makes the generalization more robust and facilitates Inversion. Since these phases see decreased
memorization of corrupted labels, we expect to see a decrease in the number of memorizing neu-
rons and a corresponding increase in the generalizing ones. Indeed, we observe a distribution-shift
towards higher IPR in the Partial Inversion phase (middle column of Figure 4). In the Full Inversion
phase (induced by weight decay or dropout), we see that memorizing neurons are almost entirely


                                                       6
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Figure 5: IPR distributions of networks with/without BatchNorm; the correlation between Batch-
   Norm weights and IPR. The IPR distributions in the two models do not exhibit significant differ-
   ences. However, BatchNorm helps generalization by assigning higher weights (γk ) to high IPR
   neurons compared to low IPR neurons. Both models are trained at data fraction α = 0.65 and cor-
   ruption fraction ξ = 0.2, with batch-size = 64.

               Pruning Memorizing (low IPR) neurons             Pruning Generalizing (high IPR) neurons
           100                                                   100
               80                                                    80                                         training set
accuracy (%)


                                                      accuracy (%)


               60                                                    60                                         test set
                                                                                                                corrupted training data
               40                                                    40                                         uncorrupted training data
               20                                                    20                                         100(1 )%
                00.0        0.2      0.4      0.6                     00.0         0.1        0.2         0.3
                       fraction of neurons pruned                            fraction of neurons pruned
                             (from lowest IPR)                                     (from highest IPR)
   Figure 6: Progressively pruning neurons from a trained model (Coexistence phase), based on IPR.
   (data fraction α = 0.5, corruption fraction ξ = 0.35). (Left) Pruning out neurons starting from
   the lowest IPR. The accuracy on corrupted training data decreases, providing evidence that low
   IPR neurons are responsible for memorization. Test accuracy as well as accuracy on uncorrupted
   training data remains high. (Right) Pruning out neurons starting from the highest IPR. Test accuracy
   decreases providing evidence that high IPR neurons are responsible for generalization. Accuracy on
   corrupted training data remains high.


   eliminated in favour of generalizing ones (right column of Figure 4). This provides a mechanism by
   which the network recovers the “true” labels even for the corrupted data – in the absence of memo-
   rizing sub-network, its predictions are guided by the underlying rule and not corrupted samples.
   BatchNorm also has a regularizing effect on training (Figure 9), albeit, through a qualitatively dis-
   tinct mechanism. In the network (Equation (1)), we apply BatchNorm after the activation function
   (post-BN):
                               f (m, n) = W BN (ϕ (U em + V en )) .                                  (5)
   BatchNorm layer does does not affect the IPR distribution of the neurons significantly – the low
   IPR neurons persist even in the Full Inversion phase (Figure 5). Instead, BatchNorm adjusts its own
   weights to de-amplify the low-IPR (memorizing) neurons, biasing the network towards generalizing
   representations. This can be seen from the strong correlation between IPRk and the corresponding
   BatchNorm weights in Figure 5(right). BatchNorm effectively prunes the network and it learns to
   do this directly from the data! Note that this effect of BatchNorm acts in conjunction with the
   implicit regularization from the mini-batch noise in this case. We find that decreasing the batch-size
   enhances Inversion even without explicit regularization (Figure 10).
   To further isolate the effect of individual neurons on performance, we perform the two complemen-
   tary pruning experiments (Figure 6) : Starting from a trained network in the Coexistence phase, we
   gradually prune out neurons, one-at-a-time, (i) starting from the lowest IPR neuron (ii) starting from
   the highest IPR neuron, while keeping track of training and test accuracies. To distinguish network’s
   ability to memorize, we also track the accuracies on corrupted and uncorrupted parts of the training
   dataset. Before pruning, the network has near-100% accuracy on both train and test data. In case


                                                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Memorization               Memorization


                                        P.I.     Full
                       P.I.
             Coexistence                   Inversion



                                                    (a) 1-layer Transformer.


      Memorization               Memorization


                                         P.I.
                      nce P.I.              Full
               existe                   Inversion
            Co            F.I.



                                                    (b) 3-layer ReLU MLP.

Figure 7: Modular Addition phase diagrams and IPR histograms with different architectures and
weight decay values (denoted by “wd”). The IPR histograms are plotted for neurons connected to
the input (embedding) layers.


(i) (Figure 6(left)), we see a monotonic decrease in accuracy on corrupted examples as more and
more low IPR neurons are pruned. The accuracy on test data as well as ucorrupted training data
remains high. The resulting (overall) training accuracy plateaus around 100(1 − ξ)%, corresponding
to the fraction of uncorrupted examples. In case (ii) (Figure 6(right)), as more high IPR neurons are
pruned, we see a decline in test accuracy (as well as the accuracy on the uncorrupted training data).
The network retains its ability to memorize, so the accuracy on corrupted training data remains high.
We emphasize that, although each generalizing neuron learns the useful periodic features, the overall
computation in the network is emergent: it is performed collectively by all generalizing neurons.

2.2   G ENERAL A RCHITECTURES

In this subsection, we aim to check if (i) we can quantify memorization/generalization capabilities of
general architectures using IPR distribution of the neurons; (ii) our understanding of regularization
can be generalized to such cases.
Hypothesis 2.2. For any network that achieves non-trivial generalization accuracy on the modular
addition dataset with label corruption, its operation can be decomposed into two steps: (I) The
input (embedding) layer with row-wise periodic weight maps the data onto periodic features; (II)
The remainder of the network nonlinearly implements trigonometric operations over the periodic
neurons and maps them to the output predictions. We hypothesize that step (I) depends only on the
dataset characteristics; and hence, is a universal property across various network architectures.

To verify Hypothesis 2.2 and better understand the impact of regularization, we conduct further
experiments on 1-layer Transformers and 3-layer ReLU MLPs. Our findings, illustrated in the first
two columns of Figure 7 and paralleling the observations in Figure 3(a), indicate that increased
weight decay promotes generalization over memorization. IPR histograms in the last two columns
of Figure 7 further confirm that weight decay encourages the correct features and corroborates the
assertions made in Hypothesis 2.2.
For these general models, Dropout mostly leads to an extended confusion phase, while BatchNorm
only facilitates coexistence. We observe weight decay to be essential for these models to have the
full inversion phase. We refer the reader to Appendix G for an in-depth discussion.


                                                               8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3       E FFECT OF R EGULARIZATION

In this section, we summarize the effect of various regularization techniques and compare them with
existing literature.


3.1       W EIGHT DECAY

As shown in Figure 3(a), increasing weight decay has two notable effects: (i) Generalization with
less data: The phase boundary between the Memorization and Coexistence phases shifts toward
lower data-fraction. Weight decay encourages generalization even when training data is scarce; in
line with classical ideas (Bartlett, 1998). (ii) Emergence of the Full Inversion phase: In this phase,
weight decay prevents memorization and helps the network “correct” the labels for corrupted data
points. This effect is further elucidated in Figure 4(a) – For a fixed amount of data and label corrup-
tion, increased weight decay results in diminished proportion of low IPR (memorizing) neurons in
favor of high IPR (generalizing) ones.


3.2       D ROPOUT

It is believed that dropout prevents complex co-adaptations between neurons in different layers, en-
couraging each neuron to learn useful features (Hinton et al., 2012; Srivastava et al., 2014). This
intuition becomes more precise in our setup. The generalizing solution constitutes of periodic neu-
rons, each corresponding to a weight-vector of a given “frequency” σ(k). Such a solution requires
p neurons with different frequencies5 , (see Equation 6). In a wide network (N = 500 in our setup),
there can be multiple neurons with the same frequency.6 Due to this redundancy, generalizing solu-
tions are more robust to dropped neurons; whereas overfitting solutions are not. As a result, training
with Dropout gets attracted to such periodic solutions.


4       C ONCLUSION

We have investigated the interplay between memorization and generalization in two-layer neural
networks trained on algorithmic datasets. The memorization was induced by creating a dataset with
corrupted labels, forcing the network to memorize incorrect examples and learn the rule at the same
time. We have found that the memorizing neurons can be explicitly identified and pruned away
leading to perfect generalization.
Next we showed that various regularization methods such as weight decay, Dropout and BatchNorm
encourage the network to ignore the corrupted labels and lead to perfect generalization. We have
leveraged the interpretability of the representations learnt on the modular addition task to quanti-
tatively characterize the effects of these regularization methods. Namely, we have found that the
weight decay and dropout act in a similar way by reducing the number of memorizing neurons;
while BatchNorm de-amplifies the output of regularizing neurons without eliminating them, effec-
tively pruning the network.


5       L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE WORK

Although the trained models in our setup are completely interpretable by means of analytical so-
lutions, the training dynamics that lead to these solutions remains an open question. Solving the
dynamics should also shed more light on the effects of regularization and label corruption.
While our work is limited to the exactly solvable models and algorithmic datasets, it paves the way
to quantitative investigation of generalization and memorization in more realistic settings.

    5
        More precisely, it only requires ⌈p/2⌉ frequencies for real weights.                            √
    6
        The analytical solution becomes exact only at large N ; with sub-leading corrections of order 1/ N .


                                                         9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
A.G.’s work at the University of Maryland was supported in part by NSF CAREER Award DMR-
2045181, Sloan Foundation and the Laboratory for Physical Sciences through the Condensed Matter
Theory Center. The authors acknowledge the University of Maryland supercomputing resources
(http://hpcc.umd.edu) made available for conducting the research reported in this paper.

R EFERENCES
Boaz Barak, Benjamin L. Edelman, Surbhi Goel, Sham M. Kakade, eran malach, and Cyril Zhang.
  Hidden progress in deep learning: SGD learns parities near the computational limit. In Al-
  ice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  8XWP2ewX-im.
P.L. Bartlett. The sample complexity of pattern classification with neural networks: the size of
  the weights is more important than the size of the network. IEEE Transactions on Information
  Theory, 44(2):525–536, 1998. doi: 10.1109/18.661502.
Brian R. Bartoldson, Ari S. Morcos, Adrian Barbu, and Gordon Erlebacher. The generalization-
  stability tradeoff in neural network pruning, 2020.
Lucas Beyer, Olivier J. Hénaff, Alexander Kolesnikov, Xiaohua Zhai, and Aäron van den Oord. Are
  we done with imagenet?, 2020.
Nicholas Carlini, Florian Tramer, Eric Wallace, Matthew Jagielski, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Katherine
  Lee, Adam Roberts, Tom Brown, Dawn Song, Ulfar Erlingsson, et al. Extracting training data
  from large language models. In 30th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 21), pp.
  2633–2650, 2021.
Nicholas Carlini, Daphne Ippolito, Matthew Jagielski, Katherine Lee, Florian Tramer, and
  Chiyuan Zhang. Quantifying memorization across neural language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2202.07646, 2022.
Viv Cothey. Web-crawling reliability. Journal of the American Society for Information Science
  and Technology, 55(14):1228–1238, 2004. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/asi.20078. URL https:
  //onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/asi.20078.
Aritra Ghosh, Himanshu Kumar, and P Shanti Sastry. Robust loss functions under label noise for
  deep neural networks. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 31,
  2017.
Steven M. Girvin and Kun Yang. Modern Condensed Matter Physics. Cambridge University Press,
  2019. doi: 10.1017/9781316480649.
Andrey Gromov. Grokking modular arithmetic, 2023.           URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2301.02679.
Bo Han, Jiangchao Yao, Gang Niu, Mingyuan Zhou, Ivor Tsang, Ya Zhang, and Masashi Sugiyama.
  Masking: A new perspective of noisy supervision. In S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle,
  K. Grauman, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, volume 31, 2018.
Danny Hernandez, Tom Brown, Tom Conerly, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Sheer El-Showk, Nel-
  son Elhage, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Tom Henighan, Tristan Hume, et al. Scaling laws and inter-
  pretability of learning from repeated data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.10487, 2022.
Geoffrey E. Hinton, Nitish Srivastava, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan R. Salakhutdi-
  nov. Improving neural networks by preventing co-adaptation of feature detectors, 2012.
Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by
  reducing internal covariate shift, 2015.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Arthur Jacot, François Ged, Berfin Şimşek, Clément Hongler, and Franck Gabriel. Saddle-to-saddle
  dynamics in deep linear networks: Small initialization training, symmetry, and sparsity, 2022.
Angelos Katharopoulos and Francois Fleuret. Not all samples are created equal: Deep learning with
  importance sampling. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2525–2534. PMLR, 10–15 Jul
  2018.
Xuefeng Liang, Xingyu Liu, and Longshan Yao. Review–a survey of learning from noisy labels.
  ECS Sensors Plus, 1(2):021401, jun 2022. doi: 10.1149/2754-2726/ac75f5. URL https://
  dx.doi.org/10.1149/2754-2726/ac75f5.
Ziming Liu, Ouail Kitouni, Niklas S Nolte, Eric Michaud, Max Tegmark, and Mike Williams. To-
  wards understanding grokking: An effective theory of representation learning. In S. Koyejo,
  S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 34651–34663. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2022. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/
  file/dfc310e81992d2e4cedc09ac47eff13e-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Ziming Liu, Eric J Michaud, and Max Tegmark. Omnigrok: Grokking beyond algorithmic data.
  In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=zDiHoIWa0q1.
William Merrill, Nikolaos Tsilivis, and Aman Shukla. A tale of two circuits: Grokking as competi-
 tion of sparse and dense subnetworks, 2023.
Ari S. Morcos, David G. T. Barrett, Neil C. Rabinowitz, and Matthew Botvinick. On the importance
  of single directions for generalization, 2018.
Neel Nanda, Lawrence Chan, Tom Lieberum, Jess Smith, and Jacob Steinhardt. Progress measures
  for grokking via mechanistic interpretability, 2023.
Pascal Jr. Tikeng Notsawo, Hattie Zhou, Mohammad Pezeshki, Irina Rish, and Guillaume Dumas.
  Predicting grokking long before it happens: A look into the loss landscape of models which grok,
  2023.
Gabriele Paolacci, Jesse Chandler, and Panagiotis G. Ipeirotis. Running experiments on ama-
  zon mechanical turk. Judgment and Decision Making, 5(5):411–419, 2010. doi: 10.1017/
  S1930297500002205.
Romualdo Pastor-Satorras and Claudio Castellano. Distinct types of eigenvector localization in
  networks. Scientific Reports, 6(1):18847, 2016. doi: 10.1038/srep18847. URL https://doi.
  org/10.1038/srep18847.
Mansheej Paul, Surya Ganguli, and Gintare Karolina Dziugaite. Deep learning on a data diet:
 Finding important examples early in training. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S.
 Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
 volume 34, pp. 20596–20607. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021.
Alethea Power, Yuri Burda, Harri Edwards, Igor Babuschkin, and Vedant Misra. Grokking: Gener-
  alization beyond overfitting on small algorithmic datasets, 2022.
Hwanjun Song, Minseok Kim, Dongmin Park, Yooju Shin, and Jae-Gil Lee. Learning from noisy
 labels with deep neural networks: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning
 Systems, pp. 1–19, 2022. doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3152527.
Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov.
  Dropout: A simple way to prevent neural networks from overfitting. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 15(56):1929–1958, 2014. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v15/
  srivastava14a.html.
Kushal Tirumala, Aram Markosyan, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Armen Aghajanyan. Memorization
  without overfitting: Analyzing the training dynamics of large language models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:38274–38290, 2022.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Vikrant Varma, Rohin Shah, Zachary Kenton, János Kramár, and Ramana Kumar. Explaining
  grokking through circuit efficiency, 2023.
Tong Xiao, Tian Xia, Yi Yang, Chang Huang, and Xiaogang Wang. Learning from massive noisy
  labeled data for image classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2015.
Jiangchao Yao, Jiajie Wang, Ivor W. Tsang, Ya Zhang, Jun Sun, Chengqi Zhang, and Rui Zhang.
   Deep learning from noisy image labels with quality embedding. IEEE Transactions on Image
   Processing, 28(4):1909–1922, 2019. doi: 10.1109/TIP.2018.2877939.
Chiyuan Zhang, Samy Bengio, Moritz Hardt, Benjamin Recht, and Oriol Vinyals. Understanding
  deep learning requires rethinking generalization. In International Conference on Learning Rep-
  resentations, 2017. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Sy8gdB9xx.
Chiyuan Zhang, Samy Bengio, Moritz Hardt, Benjamin Recht, and Oriol Vinyals. Understanding
  deep learning (still) requires rethinking generalization. Communications of the ACM, 64(3):107–
  115, 2021.
Ziqian Zhong, Ziming Liu, Max Tegmark, and Jacob Andreas. The clock and the pizza: Two stories
  in mechanistic explanation of neural networks, 2023.

Bojan Žunkovič and Enej Ilievski. Grokking phase transitions in learning local rules with gradient
  descent, 2022.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     F URTHER E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
In every plot presented, unless explicitly stated otherwise, we use the following default setting:

Default setting A 2-layer fully connected network with quadratic activation function and width
N = 500, initial weights sampled from N (0, (16N )−2/3 ), trained on p = 97 Modular Addition
dataset. The networks are trained for 2000 optimization steps, using full-batch, MSE loss, AdamW
optimizer, learning rate η = 0.01 and β = (0.9, 0.98).

A.1   F IGURES IN M AIN T EXT

Figure 1: Default setting with α = 0.5, ξ = 0.35 and (a) wd = 0 (b) wd = 5 and (c) wd = 15.
Figure 2: Default setting with α = 0.5, ξ = 0.0, wd = 5.0.
Figure 3: Each plot is scanned over 17 different data fractions α ranging from 0.1 to 0.9 and 19
noise levels ξ from 0.0 to 0.9 using the default setting.
Figures 4 and 6: Default setting with α = 0.5, ξ = 0.35.
Figure 5: 2-layer fully connected network with quadratic activation function and width N = 500,
with and without BatchNorm. We train for ∼ 8000 steps, with MSE loss, Adam optimizer with
minibatch of size 64, and learning rate η = 0.005. Data fraction α = 0.65, corruption fraction
ξ = 0.2.
General setting for minibatch training: We train the network with batch size 256 for 2000 steps. For
batch sizes 8 and 64, we scale the number of total steps so as to keep the number of epochs roughly
equal. p
       (In other words, all the networks see the same amount of data.) The learning rate is scaled as
0.01 · batch size/256.
Figure 7: All networks are trained with MSE loss using AdamW optimizer with learning rate η =
0.001 and (β1 , β2 ) = (0.9, 0.98). (a) Encoder-only Transformer, embedding dimension dembed =
128 with ReLU activation, trained for 3000 steps with 3 random seeds; (b) Width N = 500 trained
for 5000 steps with 3 random seeds.

B     D ETAILS OF RESOURCES USED
Figure 3 requires 72 hours on a single NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU.
Figure 7 used 60 hours on a 1/7 NVIDIA A100 GPU.
All the remaining figures except Figure 7 in the main text are either further experiments performed
on the data from the Figure 3 experiment; or are very quick to perform on any machine.
We used 300 GPU hours for early-stage exploration and making phase diagrams in the appendix.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C     Q UANTITATIVE C HARACTERIZATION OF PHASES
All phase diagrams are plotted using the empirical accuracies of trained networks.
Trained networks with ≥ 90% test accuracies get classified into Coexistence, Partial Inversion and
Full Inversion based on their training accuracy (specifically, their ability to memorize corrupted ex-
amples). Coexistence phase has ≥ 90% training accuracy, since it memorizes most of the corrupted
training examples. Partial Inversion phase has < 90% but ≥ 100(1.05 − ξ)% training accuracy,
where ξ is the corruption fraction. Note that we subtract ξ from 1.05 instead of 1.00 to account
for the 1 − 2% random guessing accuracy as well as statistical fluctuations around this value. Full
Inversion phase has < 100(1.05 − ξ)% training accuracy, since it does not memorize any of the
corrupted examples. Memorization phase has < 90% test accuracy but ≥ 90% training accuracy,
indicating that the network memorizes all of the training data, including the corrupted and uncor-
rupted examples. Forgetting or confusion phase has < 90% test as well as training accuracies. the
network neither generalizes nor manages to memorize all the training examples. We distinguish
Forgetting from confusion using the training curve. In the Forgetting phase the grokked network
loses its performance due to steadily decreasing weight-norms. Whereas in the confusion phase, the
network never reaches high performance.

                                    Partial                Full                               Forgetting /
               Coexistence                                                    Memorization
                                   Inversion             Inversion                             Confusion
      Test
                 ≥ 90%              ≥ 90%                  ≥ 90%                 < 90%           < 90%
    accuracy
 Training                        < 90% and
                 ≥ 90%                                < 100(1.05 − ξ)%           ≥ 90%           < 90%
 accuracy                     ≥ 100(1.05 − ξ)%

                          Table 2: Quantitative characterization of phases.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D    A NALYTICAL S OLUTION
We show that the network with periodic weights stated in Equation (2) is indeed the analytical
solution for the modular arithmetic task. The network output is given by
                        N
                        X
          fq (m, n) =         Wqk (Ukm + Vkn )2
                        k=1
                         N
                      2 X           2π              (u)      (v)
                    =       cos − σ(k)q − (ϕk + ϕk ) ·
                      N              p
                        k=1
                                                                                             2
                                     2π              (u)              2π               (v)
                            · cos        σ(k)m + ϕk         + cos         σ(k)n + ϕk
                                      p                                p
                         N
                      2 X 1            2π                       (u)      (v)
                    =           cos       σ(k)(2m − q) + ϕk − ϕk
                      N       4         p
                        k=1

                                 1        2π                         (u)      (v)
                              + cos           σ(k)(2m + q) + 3ϕk + ϕk
                                 4         p

                                 1        2π                      (u)       (v)
                              + cos           σ(k)(2n − q) − ϕk + ϕk
                                 4         p

                                 1        2π                      (u)        (v)
                              + cos           σ(k)(2n + q) + ϕk + 3ϕk
                                 4         p

                                  1        2π
                              + cos            σ(k)(m + n − q)
                                  2         p

                                 1        2π                             (u)       (v)
                              + cos           σ(k)(m + n + q) + 2ϕk + 2ϕk
                                 2         p

                                 1        2π                             (v)
                              + cos           σ(k)(m − n − q) − 2ϕk
                                 2         p

                                 1        2π                             (u)
                              + cos           σ(k)(m − n + q) + 2ϕk
                                 2         p

                                          2π             (u)      (v)
                              + cos − σ(k)q − ϕk − ϕk                      .                     (6)
                                           p

We have highlighted the term that will give us the desired output with a box. Note that the desired
term is the only one that does not have additive phases in the argument. Recall that the phases
  (u)       (v)
ϕk and ϕk randomly chosen – uniformly i.i.d. sampled between (−π, π]. Consequently, as N
becomes large, all other terms will vanish due to random phase approximation. The only surviving
term will be the boxed term. We can write this boxed term in a more suggestive form to make the
analytical solution apparent.


                                  N
                           1 X              2π
               fq (m, n) =     cos             σ(k)(m + n − q) ≈ δ p (m + n − q) ,               (7)
                           N                 p
                                 k=1

where we have defined the modular Kronecker Delta function δ p (·) as Kronecker Delta function up
to integer multiples of the modular base p.

                                           1 x = rp    (r ∈ Z)
                               δ p (x) =                          ,                           (8)
                                           0 otherwise
where Z denotes the set of all integers. Note that δ p (m + n − q) are the desired one hot encoded
labels for the Modular Arithmetic task, by definition. Thus our network output with periodic weights
is indeed a solution.


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E    F ORGETTING PHASE

                              100                           train                                      ||U||F
                                                            test                10                     ||V||F


                                                                     weight norms
                   accuracy (%)
                                  75
                                                                                                       ||W||F
                                  50
                                                                                    5
                                  25
                                   0                                                0
                                       0         2000     4000                          0   2000     4000
                                                  steps                                      steps
                                                    (a)                                        (b)
Figure 8: Forgetting phase (data fraction α = 0.5, corruption fraction ξ = 0.35, weight decay = 20).
(a) Training curves. (b) Frobenius norms of network weights with training.

We saw in Figure 3(a) (right-most panel, wd=20.0) that extremely high weight decay leads to For-
getting phase. This phase has random guessing accuracies on both training and test datasets at the
end of training. Naively, this would seem similar to the Confusion phase. However, Upon close
inspection of their training dynamics, we find rich behaviour. Namely, the network initially under-
goes dynamics similar to Full Inversion, i.e., the test accuracy reaches 100% while the train accuracy
plateaus around 100(1 − ξ)%. However, both accuracies subsequently decay down to random guess-
ing. This curious phenomenon is explained by the effect of the high weight decay on the network
weights. We notice that the Frobenius norms of the weights of the network steadily decay down to
arbitrarily small values.
This curious behaviour only occurs when we use activation functions of degree higher than 1 (e.g.
ϕ(x) = x2 in this case). (More precisely, we mean that the first term in the series expansion should
be of degree at least 2.) This can be intuitively explained by examining the gradients carefully. With
quadratic activation functions and MSE loss, gradients take the following form
                             p     N
                                                                          !
     ∂L        4      X X         X                      2     p
          =                           Wqk (Ukb + Vkn ) − δ (b + n − q) Wqa (Uab + Van )
   ∂Uab      |D|p
                   (b,n)∈D q      k=1
                              p    N
                                                                           !
     ∂L        4      X X         X                        2
          =                            Wqk (Ukm + Vkb ) − δ p (b + n − q) Wqa (Uam + Vab ) (9)
    ∂Vab     |D|p
                   (m,b)∈D q      k=1
                                N
                                                                         !
    ∂L         4      X         X                      2     p                           2
          =                        Wck (Ukm + Vkn ) − δ (m + n − q) (Udm + Vdn ) ,
   ∂Wcd      |D|p
                   (m,n)∈D                 k=1

where D is the training dataset and |D| is its size.
For non-generalizing solutions, the term inside the bracket is of degree 0 in weights, due to the
delta function term. But close to generalizing solutions, the term inside the bracket becomes effec-
tively degree 3 in weights, since the delta function term cancels with the network output. Conse-
quently, around the generalizing solution, the weight gradients have a higher degree dependence on
the weights themselves. This makes such solutions more prone to the collapse due to high weight
decay. This serves as a heuristic justification as to why only grokked networks seemed to be prone
to Forgetting, while memorizing networks seem to be immune.
If we use vanilla Gradient Descent optimizer, the updates would plateau once the balance between
gradient updates and weight decay contribution is reached. But this is not the case in Adaptive
optimizers. Indeed, we find that this phenomenon exclusively occurs with Adaptive optimizers (e.g.
Adam in this case).
We believe that it is possible to get further insight into this phase by closely examining the opti-
mization landscape and network dynamics. Since this behaviour is exclusive to grokked networks,
understanding this phase would lead to further understanding of grokking dynamics. Alternatively,
a better understanding of the dynamics of grokking should give us insights into this curious phe-
nomenon. We defer this analysis for future work and welcome an examination by our readers.


                                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F   C OMPARISON OF BATCH N ORM , L AYER N ORM AND MINIBATCH W / O
    N ORMALIZATION
Here we examine the effects of BatchNorm, LayerNorm and mini-batch noise. We find that gen-
eralization and Inversion are indeed enhanced by decreasing the batch-size. This demonstrates that
implicit regularization from mini-batch noise favours simpler solutions in our setup.
Additionally, upon comparing Figure 9, Figure 10 and Figure 11 we find enhanced Inversion in cases
with normalization layers (especially BatchNorm). For BatchNorm, we provide an explanation in
the main text, with the the BatchNorm weights de-amplifying memorizing neurons in favour of
generalizing ones. For LayerNorm, however, we do not find such an effect.



         Memorization                 Memorization                       Memorization                          Memorization


                         P.I.                          P.I.                               P.I.
                                               ce
                                                                                                                             P.I.


                                                                                     ce
                  ce


                                                en


                                                                                  ten
                ten


                             Full                          Full                              Full                                  Full
                                             ist
                 is


                                                                                is
                                           ex
              ex


                                                                             ex
                       Inversion                     Inversion                            Inversion                   C.E.      Inversion
                                        Co
           Co


                                                                          Co
                          Figure 9: Phase diagram with BatchNorm (post-BN)


                       Memorization                  Memorization                          Memorization



                                         Partial                           P.I.                                P.I.
                                                                  ce
                                                               ten


                                      Inversion                                                                Full
                                                                is


                                                                                  F.I.
                                                             ex


                                Coexistence                                                      C.E.    Inversion
                                                          Co


Figure 10: Phase diagram with mini-batch training, without any explicit regularization or normal-
ization layers.


                       Memorization                  Memorization                         Memorization



                                        Partial                           P.I.
                                                                   ce


                                                                                                        P.I.
                                     Inversion
                                                               ten


                                                                              Full                           Full
                                                               is
                                                            ex


                                Coexistence                             Inversion                C.E.     Inversion
                                                         Co


                          Figure 11: Phase diagram with LayerNorm (post-LN)


                                                              17
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    G               T RANSFORMERS AND D EEP MLP S

    In this section, we present (i) more weight decay experiments on different configurations of Trans-
    formers; (ii) the Effect of Dropout on Transformers; (iii) the Effect of BatchNorm on 3-layer ReLU
    MLPs.
    For reasons that we do not fully understand, 3-layer ReLU MLPs with even 0.05 Dropout probabil-
    ities failed to memorize the dataset for any data fraction α > 0.3 and noise level ξ ≥ 0.1, even after
    an extensive hyperparameter search. We leave the discussion about this for the future.

    G.1             E FFECT OF D EPTH / N UMBER OF H EADS / W EIGHT T YING

    To further support our Hypothesis 2.2, we conducted further experiments by varying the config-
    uration of Transformer models. Figure 12 suggests that our Hypothesis holds irrespective of the
    Transformer configurations.

                         1-layer           1-layer + Weight Tying         4-layer              4-layer + Weight Tying
           100
# of neurons


               50

                00.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
                          IPR                       IPR                     IPR                         IPR
                                   (a) Transformer with 8 heads and embedding dimension 128.

                         1-layer           1-layer + Weight Tying         4-layer              4-layer + Weight Tying
           100
# of neurons


               50

                00.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
                          IPR                       IPR                     IPR                         IPR
                                   (b) Transformer with 4 heads and embedding dimension 128.

    Figure 12: The IPR histograms of the Embedding layer for Transformers with different configura-
    tions. We see that depth does not affect the IPR distribution, whereas more heads encourages high
    IPR embeddings and weight tying discourages it. All models are trained with corruption fraction
    α = 0.8 and corruption fraction ξ = 0.2.


    G.2             D ROPOUT P HASE D IAGRAM FOR T RANSFORMERS

    We conduct further experiments to check the effect of Dropout on Transformers. From Figure 13,
    we see that with a small dropout probability, the model managed to have a coexistence phase with an
    average higher IPR for neurons connected to the embedding layer. Notably, any dropout probability
    larger than 0.1 does not help.

    G.3             E FFECT OF PARAMETERIZATION FOR 3- LAYER MLP S

    As we mentioned in Hypothesis 2.2, the input layer should have high IPR columns irrespective of
    the details of the network. In this section, we show that different parameterization of the network
    does not break our Hypothesis.
    In particular, we consider two different parameterizations: (i) The standard parameterization
    with weights sampled from N (0, 2/fan in); (ii) The parameterization with weights sampled from
    N (0, 2/N 2/3 ), which corresponds to a network parameterized in a more lazy training regime (Jacot
    et al., 2022).


                                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Confusion


                                                 Confusion
      Memorization                Memorization



                                                   C.E.



                                                             (a) 1-layer Transformer.

Figure 13: Modular Addition phase diagrams and IPR histograms with different dropout probabil-
ities (denoted by “dp”). The IPR histograms are plotted for neurons connected to the embedding
layer. We select points trained with data fraction α = 0.9 and corruption fraction ξ = 0.1.


Our results in Figure 14 show that as the network gets into a lazier regime, the row-wise IPR dis-
tribution of the input layer weight barely shifts, whereas the column-wise IPR distribution of the
output layer weight has larger values. We interpret this shift as happening because the network with
lazier parameterization fails to utilize the hidden layers to decode the periodic features embedded
by input layers.


         Memorization


                      P.I.
                         Full
                     Inversion



                                            (a) MLPs in standard parameterization.


        Memorization


                     P.I.
                        Full
                     Inversion



                                            (b) MLPs in a lazier parameterization.

Figure 14: Phase diagrams and the IPR histograms of the columns of input layer weight and rows
of the output layer weights for 3-layer MLPs with different parameterizations. Selected models are
trained with data fraction α = 0.8 and corruption fraction ξ = 0.2.


G.4      BATCH N ORM FOR 3-L AYER R E LU MLP S

This subsection tests the correlation between BatchNorm weights and high IPR neurons for 3-layer
ReLU MLPs. We found that BatchNorm for 3-layer MLPs only has coexistence phases and can
perfectly memorize and generalize for small corruption fractions ξ, we showed a representative
training curve in Figure 15. We find that with BatchNorm, the 3-layer MLP tends to have high IPR


                                                                       19
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  neurons close to the output layer instead of having high IPR for neurons close to the input layer.
  We believe that failure to remove the very low IPR neurons connected to the input layer is why this
  network is always in the coexistence phase.

           500                                                                                                          0.150
                                         Input                                      Output


                                                                                                   |BatchNorm weight|
           400                                                                                                          0.125
# of neurons



           300                                                                                                          0.100
           200                                                                                                          0.075
           100                                                                                                          0.050
               00.0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8      1.0 0.0   0.2    0.4         0.6   0.8      1.0                        0.0250.0   0.2   0.4         0.6   0.8   1.0
                              IPR                                       IPR                                                                    IPR
                                        (a) 3-layer ReLU MLP, trained with batch size B = 64.

  Figure 15: IPR of a 3-layer MLP in coexistence phase, trained with data fraction α = 0.8 and
  corruption fraction ξ = 0.1. We plotted row-wise IPR for input layer weight and column-wise
  IPR for output layer weight; the correlation between column-wise IPR of output layer weights with
  the absolute value of BatchNorm weights right before it. The correlation between the BatchNorm
  weights and IPR values we pointed out in the main text still holds. However, we did not observe a
  strong correlation between row-wise IPR of the input layer and the BatchNorm weight next to it.


   H             L ABEL CORRUPTION ON GENERAL DATASETS
  We train a 4-layer ReLU MLP on the MNIST dataset with label corruption with weight decay
  and dropout (CrossEntropy loss). Weight decay indeed enhanses generalization and leads to Full
  Inversion. Very high weight decay leads to confusion. Dropout, on the other hand, is not as effective.
  Increasing dropout hurts both test and train accuracies in this case.
  The generalizing features are harder to quantify for MNIST – we leave this analysis for future work.


                                                   Confusion                        Confusion


                        Memorization                                                                                                           Confusion
                                                              Full                                    Full
                                                           Inversion                               Inversion

                      Coexistence                 C.E.



                                                                 (a) Weight decay



                                                                 Confusion

                        Memorization                                                         Confusion                                         Confusion

                                                   Memorization


                      Coexistence



                                                                   (b) Dropout

                      Figure 16: 4-layer ReLU MLP trained on MNIST dataset with label corruption.


                                                                          20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I              A DDITIONAL P RUNING C URVES
I.1                 ACCURACIES

In Figure 6, we showed pruning low and high IPR neurons in the Coexistence phase. Here we show
the extended version of the pruning experiments. In contrast to the plots in Figure 6, In Figure 17
we plot longer x-axes – we show accuracies with fraction of pruned neurons ranging from 0.0 to 1.0.
We also perform the pruning experiment for Partial Inversion and Full Inversion phases. Pruning
affects generalization and memorization differently in different phases because the proportion of
high and low IPR neurons in trained networks depends on the phase.
               Pruning Memorizing (low IPR) neurons                 Pruning Generalizing (high IPR) neurons
           100                                                       100
               80                                                        80                                         training set
accuracy (%)


                                                          accuracy (%)
               60                                                        60                                         test set
                                                                                                                    corrupted training data
               40                                                        40                                         uncorrupted training data
               20                                                        20                                         100(1 )%
                00.0     0.2   0.4    0.6   0.8     1.0                   00.0     0.2    0.4   0.6   0.8     1.0
                       fraction of neurons pruned                                fraction of neurons pruned
                             (from lowest IPR)                                         (from highest IPR)
(a) Coexistence phase (weight decay = 0.0). (Left) Pruning from low IPR neurons retains performance on test
data and uncorrupted training data; while decreases performance on corrupted training data down to to 100 ∗
(1 − ξ)%. (Right) Pruning high IPR neurons decreases performance on test data; while retaining performance
on training data. Note that the accuracy on corrupted data is retained longer than that on uncorrupted data.
               Pruning Memorizing (low IPR) neurons                 Pruning Generalizing (high IPR) neurons
           100                                                       100
               80                                                        80                                         training set
accuracy (%)


                                                          accuracy (%)


               60                                                        60                                         test set
                                                                                                                    corrupted training data
               40                                                        40                                         uncorrupted training data
               20                                                        20                                         100(1 )%
                00.0     0.2   0.4    0.6   0.8     1.0                   00.0     0.2    0.4   0.6   0.8     1.0
                       fraction of neurons pruned                                fraction of neurons pruned
                             (from lowest IPR)                                         (from highest IPR)
(b) Partial Inversion phase (weight decay = 5.0). (Left) Pruning from low IPR neurons retains performance
on test data and uncorrupted training data; while decreases performance on corrupted training data down to
to 100 ∗ (1 − ξ)%. (Right) Pruning high IPR neurons decreases performance on test data. It improves the
performance on corrupted training data and retains it on uncorrupted training data. In the absence of periodic
neurons, the (memorizing) low-IPR neurons have an increased influence on the network predictions, which
leads to this increase in memorization.
               Pruning Memorizing (low IPR) neurons                 Pruning Generalizing (high IPR) neurons
           100                                                       100
               80                                                        80                                         training set
accuracy (%)


                                                          accuracy (%)


               60                                                        60                                         test set
                                                                                                                    corrupted training data
               40                                                        40                                         uncorrupted training data
               20                                                        20                                         100(1 )%
                00.0     0.2   0.4    0.6   0.8     1.0                   00.0     0.2    0.4   0.6   0.8     1.0
                       fraction of neurons pruned                                fraction of neurons pruned
                             (from lowest IPR)                                         (from highest IPR)
(c) Full Inversion phase (weight decay = 15.0). (Left) Pruning from low IPR neurons retains performance on test
data and uncorrupted training data; while decreases performance on corrupted training data to 100 ∗ (1 − ξ)%.
(Right) Pruning high IPR neurons does not improve memorization significantly, except for the small increase
in accuracy on corrupted training data towards the end. This is because the fraction of the neurons that have
low IPR is very small in this case.

Figure 17: Pruning experiments in all various phases (N = 500, α = 0.5, ξ = 0.35). Pruning affects
generalization and memorization differently in different phases because the proportion of high and
low IPR neurons in trained networks depends on the phase.


                                                                                         21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I.2   L OSSES

Here we show how the train and test losses are affected by pruning. Train loss is lowered by, both,
memorizing (low IPR) and generalizing (high IPR) neurons. This leads to monotonic behaviors in
all the cases. Test loss is lowered by periodic neurons, while increased by memorizing neurons.
An effect that sits on top of these is the effective cancellation of sub-leading terms in the analytical
solution Equation (6). Since the accuracies only depend on the largest logit, these sub-leading terms
have little effect on them (at sufficient width). However, losses are significantly affected by them.
With zero or small weight decay values, this cancellation is achieved by low IPR neurons. Thus, in
these cases, low IPR neurons serve the dual purpose of memorization as well as canceling the sub-
leading terms. With large weight decay values, this cancellation is achieved by a different algorithm,
where “secondary peaks” appear in the Fourier spectrum of the periodic neurons. We leave an in-
depth analysis of these algorithmic biases for future work.

                    Pruning Memorizing (low IPR) neurons                 Pruning Generalizing (high IPR) neurons
                0.020                                                0.020
                0.015                                                0.015
         MSE loss


                                                              MSE loss                                              training set
                0.010                                                0.010                                          test set
                0.005                                                0.005
                     0.0     0.2   0.4    0.6   0.8     1.0                0.0     0.2   0.4    0.6   0.8     1.0
                           fraction of neurons pruned                            fraction of neurons pruned
                                 (from lowest IPR)                                     (from highest IPR)
(a) Coexistence phase (weight decay = 0.0). (Left) Pruning from low IPR neurons (almost) monotonically
increases the train loss. The test loss has two competing factors: lower memorization and fewer neurons that
cancel the sub-leading terms. As a result, we see non-monotonic behaviour in the first half. (Right) Pruning
high IPR neurons increases both train and test losses. We see a non-monotonic behaviour in the second half
since the cancellation of sub-leading terms is irrelevant in the absence of periodic neurons.
                    Pruning Memorizing (low IPR) neurons                 Pruning Generalizing (high IPR) neurons

                0.010                                                0.010
         MSE loss


                                                              MSE loss


                                                                                                                    training set
                0.008                                                0.008                                          test set
                0.006                                                0.006

                     0.0     0.2   0.4    0.6   0.8     1.0                0.0     0.2   0.4    0.6   0.8     1.0
                           fraction of neurons pruned                            fraction of neurons pruned
                                 (from lowest IPR)                                     (from highest IPR)
(b) Partial Inversion phase (weight decay = 5.0). (Left) Pruning from low IPR neurons: Initially, the removal
of memorizing neurons causes the train loss to increase and the test loss to decrease. In the latter half, once
we start removing the periodic neurons, both train and test losses increase. (Right) Pruning from high IPR
neurons: Initially, both train and test losses increase due to the removal of periodic neurons. In the latter half,
the removal of the memorizing neurons causes the train and test losses to increase and decrease, respectively.
                    Pruning Memorizing (low IPR) neurons                 Pruning Generalizing (high IPR) neurons

                0.010                                                0.010
         MSE loss


                                                              MSE loss


                                                                                                                    training set
                0.009                                                0.009                                          test set

                0.008                                                0.008
                    0.0      0.2   0.4    0.6   0.8     1.0              0.0       0.2   0.4    0.6   0.8     1.0
                           fraction of neurons pruned                            fraction of neurons pruned
                                 (from lowest IPR)                                     (from highest IPR)
(c) Full Inversion phase (weight decay = 15.0). (Left) Pruning from low IPR neurons monotonically increases
the train loss, since it is affected by removal of memorizing and periodic neurons. On the other hand, test
loss briefly remains constant (during the removal of the low IPR neurons), followed by a monotonic increase.
(Right) Removing high IPR neurons monotonically increases both train and test losses.

Figure 18: Pruning experiments in all various phases (N = 500, α = 0.5, ξ = 0.35). Pruning affects
generalization and memorization differently in different phases because the proportion of high and
low IPR neurons in trained networks depends on the phase.


                                                                             22
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  J           A DDITIONAL T RAINING C URVES

                         Coexistence                             Partial Inversion                       Full Inversion                         Confusion
         100                                          100                                      100                                 100
% accuracy


             50                                        50                                       50                                  50
                                             train                                train                                   train                             train
                                             test                                 test                                    test                              test
              0                                          0                                       0                                   0
                  0                  500       1000          0           200     400                 0       200         400             0          1000      2000
                                    steps                                steps                                   steps                             steps
                                     (a)                                  (b)                                     (c)                               (d)
                      Figure 19: Training curves with dropout (a) dp=0.0 (b) dp=0.3 (c) dp=0.6 (d) dp=0.9

                                             Coexistence                          Partial Inversion                            Full Inversion
                                100                                       100                                      100
                                 75                                        75                                       75
                       % accuracy


                                 50                                        50                                       50
                                                                 train                                   train                                  train
                                 25                              test      25                            test       25                          test
                                  0                                         0                                        0
                                            1000 2000 3000 4000                    500 1000 1500 2000                          500 1000 1500 2000
                                                 steps                                    steps                                    steps
                                                  (a)                                      (b)                                      (c)
  Figure 20: Training curves in various phases with BatchNorm. All networks are trained with cor-
  ruption fraction ξ = 0.3 and batch-size = 64; with variable data fractions. (a) Coexistence (α = 0.4)
  (b) Partial Inversion (α = 0.5) (c) Full Inversion (α = 0.8)

                                             Coexistence                          Partial Inversion                            Full Inversion
                                100                                       100                                      100
                                 75                                        75                                       75
                       % accuracy


                                 50                                        50                                       50
                                                                 train                                   train                                  train
                                 25                              test      25                            test       25                          test
                                  0                                         0                                        0
                                            1000 2000 3000 4000                    500 1000 1500 2000                          500 1000 1500 2000
                                                 steps                                    steps                                    steps
                                                  (a)                                      (b)                                      (c)
  Figure 21: Training curves in various phases with LayerNorm. All networks are trained with cor-
  ruption fraction ξ = 0.3 and batch-size = 64; with variable data fractions. (a) Coexistence (α = 0.4)
  (b) Partial Inversion (α = 0.5) (c) Full Inversion (α = 0.8)

                                             Coexistence                          Partial Inversion                            Full Inversion
                                100                                       100                                      100
                                 75                                        75                                       75
                       % accuracy


                                 50                                        50                                       50
                                                                 train                                   train                                  train
                                 25                              test      25                            test       25                          test
                                  0                                         0                                        0
                                            1k 2k 3k 4k 5k                         500 1000 1500 2000                          500 1000 1500 2000
                                                 steps                                    steps                                    steps
                                                  (a)                                      (b)                                      (c)
  Figure 22: Training curves in various phases without any normalization, but with mini-batches.
  All networks are trained with corruption fraction ξ = 0.3 and batch-size = 64; with variable data
  fractions. (a) Coexistence (α = 0.4) (b) Partial Inversion (α = 0.5) (c) Full Inversion (α = 0.8)


                                                                                          23
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  K             O UTPUT L OGITS
 Here we show how the output logits of trained networks look like in various phases (i.e. different
 amount of weight decay) on corrupted training examples. In all cases, we see two peaks in logits,
 corresponding the the corrupted and the “correct” labels. Their relative value determines the degree
 of memorization, and hence, the phase.

          1.0
                           correct label                correct label                correct label                correct label
          0.8              corrupted label              corrupted label              corrupted label              corrupted label
logit value


          0.6
          0.4
          0.2
          0.0
                0   25 50 75             100 0   25 50 75             100 0   25 50 75             100 0   25 50 75             100
                     output_index                 output_index                 output_index                 output_index
 (a) Coexistence phase (wd=0.0). The logits corresponding to corrupted label have a higher values than the
 correct ones, which explains the memorization of corrupted data in this phase.
    0.4
                           correct label                correct label                correct label                correct label
          0.3              corrupted label              corrupted label              corrupted label              corrupted label
logit value


          0.2
          0.1
          0.0
                0   25 50 75             100 0   25 50 75             100 0   25 50 75             100 0   25 50 75             100
                     output_index                 output_index                 output_index                 output_index
 (b) Partial Inversion phase (wd=5.0). The logits corresponding to corrupted labels have similar values to the
 correct ones, which explains partial memorization of corrupted data in this phase.
    0.2
                           correct label                correct label                correct label                correct label
                           corrupted label              corrupted label              corrupted label              corrupted label
logit value


          0.1


          0.0
                0   25 50 75             100 0   25 50 75             100 0   25 50 75             100 0   25 50 75             100
                     output_index                 output_index                 output_index                 output_index
 (c) Full Inversion phase (wd=15.0). The logits corresponding to corrupted labels are heavily suppressed com-
 pared to the correct ones, which explains the absence of memorization of corrupted data in this phase.

 Figure 23: Network output logits on 4 different (corrupted) training examples examples, in various
 phases (N = 500, α = 0.5, ξ = 0.35). Blue dots correspond to the logit value for the “correct”
 labels. Red dots correspond to the logit value for the corrupted labels.


                                                                     24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L    D ETAILED P HASE D IAGRAMS
Here we replot the phase diagrams in Figure 3 together with train and test accuracies.


          Memorization            Memorization                    Memorization         Memorization


                                                     P.I.
                                         ce


                        Partial
                                          n


                                                                             Full
                                       te


                     Inversion                                                                Forgetting
                                        is


                                                    Full                  Inversion
                                     ex
                                  Co


              Coexistence                        Inversion


 Figure 24: Modular Addition with weight decay. The first two rows are train and test accuracies.


          Memorization            Memorization                    Memorization
                                                                                        Confusion

                                                     P.I.
                                            ce


                        Partial
                                          en


                     Inversion                                                Full
                                       ist


                                                    Full                                           Full
                                                                           Inversion
                                     ex


                                                 Inversion                                      Inversion
                                  Co


               Coexistence


    Figure 25: Modular Addition with Dropout. The first two rows are train and test accuracies.



                                                             25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


M    C HOICE OF L OSS F UNCTION
CrossEntropy loss is known to be sensitive to label noise (Ghosh et al., 2017). By adding regular-
ization, we recover similar phase diagrams. The requirement for regularization is much greater for
CrossEntropy loss compared to MSE. We find that CrossEntropy training is very sensitive to weight
decay, with Inversion occuring for a narrow band of weight decay values, beyond which we find
Confusion. We do not observe a Forgetting phase in this case. See Figure 26. With Dropout, we find
that CrossEntropy training requires very high dropout probabilities to grok and/or attain Inversion.



                                                          Memorization
                                  Memorization
           Memorization                                                              Confusion
                                                                  P.I.
                                                                       Full
                                      Coexistence                   Inversion


                                          (a) Weight decay


                                                                                  Memorization
                                  Memorization               Memorization
           Memorization

                                                                                           P.I.
                                                                                                 Full
                                                                                              Inversion
                                                 C.E.               Coexistence     C.E.



                                            (b) Dropout

Figure 26: Modular Addition trained with CrossEntropy Loss. Robustness to label corruption is
weaker compared to MSE.


                                                 26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


N    C HOICE OF ACTIVATION F UNCTION
To check if the story depends on the activation function, we did the modular addition experiments
for 2-layer ReLU network, see Figures 27 and 28. The requirement for regularization for grokking
is higher compared to quadratic activation function. We noticed that the phase diagram for weight
decay behaves similarly to quadratic activation functions, except for the disappearance of the For-
getting phase. Dropout does not seem as effective for ReLU networks, with the network entering
Confusion phase for even moderate dropout probabilites.



                                                                                             Conf-
                                                                                             usion
                                            Memorization


                                                                                                     Memorization
                                                                                                                     Confusion
          Memorization                                                        Memorization


                                                          Full                             Full
                             F.I.                      Inversion                        Inversion                                F.I.



                         Figure 27: Phase diagram with weight decay, ReLU.
                                    Memorization


                                                                    Memorization


          Memorization                             Confusion
                                                                                    Confusion                       Confusion


                         P.I.
                 C.E.      F.I.


                            Figure 28: Phase diagram with Dropout, ReLU.


                                                               27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


O    E FFECT OF OF WIDTH



           Memorization            Memorization                       Memorization               Memorization

                                                                                 P.I.
                                                     ce   P.I.
                                                   en
                                                ist        Full
                                                                                 Full                      Forgetting
                  Coexistence              ex                                 Inversion
                                        Co           Inversion


Figure 29: Phase diagram for width N = 5000 fully connected network with quadratic activation.
Regularization with weight decay. Compared to N = 500 network in Figure 3(a), the network
generalizes marginally poorly. Note: the absence of Partial Inversion phase and smaller Coexistence
phase with wd = 0.0. This can be attributed to the increased capacity to memorize due to abundance
of Neurons.


                                   Memorization                       Memorization               Memorization

            Memorization
                                                                                                               e     P.I.
                                                                                                             nc
                                                                                                           te
                                                                            Coexistence               exis         Full
                                               Coexistence                                          Co
                                                                                          F.I.                  Inversion


Figure 30: Phase diagram for width N = 5000 fully connected network with ReLU activation.
Regularization with weight decay. In this case, the network performance is drastically improved
compared to N = 500 (Figure 27). The confusion phase is largely eliminated, due to the increased
capacity of the network, as a result of abundance of neurons.


P   OTHER M ODULAR A RITHMETIC DATASETS
In this section, we check if the phase diagram story is unique to modular addition. We repeat our
experiments with modular multiplication (z = (mn)%p ≡ mn mod p) and obtain almost identical
phase diagrams to modular addition (see Figure 31).



           Memorization            Memorization                       Memorization               Memorization


                                                          P.I.
                                          ce


                         Partial
                                           n


                                                                                 Full
                                        te


                      Inversion                                                                            Forgetting
                                         is


                                                     Full                     Inversion
                                      ex
                                   Co


               Coexistence                        Inversion


Figure 31: Phase diagram for Modular Multiplication, weight decay. All other settings are identical
to Figure 3. Note that the phase diagram is identical to Modular Arithmetic case – representative of
the similarity in the algorithms learnt by the network.



                                                                 28
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Q            H OW MANY NEURONS CAN BE PRUNED WHILE RETAINING
               GENERALIZATION ?

 We showed in the pruning experiments (Figures 6, 17) that a significant proportion of neurons (start-
 ing from low IPR) can be pruned out without decreasing test error. In Figure 32 we show how many
 neurons can pruned from a trained network at various widths. We train networks with widths be-
 tween 500 and 10000; with learning rate 0.005 and weight decay 1.0, with AdamW optimizer and
 MSE loss. We use corrupted modular addition data, with data fraction α = 0.5 and corruption
 fraction ξ = 0.35. We repeat the experiment 40 times, averaging over different random seeds.


                                                           % of pruned neurons
           100                                                               98
# of neurons


               90                                                            96
               80                                                            94
                                                                             92
               70
                                                                             90
               60
                                                                             88
                     103                      104                                 103                 104
                     network width (N)                                            network width (N)
 (a) Number of neurons required after pruning                 (b) % of neurons that can be pruned (from low
 (from low IPR) to retain generalization. We see              IPR) while retaining generalization.
 a sub-linear increase in the required neurons with
 width. shaded region denoted the standard error
 over 40 runs.

 Figure 32: Pruning as many low IPR neurons as possible while retaining generalization, for various
 network widths (α = 0.5, ξ = 0.35). The curves are averaged over 40 random seeds. Note that the
 x-axes on both plots have a logarithmic scale.


                                                      29
