Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A T HEORY OF U NIMODAL B IAS IN M ULTIMODAL
L EARNING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Using multiple input streams simultaneously in training multimodal neural net-
         works is intuitively advantageous, but practically challenging. A key challenge is
         unimodal bias, where a network overly relies on one modality and ignores oth-
         ers during joint training. While unimodal bias is well-documented empirically,
         our theoretical understanding of how architecture and data statistics influence this
         bias remains incomplete. Here we develop a theory of unimodal bias with deep
         multimodal linear networks. We calculate the duration of the unimodal phase in
         learning as a function of the depth at which modalities are fused within the net-
         work, dataset statistics, and initialization. We find that the deeper the layer at
         which fusion occurs, the longer the unimodal phase. In addition, our theory re-
         veals the modality learned first is not necessarily the modality that contributes
         more to the output. Our results, derived for multimodal linear networks, extend to
         ReLU networks in certain settings. Taken together, this work illuminates patholo-
         gies of multimodal learning under joint training, showing that late and intermedi-
         ate fusion architectures can give rise to long unimodal phases and even prioritize
         learning a less helpful modality.


1   I NTRODUCTION
The success of multimodal deep learning hinges on effectively utilizing multiple modalities (Bal-
trušaitis et al., 2019; Liang et al., 2022). However, some multimodal networks overly rely on a
faster-to-learn or easier-to-learn modality and ignore the others during joint training (Goyal et al.,
2017; Cadene et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020; Gat et al., 2021; Peng et al., 2022). For example, Vi-
sual Question Answering models should provide a correct answer by both “listening” to the question
and “looking” at the image (Agrawal et al., 2016), whereas they tend to overly rely on the language
modality and ignore the visual modality (Goyal et al., 2017; Agrawal et al., 2018; Hessel & Lee,
2020). This phenomenon has been observed in a variety of settings, and has several names: uni-
modal bias (Cadene et al., 2019), greedy learning (Wu et al., 2022), modality competition (Huang
et al., 2022), modality laziness (Du et al., 2023), and modality underutilization (Makino et al., 2023).
In this paper we adopt the term unimodal bias to refer to the phenomenon in which a multimodal
network learns from different input modalities at different times during joint training. The extent to
which multimodal networks exhibit unimodal bias depends on both the dataset and the multimodal
network. Goyal et al. (2017); Agrawal et al. (2018); Hudson & Manning (2019) tried to alleviate
the bias by building more balanced multimodal datasets. Empirical work has shown that unimodal
bias emerges in jointly trained late fusion networks (Wang et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2022) and
intermediate fusion networks (Wu et al., 2022), while early fusion networks may encourage usage
of all input modalities (Gadzicki et al., 2020; Barnum et al., 2020).
Despite empirical evidence, there is scarce theoretical understanding of how unimodal bias arises
and how it is affected by the network configuration, dataset statistics, and initialization. To unravel
this pathological behavior, we study deep multimodal linear networks with three common fusion
schemes: early, intermediate, and late (Ramachandram & Taylor, 2017). We find that unimodal bias
is absent in early fusion linear networks but present in intermediate and late fusion linear networks.
Intermediate and late fusion linear networks learn one modality first and the other after a delay,
yielding a phase in which the multimodal network implements a unimodal function. This differ-
ence in time is consistent with the empirical observation that multimodal networks learn different


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


modalities at different speeds (Wang et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2022). We compute the duration of the
unimodal phase in terms of parameters of the network and the dataset. We find that a deeper fusion
layer within the multimodal network, stronger correlations between input modalities, and greater
disparities in input-output correlations for each modality all prolong the unimodal phase. We also
find that multimodal networks have a superficial preference for which modality to learn first: they
prioritize the faster-to-learn modality, which is not necessarily the modality that contributes more
to the output, and we derive conditions under which a network will exhibit this superficial pref-
erence. Our results apply to ReLU networks in certain settings, providing insights for examining,
diagnosing, and curing unimodal bias in a broader range of realistic cases.
Our contributions are the following: (i) We provide a theoretical explanation for the presence of
unimodal bias in late and intermediate fusion linear networks and the absence of unimodal bias in
early fusion linear networks. (ii) We calculate the duration of the unimodal phase in mulitmodal
learning with late and intermediate fusion linear networks, as a function of the network configura-
tion, correlation matrices of the dataset, and initialization scale. (iii) We show that under specific
conditions on dataset statistics, late and intermediate fusion linear networks exhibit a superficial
modality preference, prioritizing learning a modality that makes less contribution to the output. (iv)
We validate our findings with numerical simulations of deep linear networks and certain two-layer
ReLU networks.


1.1   R ELATED W ORK

Several attempts have been made to explain the unimodal bias behavior. Various metrics have been
proposed to inspect the internal mechanics of multimodal learning and multimodal models (Wang
et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2022; Kleinman et al., 2023). Huang et al. (2021; 2022) provides a theoretical
explanation for why multimodal learning has the capacity to outperform unimodal learning but can
fail to deliver. Makino et al. (2023) propose incidental correlation to diagnose and explain modality
underutilization in the small data regime. Our work differs by seeking an analytical relationship
between unimodal bias, network configuration, and dataset statistics.
Our work leverages a rich line of theoretical literature on deep linear neural networks. Exact solu-
tions and reductions of the gradient descent dynamics have been derived in (Fukumizu, 1998; Saxe
et al., 2014; 2019; Arora et al., 2018; Advani et al., 2020; Atanasov et al., 2022; Shi et al., 2022).
Balancing properties in linear networks were discovered and proved in (Ji & Telgarsky, 2019; Du
et al., 2018). However, as multimodal linear networks are not fully connected and multimodal
datasets generally do not have white input covariance, previous solutions no longer apply, and we
had to develop new analytic tools.


2     P ROBLEM S ETUP

2.1   M ULTIMODAL DATA

Let x ∈ RD represent an arbitrary multimodal input and y ∈ R be its scalar target output. We
are given a dataset {xµ , y µ }P
                               µ=1 consisting of P samples. For simplicity, we assume there are two
modalities A and B with full input x = [xA , xB ]⊤ . Since we study multimodal linear networks,
the learning dynamics only depend on correlation matrices of the dataset (Fukumizu, 1998; Saxe
et al., 2014). We notate the input correlation matrix as Σ and input-output correlation matrix as
Σyx defined as

                        xA x⊤           xA x⊤

         ΣA     ΣAB
                                                                                   yx⊤    yx⊤
                            A               B

    Σ=               =                              , Σyx = [ΣyxA   ΣyxB ] =                        (1)
         ΣBA    ΣB      xB x⊤
                            A           xB x⊤
                                            B
                                                                                     A      B



where ⟨·⟩ denotes the average over the dataset. We assume data points are centered to have zero
mean ⟨x⟩ = 0 and covariance Σ has full rank, but make no further assumptions on the correlation
matrices.


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                       𝑾𝑾1A       𝑾𝑾2A
                             𝒙𝒙A                             …       𝑾𝑾𝐿𝐿𝑓𝑓 +1


                                   …



                                              …



                                                         …


                                                                 …
                                                                                             𝑾𝑾𝐿𝐿
                                                                                 …
                                                                                                     𝑦𝑦�


                                                                           …



                                                                                         …
                             𝒙𝒙B                             …


                                   …



                                              …



                                                         …


                                                                 …
                                       𝑾𝑾1B       𝑾𝑾2B

  Figure 1: Schematic of a multimodal fusion network with total depth L and fusion layer at Lf .


2.2   M ULTIMODAL F USION L INEAR N ETWORK

We study a deep linear network with total depth L and fusion layer at Lf defined as
                                                        
                     L          Lf             Lf
                    Y           Y             Y
     ŷ(x; W ) =          W j  WAi xA +          WBi xB  ≡ WAtot xA + WBtot xB ≡ W tot x .                                         (2)
                    j=Lf +1              i=1                 i=1

The overall network input-output map is denoted as W tot and the map for each modality is denoted
as WAtot , WBtot . We use W to denote all weight parameters collectively. We assume the number of
neurons in both pre-fusion layer branches is of the same order. A schematic of this network is given
in Fig. 1.
Our network definition incorporates bimodal deep linear networks of three common fusion schemes.
Categorized by the multimodal deep learning community (Ramachandram & Taylor, 2017), the case
where Lf = 1 is early or data-level fusion; 1 < Lf < L is intermediate fusion; and Lf = L is late
or decision-level fusion.

2.3   G RADIENT D ESCENT DYNAMICS
                                                                           1
                                                                              PP       µ     µ 2
The network is trained by optimizing the mean square error loss L = 2P          µ=1 (ŷ − y ) with
full batch gradient descent. In the limit of small learning rate, the gradient descent dynamics are
well approximated by the continuous time differential equations given below; see Appendix A. For
pre-fusion layers 1 ≤ l ≤ Lf ,
                                      ⊤                                               !⊤
                    L          Lf                                              l−1
                   Y           Y                                               Y
      τ ẆAl =         Wj         WAi  ΣyxA − WAtot ΣA − WBtot ΣBA               WAi

                                                                                           ,     (3a)
                j=Lf +1            i=l+1                                                                     i=1
                                                 ⊤                                                                       !⊤
                  L         Lf
                  Y         Y                                                                                l−1
                                                                                                             Y
      τ ẆBl =         Wj       WBi                    ΣyxB − WAtot ΣAB − WBtot ΣB                                 WBi        .   (3b)
                j=Lf +1    i=l+1                                                                             i=1

For post-fusion layers Lf + 1 ≤ l ≤ L,
                            ⊤                                                                                             ⊤
                    L                                      l−1                                                      Lf
                   Y                                       Y                                                        Y
            l              j                                                                                    j
                                         tot     tot
                                                                                                                          WAi 

       τ Ẇ =          W       ΣyxA − WA ΣA − WB ΣBA                                                     W
                    j=l+1                                                                    j=Lf +1                i=1
                                  ⊤                                                                                       ⊤
                    L                                                                          l−1                  Lf
                    Y                                                                          Y                    Y
                            W j         ΣyxB − WAtot ΣAB − WBtot ΣB                                      Wj             WBi  ,

             +                                                                                                                      (4)
                  j=l+1                                                                  j=Lf +1                    i=1

where the time constant τ is the inverse of learning rate η −1 = τ . We abuse the notation j W j to
                                                                                           Q
represent the ordered product of matrices with the largest index on the left and smallest on the right.
The network is initialized with small random weights.


                                                                 3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                   1.0                                                                                     1.0
                                                                                                   𝑾𝑾1A
          𝑾𝑾1
𝒙𝒙A                                                                    Loss              𝒙𝒙A                  𝑾𝑾2A                                             Loss
      …


                                                                                               …
                    𝑾𝑾   2                                             WAtot                                                                                   WAtot


                                                                                                          …
                                   0.5                                                                                     0.5
                             𝑦𝑦�                                       WBtot                                         𝑦𝑦�                                       WBtot

𝒙𝒙B             …                                                                        𝒙𝒙B
      …


                                                                                               …
                                   0.0                                                                        𝑾𝑾2B         0.0


                                                                                                          …
                                         0    100   200    300 400   500       600                                               0    100   200    300 400   500       600
                                                          Epoch                                    𝑾𝑾1B                                           Epoch

      (a) Network                            (b) Loss and weights                              (c) Network                           (d) Loss and weights

Figure 2: Schematic and training trajectories of two-layer early and late fusion linear networks.
(a,c) Schematic of a two-layer early fusion (a) and late fusion (c) linear network. (b,d) Loss and
total weights trajectories in the two-layer early fusion (b) and late fusion (d) linear network. Details:
Both networks are trained to learn the same task of fitting y = xA + xB . Inputs xA and xB are
scalars with covariance matrix Σ = diag(4, 1). The early fusion network has 100 hidden neurons.
The late fusion network has 100 hidden neurons in both branches. Both networks are initialized with
small random weights sampled independently from N (0, 10−9 ). The learning rate is 0.04.


3      T WO -L AYER M ULTIMODAL L INEAR N ETWORKS
We first study two-layer multimodal linear networks with L = 2. There are two possible fusion
schemes for two-layer networks according to our setup, namely early fusion Lf = 1, as in Fig. 2a
and late fusion Lf = 2, as in Fig. 2c. Unimodal bias is absent in early fusion linear networks but
present in late fusion linear networks. We first give an overview of the qualitative behavior based on
the loss landscape and then quantitatively characterize the unimodal bias.

3.1       T WO -L AYER E ARLY F USION L INEAR N ETWORK

Early fusion networks learn from both modalities simultaneously as shown in Fig. 2b. There is no
conspicuous unimodal phase over the course of training.
This behavior can be appreciated through an analysis of the fixed points of the gradient dynamics.
There are two manifolds of fixed points in early fusion networks (Appendix B): one is an unstable
fixed point at zero M0 and the other is a manifold of stable fixed points at M∗ ,
                                                           M0 = {W |W = 0};                                                                                        (5a)
                                                           M∗ = W |W tot = Σyx Σ−1 .

                                                                                                                                                                   (5b)
The network starts from small initialization, which is close to the unstable fixed point M0 . When
learning progresses, the network escapes from the unstable fixed point M0 and converges to the
global pseudo-inverse solution at M∗ . As studied by Saxe et al. (2019); Jacot et al. (2021); Pesme
& Flammarion (2023), linear networks trained from small initialization exhibit quasi-stage-like be-
havior: learning progresses slowly for most of the time and rapidly moves from one fixed point or
saddle to the next with a brief sigmoidal transition. Because there is only one fixed point aside from
the zero fixed point at initialization to transit to, all dimensions and thus all modalities are learned
during this one transition. Since the transitional period is very brief compared to the total learning
time, all modalities are learned at almost the same time in early fusion networks.

3.2       T WO -L AYER L ATE F USION L INEAR N ETWORK

Late fusion networks learn from two modalities with two sigmoidal transitions at two different times,
as shown in Fig. 2d. There can be a prolonged unimodal phase during joint training.
Late fusion linear networks have the same two manifolds of fixed points M0 , M∗ as early fusion
networks. In addition, late fusion linear networks have two manifolds of saddles MA , MB (Ap-
pendix C.1), corresponding to learning one modality but not the other,
                          MA = W |WAtot = ΣyxA ΣA −1 , WBtot = 0 ;

                                                                                           (6a)
                                          tot       tot            −1

                          MB = W |WA = 0, WB = ΣyxB ΣB                 .                   (6b)


                                                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            WAtot(tuni)                                                                                         A/ B = 3                                                         0.6                         A/ B = 3


                                                                                                                                           Misattribution WAtot( ) WAtot(tuni)
                                                                                                                A/ B = 2                                                         0.4                         A/ B = 2
              WAtot(      )                                                                                     A/ B = 1.5                                                                                   A/ B = 1.5
                                                                                                                A/ B = 1


                                                               Time ratio tB/tA
                                                    Loss                               1
                                                                                                                                                                                 0.2
                                                                                  10
                                                    WAtot                                                                                                                        0.0
                                                    WBtot                                                                                                                        0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                 0.4
                          0                                                       10
                                                                                       0                                                                                         0.6
                              0 tA      tB              1000                               1.0        0.5        0.0        0.5    1.0                                                           1.0         0.5        0.0        0.5   1.0
                                       Epoch                                                          Correlation coefficient                                                                                Correlation coefficient

              (a) ρ = 0.5 loss and weights                                                        (b) Time ratio                                                                                       (c) Mis-attribution
                                                                                  3.0                                                                                                                  3.0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Misattribution WAtot( ) WAtot(tuni)
         WAtot( )
                                                                                  2.5                                                                                                                  2.5                                     0.5


                                                            Variance ratio A/ B


                                                                                                                                                                                 Variance ratio A/ B
        WAtot(tuni)


                                                                                                                                    Time ratio tB/tA
                                                Loss                                                                              10
                                                                                                                                       1
                                                WAtot                             2.0                                                                                                                  2.0                                     0.0
                                                WBtot
                                                                                  1.5                                                                                                                  1.5                                      0.5
                 0                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                  1.0                                             10                                                                   1.0
                      0        tA              tB   1000                                           0.5      0.0       0.5                                                                                      0.5      0.0      0.5
                                     Epoch                                                       Correlation coefficient                                                                                     Correlation coefficient

        (d) ρ = −0.5 loss and weights                                                      (e) Time ratio heatmap                                                                                      (f) Mis-attribution heatmap

Figure 3: The duration of the unimodal phase and the amount of mis-attribution in two-layer late
fusion linear networks. Two-layer late fusion linear networks of the same setting as Fig. 2c are
trained to fit y = xA + xB with different input covariance matrices. We notate the elements in
the two-dimentional input covariance matrix as Σ = [σA2 , ρσA σB ; ρσA σB , σB2 ]. (a,d) Examples of
loss and total weight trajectories in two-layer late fusion networks when modalities have positive
correlation ρ = 0.5 (a) and negative correlation ρ = −0.5 (d). (b,c,e,f) Time ratio and amount of
mis-attribution. Lines and heatmaps are theoretical predictions; circles are simulations of two-layer
late fusion linear networks; crosses are simulations of two-layer late fusion ReLU networks. When
assuming inputs xA , xB are scalars and the target output is y = xA + xB , the time ratio reduces to
      σ2
1 + ( σA2 − 1)/(1 − ρ2 ); the amount of mis-attribution reduces to ρ σσAB .
          B


The late fusion linear network therefore goes through two transitions because the network first ar-
rives and lingers near a saddle in MA or MB and subsequently converges to the global pseudo-
inverse solution in M∗ . Visiting the saddle gives rise to the plateau in the loss that separates the
time when the two modalities are learned. We visualize the learning path and fixed points in the
phase portrait in Fig. 6.
Which modality is learned first depends solely on the relative size of ∥ΣyxA ∥ and ∥ΣyxB ∥ in late
fusion linear networks with small initialization1 . For definiteness, in all our simulations we choose
∥ΣyxA ∥ > ∥ΣyxB ∥ which ensures that modality A is learned first; see Appendix C.3.1. We define
tA to be the time when the total weight of modality A reaches half of its associated plateau; and
similarly for tB as illustrated in Figs. 3a and 3d. At time tA , WAtot escapes from the zero fixed
point M0 and the network visits a saddle in MA where modality A fits the output as much as it
can while modality B has not been learned. During the time lag from tA to tB , the loss lingers in a
plateau and the network is unimodal. At time tB , modality B escapes from the zero fixed point and
the network converges to the global pseudo-inverse solution fixed point in M∗ . We quantify how
long the unimodal phase is in Section 3.2.1. We take a closer look at the unimodal mode during
the unimodal phase by highlighting the mis-attribution in unimodal phase in Section 3.2.2 and the
superficial modality preference in Section 3.2.3.

3.2.1         D URATION OF THE U NIMODAL P HASE
We first quantify the duration of the unimodal phase. Because of the small random initialization,
we can assume that the Frobenius norm of WA1 is approximately equal to the norm of WB1 at ini-
tialization, notated as u0 . Through leading order approximation, we compute the times tA and tB in
   1
       We use ∥ · ∥ to notate the L2 norm of a vector or the Frobenius norm of a matrix in this paper.


                                                                                                           5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Appendix C.3, which yields
                                   1                     1 − ∥ΣyxA ∥−1 ∥ΣyxB ∥   1
             tA ≈ τ ∥ΣyxA ∥−1 ln      ,   tB ≈ tA + τ                   −1     ln .                   (7)
                                   u0                    ΣyxB − ΣyxA ΣA ΣAB      u0

To compare the unimodal phase duration across different settings, we focus on the time ratio,
                                tB       ∥ΣyxA ∥ − ∥ΣyxB ∥
                                   =1+                       .                                        (8)
                                tA     ΣyxB − ΣyxA ΣA −1 ΣAB
We note that the time lag tB − tA is proportional to ∥ΣyxA ∥ − ∥ΣyxB ∥, which accords with the
intuition that the ∥ΣyxA ∥ governs the speed at which modality A is learned and ∥ΣyxB ∥ governs the
speed at which modality B is learned during time 0 to tA . The denominator governs the speed at
which modality B is learned during the unimodal phase from time tA to tB . Specifically, the network
visits a saddle in MA during the unimodal phase, which affects the speed at which modality B is
learned during the unimodal phase if cross correlation is not zero. Near the saddle, the speed of
modality B is reduced by ΣyxA ΣA −1 ΣAB ; see Appendix C.3.
We validate Eq. (8) with numerical simulations in Fig. 3b. From Eq. (8) and Fig. 3b, we conclude
that stronger correlations between input modalities and a greater disparity in input-output corre-
lations for each modality make the time ratio larger, indicating a longer unimodal phase. In the
extreme case of having maximum correlation, xA and xB have collinearity and one of them is re-
dundant. Thus the denominator ΣyxB − ΣyxA ΣA −1 ΣAB = 0 and the time ratio is ∞, implying
later becomes never — the network learns to fit the output only with modality A and modality B will
never be learned as shown in Fig. 7.
We also simulate two-layer late fusion networks with ReLU nonlinearity added to the hidden layer,
while holding the rest of our setting fixed. We empirically find that two-layer late fusion ReLU
networks trained to learn a linear target map learn two modalities with two transitions and the time
ratio plotted in Fig. 3b (crosses) closely aligns with the theoretical predictions derived for late fusion
linear networks.

3.2.2   M IS - ATTRIBUTION IN THE U NIMODAL P HASE
We now quantify how much the multimodal network mis-attributes some of the output to modality
A during the unimodal phase. When modalities are correlated, the local  pseudo-inverse solution
differs from the global pseudo-inverse solution ( ΣyxA ΣA −1 , ΣyxB ΣB −1 ̸= Σyx Σ−1 ). During
the unimodal phase, WAtot fits the output as much as it can and the network mis-attributes some of
the output contributed by modality B to modality A by exploiting their correlations. Specifically, the
weights of modality A overshoot if modalities have a positive correlation as in Fig. 3a and undershoot
if negative as in Fig. 3d. This mis-attribution is then corrected when modality B catches up and the
network eventually converges to the global pseudo-inverse solution. We demonstrate, using scalar
input for clarity, that mis-attribution is more severe when modalities have higher correlation; see
Figs. 3c and 3f.
When modalities are uncorrelated, late fusion networks do not mis-attribute during the unimodal
phase. Weights for modality A converge to the global pseudo-inverse solution at time tA and do not
change thereafter, as in Fig. 2d, since the local pseudo-inverse solutions are the same as the global
pseudo-inverse solution. In this case, late fusion networks behave the same as separately trained
unimodal networks.
We empirically find that mis-attribution exists in two-layer late fusion ReLU networks as well and
the amount of mis-attribution plotted in Fig. 3c (crosses) closely align with theoretical predictions
for late fusion linear networks.

3.2.3   S UPERFICIAL M ODALITY P REFERENCE
We now look into which modality is learned first. Late fusion networks have what we call “su-
perficial modality preference” for which modality to learn first. They prioritize the modality that
is faster to learn, which is not necessarily the modality that yields the larger decrease in loss. Put
differently, late fusion networks first learn the modality that has a higher correlation with the output,


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                    3
          1                                                 1                                                                                   Prioritization
                                                                                                                                                Contribution
                                                                                                                             II
                                       Loss                                               Loss                      2
      (   A)                           WAtot(t)         (   B)                            WAtot(t)


                                                                                                           wA /wB
                                                                                                                                            I
                                       WAtot( )                                           WAtot( )
                                       WBtot(t)                                           WBtot(t)
      (   B)                           WBtot( )         (   A)                            WBtot( )                  1
                                                                                                                            IV
                                                                                                                                                 III
          0                                                 0                                                       0
               0   100           200              300            0    100           200              300                0            1           2               3
                         Epoch                                              Epoch                                                 Variance ratio A/ B

          (a) Superficial preference                    (b) Non-superficial preference                                  (c) Superficial region

Figure 4: Demonstration of superficial modality preference. Two-layer late fusion linear networks
with the same setting as Fig. 2 are trained with different datasets. (a,b) In both examples, modality
A is learned first. The dotted black line marks the loss when the network visits MA . The dotted gray
line marks the loss if the network had instead visited MB . (a) The target output is y = xA + 4xB
and the input covariance matrix is Σ = diag(9, 1). The dotted gray line is below the dotted black,
meaning modality B contributes more to the output. The prioritized modality is therefore not the
modality that contributes more to the output. (b) The target output is y = xA + 3xB and the input
covariance matrix is Σ = diag(16, 1). The dotted black line is below the dotted gray, meaning
modality A contributes more to the output. The prioritized modality is the modality that contributes
more to the output. (c) Boundaries of which modality is prioritized and which modality contributes
more to the output in terms of dataset statistics. In region I and III, modality A is learned first. In
region I and II, modality A contributes more to the output. Thus in region II and III (shaded red),
prioritization and contribution disagree, resulting in superficial modality preference.


even though the other modality may make a larger contribution to the output. Under the following
two conditions on dataset statistics,
                          ∥ΣyxA ∥ > ∥ΣyxB ∥, ΣyxA ΣA −1 Σ⊤
                                                         yxA < ΣyxB ΣB
                                                                       −1 ⊤
                                                                         ΣyxB ,                                                                                       (9)
modality A is faster to learn but modality B contributes more to the output. We present an example
where these conditions hold in Fig. 4a and where they do not in Fig. 4b.
If xA , xB are scalars and uncorrelated, the two inequality conditions in Eq. (9) reduce to
                                                                 σB2   wA∗   σB
                                                                  2  <   ∗ <    ,                                                                                    (10)
                                                                 σA    wB    σA
where σA , σB are variances of xA , xB and we assume the target output is generated as y =
wA∗ xA + wB∗ xB . We plot the two conditions in Fig. 4c. Region III satisfies the conditions we give
in Eq. (10). Region II corresponds to Eq. (10) with flipped inequality signs, meaning the other su-
perficial modality preference case where modality B is prioritized but modality A contributes more
to the output. Hence, region II and III (shaded red) cover the dataset statistics where prioritization
and contribution disagree and late fusion linear networks would prioritize learning the modality that
contributes less to the output.

4     D EEP M ULTIMODAL L INEAR N ETWORKS

We now consider the more general case of deep multimodal linear networks and examine how the
fusion layer depth Lf modulates the extent of unimodal bias.

4.1   D EEP E ARLY F USION L INEAR N ETWORK

Similar to two-layer early fusion networks, deep early fusion networks learn from both modalities
simultaneously, as shown in Fig. 5a (purple curve). Saxe et al. (2014; 2019); Advani et al. (2020)
have shown that for deep linear networks, depth slows down learning but does not qualitatively
change the dynamics compared to two-layer linear networks. The weights associated with all input
modalities escape from the initial zero fixed point M0 and converge to the pseudo-inverse solution
fixed point in M∗ in one transitional period.


                                                                        7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       1.0                                                                             Lf = 4                                              Lf=4                                            4
                            Lf = 4                                                     Lf = 3                                   8
                            Lf = 3                              1                                                                          Lf=3


                                                                                                             Time ratio tB/tA
                                                           10                          Lf = 2                                                                                                   Lf=4


                                                                                                                                                                        Time ratio tB/tA
                                        Time ratio tB/tA
                            Lf = 2                                                     Lf = 1                                   6          Lf=2                                            3
                                                                                                                                                                                                Lf=3
Loss   0.5                  Lf = 1                                                                                                         Lf=1                                                 Lf=2
                                                                                                                                4
                                                                                                                                                                                           2    Lf=1
                                                                                                                                2
       0.0                                                 10
                                                                0                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                    1.0     1.5      2.0     2.5  3.0                          0.05         0.10      0.15   0.20
             0    1000 2000      3000                               1.0    0.5        0.0        0.5   1.0
                     Epoch                                                 Correlation coefficient                                        Variance ratio A/ B = k                                     Initialization u0

                 (a) Loss                                   (b) Correlation sweep                                        (c) Variance ratio sweep                                      (d) Initialization sweep

Figure 5: Duration of the unimodal phase in deep multimodal linear networks. Four-layer linear
networks with fusion layer at Lf = 1, 2, 3, 4 are trained to fit y = xA + xB . (a) An example of
loss trajectories when input covariance matrix Σ = diag(4, 1). (b,c,d) Lines are theory; circles
are simulations of four-layer linear networks with different fusion layer depth. Variances of xA , xB
and their correlation coefficient are notated as σA , σB and ρ respectively. (b) Correlation coefficient
sweep with σA /σB = 2 and√ initialization scale u0 = 0.1. (c) Variance ratio sweep with ρ = 0, u0 =
0.1. Note that σA /σB = k when ρ = 0. (d) Initialization scale sweep with σA /σB = 2, ρ = 0.


4.2              D EEP I NTERMEDIATE AND L ATE F USION L INEAR N ETWORK

Deep intermediate and late fusion linear networks learn the two modalities with two separate tran-
sitions, as shown in Fig. 5a; this is similar to what happens in two-layer late fusion networks.
Due to the common terms in Eqs. (3) and (4) that govern the weight dynamics, the two mani-
folds of fixed points, M0 , M∗ , and the two manifolds of saddles, MA , MB , still exist for any
2 ≤ Lf ≤ L, L ≥ 2, comprising intermediate and late fusion linear networks of any configuration.
In what follows, we stick to the convention that modality A is learned first. Deep intermediate and
late fusion networks start from small initialization, which is close to the zero fixed point M0 . When
modality A is learned in the first transitional period at time tA , the network visits the saddle MA .
After a unimodal phase, the network goes through the second transition at time tB to reach the global
pseudo-inverse solution fixed point M∗ . Because the network is in the same manifold MA during
the unimodal phase, our results in Section 3.2.2 on the mis-attribution in the unimodal phase and
Section 3.2.3 on superficial modality preference in two-layer late fusion networks directly carry over
to deep intermediate and late fusion linear networks.
As shown in Fig. 5, the loss trajectories of networks with different Lf ≥ 2 traverse the same plateau
but they stay in the plateau for different durations. We thus quantify how the total depth L and fusion
layer depth Lf affect the duration of the unimodal phase in Section 4.2.1.

4.2.1             D URATION OF THE U NIMODAL P HASE
We now calculate the duration of the unimodal phase in deep intermediate and late fusion linear
networks, incorporating the new parameters L and Lf . The input-output correlation ratio is denoted
as k = ∥ΣyxB ∥/∥ΣyxA ∥ ∈ (0, 1). We derive the expression of the time ratio through leading order
approximation in Appendix D. For 2 < Lf ≤ L, the time ratio is
                                                                                                                                             L−L
                   tB                 (∥ΣyxA ∥ − ∥ΣyxB ∥)u0 f
                      =1+                       L                      I(L, Lf )−1 ,                                                                                                                                         (11)
                   tA                     −1 1− Lf
                          (Lf − 2)∥ΣyxA ΣA ∥                      −1
                                                    ΣyxB − ΣyxA ΣA ΣAB
where
                                                                          Z ∞                                                 Lf −L

                                                                                    1−L
                                                                                                h                         2 i 2
                                                                                                                   Lf −2 2−Lf
                              I(L, Lf ) =                                        x               1 + k + (1 − k) x                  dx .                                                                                     (12)
                                                                          1
For Lf = 2, the expression is slightly different; see Appendix D.3. As shown in Fig. 5, the theoreti-
cal prediction captures the trend that a deeper fusion layer Lf , a larger input-output correlation ratio
k, and stronger correlations ΣAB between input modalities all prolong the duration of the unimodal
phase. The qualitative influence of dataset statistics on the time ratio in intermediate and late fusion
networks is consistent with what we have seen in two-layer late fusion networks.
We now look into the influence of the fusion layer depth. By setting Lf = L in Eq. (11), we find
that the time ratio in deep late fusion networks reduces to the same expression as the two-layer late


                                                                                                                       8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


fusion case in Eq. (8), which only involves dataset statistics but not the depth of the network or
the initialization, since depth slows down the learning of both modalities by the same factor. In
intermediate fusion linear networks, the time ratio is smaller than that in late fusion networks, with
a smaller ratio with a shallower fusion layer. In intermediate fusion linear networks, learning one
modality changes the weights in its associated pre-fusion layers and the shared post-fusion layers.
At time tA , the pre-fusion layer weights of modality A and the shared post-fusion layer weights have
escaped from the zero fixed point and grown in scale while the pre-fusion layer weights of modality
B have not. During the unimodal phase, the shared post-fusion layer weights and the correlation
between modality B and the output together drive the pre-fusion layer weights of modality B to
escape from the zero fixed point. Thus having more shared post-fusion layers makes learning one
modality more helpful for learning the other, shortening the unimodal phase. In essence, an early
fusion point allows the weaker modality to benefit from the stronger modality’s learning in the post-
fusion layers.
We also note that the initialization scale affects the time ratio in intermediate fusion networks as
demonstrated in Fig. 5d. Even amongst cases that all fall into the rich feature learning regime, the
initialization scale has an effect on the time ratio, with a larger time ratio for a larger initialization
scale. In Fig. 5d, the simulations (circles) slightly deviate from theoretical predictions (lines) be-
cause our theoretical prediction is derived with small initialization and thus is less accurate for larger
initialization. Nonetheless, the monotonic trend is well captured.
In summary, a deeper fusion layer, a larger input-output correlation ratio, stronger correlations be-
tween input modalities, and sometimes a smaller initialization scale all prolong the unimodal phase
in the joint training of deep multimodal linear networks with small initialization.

5    D ISCUSSION
We investigated the duration of the unimodal phase, mis-attribution, and superficial modality pref-
erence in deep intermediate and late fusion linear networks. We empirically find that our results,
derived for linear networks, carry over to two-layer ReLU networks when the target task is linear,
which aligns with the intuitions from a line of studies on two-layer ReLU networks (Sarussi et al.,
2021; Phuong & Lampert, 2021; Min et al., 2023; Timor et al., 2023). We simulate and present
the duration of the unimodal phase and the amount of mis-attribution in two-layer late fusion ReLU
networks in Figs. 3b and 3c (crosses), which closely follow the theoretical predictions and results
of their linear counterparts. The loss and weights trajectories shown in Fig. 10 are also qualitatively
the same as the trajectories in two-layer linear networks in Fig. 2, except that learning is about two
times slower and the converged total weights are two times larger.
In practice, multimodal data is correlated and heterogeneous. We explained the unimodal bias
induced by correlation in deep linear networks. More generally, the heterogeneity in data and
nonlinearity in neural networks can induce behaviors that do not arise in linear networks and lin-
ear tasks, which are out of the scope of this paper. Nonetheless, we present a simple nonlinear
example in the hope of inspiring future work. Consider learning y = xA + XOR(xB ), where
xA ∈ R, xB ∈ {[1, 1], [1, −1], [−1, 1], [−1, −1]} and XOR(xB ) refers to performing XOR to the
two dimensions of xB . We observe that two-layer late fusion ReLU networks always learn this task
successfully, forming the four perpendicular XOR features perfectly as shown in Figs. 11b, 11d
and 11f. However, two-layer early fusion ReLU networks do not learn consistent XOR features and
can even fail to learn this task when the variance of xA is large so that exploiting the linear modality
causes fatal perturbations to extracting features from the XOR modality as shown in Figs. 11a, 11c
and 11e. In this nonlinear example, late fusion networks are advantageous in terms of extracting
heterogeneous features from each input modality.
We hypothesize that the practical choice of the fusion layer depth is a trade-off between alleviating
unimodal bias and learning unimodal features. A shallower fusion layer helps alleviate unimodal
bias because modalities can cooperate reciprocally to learn the synergistic computation. Meanwhile,
a deeper fusion layer helps unimodal feature learning because the network can operate more inde-
pendently to learn the unique computation of extracting heterogeneous features from each modality.
We hope our work contributes to a better understanding of this tradeoff, ultimately leading to more
systematic architectural choices and improved multimodal learning algorithms.



                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Madhu S. Advani, Andrew M. Saxe, and Haim Sompolinsky. High-dimensional dynamics of gener-
 alization error in neural networks. Neural Networks, 132:428–446, 2020. ISSN 0893-6080. doi:
 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neunet.2020.08.022. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/
 science/article/pii/S0893608020303117.

Aishwarya Agrawal, Dhruv Batra, and Devi Parikh. Analyzing the behavior of visual question
  answering models. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing, pp. 1955–1960, Austin, Texas, November 2016. Association for Compu-
  tational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D16-1203. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  D16-1203.

Aishwarya Agrawal, Dhruv Batra, Devi Parikh, and Aniruddha Kembhavi. Don’t just assume;
  look and answer: Overcoming priors for visual question answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2018.

Sanjeev Arora, Nadav Cohen, and Elad Hazan. On the optimization of deep networks: Implicit
  acceleration by overparameterization. In Jennifer Dy and Andreas Krause (eds.), Proceedings of
  the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 244–253. PMLR, 10–15 Jul 2018. URL https://proceedings.
  mlr.press/v80/arora18a.html.

Alexander Atanasov, Blake Bordelon, and Cengiz Pehlevan. Neural networks as kernel learners:
  The silent alignment effect. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=1NvflqAdoom.

Tadas Baltrušaitis, Chaitanya Ahuja, and Louis-Philippe Morency. Multimodal machine learning:
  A survey and taxonomy. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 41(2):
  423–443, 2019. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2018.2798607.

George Barnum, Sabera J Talukder, and Yisong Yue. On the benefits of early fusion in mul-
  timodal representation learning. In NeurIPS 2020 Workshop SVRHM, 2020. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=FMJ5e0IoFFk.

Remi Cadene, Corentin Dancette, Hedi Ben younes, Matthieu Cord, and Devi Parikh.
  Rubi: Reducing unimodal biases for visual question answering.      In H. Wallach,
  H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2019/
  file/51d92be1c60d1db1d2e5e7a07da55b26-Paper.pdf.

Chenzhuang Du, Jiaye Teng, Tingle Li, Yichen Liu, Tianyuan Yuan, Yue Wang, Yang Yuan, and
  Hang Zhao. On uni-modal feature learning in supervised multi-modal learning. In Andreas
  Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scar-
  lett (eds.), Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202
  of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 8632–8656. PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/du23e.html.

Simon S Du, Wei Hu, and Jason D Lee.               Algorithmic regularization in learn-
  ing deep homogeneous models: Layers are automatically balanced.         In S. Bengio,
  H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Garnett (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 31. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2018. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2018/
  file/fe131d7f5a6b38b23cc967316c13dae2-Paper.pdf.

Kenji Fukumizu. Effect of batch learning in multilayer neural networks. Gen, 1(04):1E–03, 1998.

Konrad Gadzicki, Razieh Khamsehashari, and Christoph Zetzsche. Early vs late fusion in multi-
  modal convolutional neural networks. In 2020 IEEE 23rd International Conference on Informa-
  tion Fusion (FUSION), pp. 1–6, 2020. doi: 10.23919/FUSION45008.2020.9190246.


                                              10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Itai Gat, Idan Schwartz, and Alex Schwing. Perceptual score: What data modalities does your model
   perceive? In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan
   (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 21630–21643. Cur-
   ran Associates, Inc., 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
   paper/2021/file/b51a15f382ac914391a58850ab343b00-Paper.pdf.
Yash Goyal, Tejas Khot, Douglas Summers-Stay, Dhruv Batra, and Devi Parikh. Making the v in vqa
  matter: Elevating the role of image understanding in visual question answering. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), July 2017.
Jack Hessel and Lillian Lee. Does my multimodal model learn cross-modal interactions? it’s
  harder to tell than you might think! In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Meth-
  ods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 861–877, Online, November 2020. Asso-
  ciation for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.62. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-main.62.
Yu Huang, Chenzhuang Du, Zihui Xue, Xuanyao Chen, Hang Zhao, and Longbo Huang. What
  makes multi-modal learning better than single (provably). In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelz-
  imer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural In-
  formation Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 10944–10956. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2021/
  file/5aa3405a3f865c10f420a4a7b55cbff3-Paper.pdf.
Yu Huang, Junyang Lin, Chang Zhou, Hongxia Yang, and Longbo Huang. Modality competition:
  What makes joint training of multi-modal network fail in deep learning? (Provably). In Ka-
  malika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 9226–9259. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/huang22e.html.
Drew A. Hudson and Christopher D. Manning. Gqa: A new dataset for real-world visual reasoning
  and compositional question answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2019.
Arthur Jacot, François Ged, Berfin Şimşek, Clément Hongler, and Franck Gabriel. Saddle-to-saddle
  dynamics in deep linear networks: Small initialization training, symmetry, and sparsity. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2106.15933, 2021.
Ziwei Ji and Matus Telgarsky. Gradient descent aligns the layers of deep linear networks. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=HJflg30qKX.
Michael Kleinman, Alessandro Achille, and Stefano Soatto. Critical learning periods for multisen-
 sory integration in deep networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
 Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 24296–24305, June 2023.
Paul Pu Liang, Amir Zadeh, and Louis-Philippe Morency. Foundations and recent trends in
  multimodal machine learning: Principles, challenges, and open questions. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2209.03430, 2022.
Taro Makino, Yixin Wang, Krzysztof J. Geras, and Kyunghyun Cho. Detecting incidental correlation
  in multimodal learning via latent variable modeling. Transactions on Machine Learning Research,
  2023. ISSN 2835-8856. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=QoRo9QmOAr.
Hancheng Min, René Vidal, and Enrique Mallada. Early neuron alignment in two-layer relu net-
  works with small initialization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.12851, 2023.
Xiaokang Peng, Yake Wei, Andong Deng, Dong Wang, and Di Hu. Balanced multimodal learning
  via on-the-fly gradient modulation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 8238–8247, June 2022.
Scott Pesme and Nicolas Flammarion. Saddle-to-saddle dynamics in diagonal linear networks. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2304.00488, 2023.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Mary Phuong and Christoph H Lampert. The inductive bias of relu networks on orthogonally sep-
 arable data. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https:
 //openreview.net/forum?id=krz7T0xU9Z_.
Dhanesh Ramachandram and Graham W. Taylor. Deep multimodal learning: A survey on recent
  advances and trends. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 34(6):96–108, 2017. doi: 10.1109/MSP.
  2017.2738401.
Roei Sarussi, Alon Brutzkus, and Amir Globerson. Towards understanding learning in neural net-
  works with linear teachers. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learn-
  ing Research, pp. 9313–9322. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
  press/v139/sarussi21a.html.
Andrew M Saxe, James L McClelland, and Surya Ganguli. Exact solutions to the nonlinear dy-
  namics of learning in deep linear neural networks. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2014. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1312.6120.
Andrew M. Saxe, James L. McClelland, and Surya Ganguli. A mathematical theory of semantic
  development in deep neural networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 116
  (23):11537–11546, 2019. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1820226116. URL https://www.pnas.org/
  doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.1820226116.
Jianghong Shi, Eric Shea-Brown, and Michael Buice. Learning dynamics of deep lin-
   ear networks with multiple pathways.  In S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal,
   D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Process-
   ing Systems, volume 35, pp. 34064–34076. Curran Associates, Inc., 2022.  URL
   https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/file/
   dc3ca8bcd613e43ce540352b58d55d6d-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Nadav Timor, Gal Vardi, and Ohad Shamir. Implicit regularization towards rank minimization in
  relu networks. In Shipra Agrawal and Francesco Orabona (eds.), Proceedings of The 34th Inter-
  national Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory, volume 201 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 1429–1459. PMLR, 20 Feb–23 Feb 2023.
Weiyao Wang, Du Tran, and Matt Feiszli. What makes training multi-modal classification networks
 hard? In 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp.
 12692–12702, 2020. doi: 10.1109/CVPR42600.2020.01271.
Nan Wu, Stanislaw Jastrzebski, Kyunghyun Cho, and Krzysztof J Geras. Characterizing and
  overcoming the greedy nature of learning in multi-modal deep neural networks. In Kamalika
  Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162 of Pro-
  ceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 24043–24055. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/wu22d.html.
Bo Xie, Yingyu Liang, and Le Song. Diverse Neural Network Learns True Target Functions. In
  Aarti Singh and Jerry Zhu (eds.), Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Artifi-
  cial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 54 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  1216–1224. PMLR, 20–22 Apr 2017. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v54/
  xie17a.html.


                                              12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX

A    G RADIENT D ESCENT IN D EEP M ULTIMODAL L INEAR N ETWORKS

We derive the full-batch gradient descent dynamics in deep multimodal linear networks with learning
rate η. In pre-fusion layers 1 ≤ l ≤ Lf , the gradient update is

               ∂L ∂ ŷ
    ∆WAl = −η
               ∂ ŷ ∂WAl
                                ⊤                    !⊤
                    L      Lf                l−1
                  Y        Y                 Y
                         j     i                 i
           =η         W      WA    (y − ŷ)     WA xA
                   j=Lf +1           i=l+1                        i=1
                                               ⊤                                                            !⊤
                     L                Lf                                                         l−1
                     Y                Y                                                          Y
                                 j
                                             WAi      y − WAtot xA − WBtot xB              x⊤         WAi

           = η              W                                                               A
                   j=Lf +1           i=l+1                                                       i=1
                                               ⊤                                                                 !⊤
                     L                Lf
                     Y
                                 j
                                      Y                                                            l−1
                                                                                                   Y
           = η              W               WAi      ΣyxA − WAtot ΣA − WBtot ΣBA                           WAi         (13a)
                   j=Lf +1           i=l+1                                                             i=1
                                             ⊤                                                              !⊤
                   L                 Lf
                   Y                 Y                                                          l−1
                                                                                                Y
    ∆WBl =                Wj             WBi       ΣyxB − WAtot ΣBA − WBtot ΣB                        WBi              (13b)
                j=Lf +1          i=l+1                                                            i=1


In post-fusion layers Lf + 1 ≤ l ≤ L,

             ∂L ∂ ŷ
    ∆W l = −η
             ∂ ŷ ∂W l
                      ⊤                                                       ⊤
                L                   l−1                           Lf
              Y                     Y                             Y
         = η      W j  (y − ŷ)                           Wj         WAi xA 
                  j=l+1                            j=Lf +1        i=1
                            ⊤                                                 ⊤
                   L                                 l−1          Lf
                   Y                                 Y            Y
         +η              W j  (y − ŷ)                    Wj         WBi xB 
                  j=l+1                            j=Lf +1        i=1
                            ⊤                                                                             ⊤
                   L                                                              l−1            Lf
                   Y                                                              Y              Y
                          W j        y − WAtot xA − WBtot xB x⊤                            Wj         WAi 

         = η                                                  A
                                                                 
                  j=l+1                                                         j=Lf +1          i=1
                            ⊤                                                                             ⊤
                   L                                                              l−1            Lf
                   Y                                                              Y              Y
                          W j        y − WAtot xA − WBtot xB x⊤                            Wj         WBi 

         +η                                                   B
                                                                 
                 j=l+1                                                          j=Lf +1          i=1
                            ⊤                                                                                    ⊤
                   L                                                                  l−1          Lf
                   Y                                                                  Y            Y
                          W j        ΣyxA − WAtot ΣA − WBtot ΣBA                            Wj         WAi xA 

         = η
                  j=l+1                                                             j=Lf +1        i=1
                            ⊤                                                                                    ⊤
                   L                                                                 l−1           Lf
                   Y                                                                 Y             Y
                          W j        ΣyxB − WAtot ΣAB − WBtot ΣB                           Wj          WBi xB 

         +η                                                                                                              (14)
                 j=l+1                                                            j=Lf +1          i=1


In the limit of small learning rate, the difference equations Eqs. (13) and (14) are well approximated
by the differential equations Eqs. (3) and (4) in the main text.


                                                             13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B     T WO -L AYER E ARLY F USION L INEAR N ETWORK F IXED POINTS
A two-layer early fusion linear network is described as ŷ = W 2 W 1 x. The gradient descent dy-
namics are
                          ⊤                                                                  ⊤
            τ Ẇ 1 = W 2 (Σyx − W 2 W 1 Σ),            τ Ẇ 2 = (Σyx − W 2 W 1 Σ)W 1 .            (15)
By setting to the gradients to zero, we find that there are two manifolds of fixed points:
                     W 2 = 0, W 1 = 0        ⇒     M0 = {W |W = 0},                              (16a)
                              2   1                                tot             −1
                  Σyx − W W Σ = 0            ⇒     M∗ = {W |W            = Σyx Σ        }.       (16b)

C     T WO -L AYER L ATE F USION L INEAR N ETWORK DYNAMICS
A two-layer late fusion linear network is described as ŷ = WA2 WA1 xA + WB2 WB1 xB . The gradient
descent dynamics are
                                      ⊤
                       τ ẆA1 = WA2 (ΣyxA − WA2 WA1 ΣA − WB2 WB1 ΣBA ),                          (17a)
                                                                     ⊤
                       τ ẆA2 = (ΣyxA − WA2 WA1 ΣA − WB2 WB1 ΣBA )WA1 ,                          (17b)
                                   ⊤
                       τ ẆB1 = WB2 (ΣyxB − WA2 WA1 ΣAB − WB2 WB1 ΣB ),                          (17c)
                                                                     ⊤
                       τ ẆB2 = (ΣyxB − WA2 WA1 ΣAB − WB2 WB1 ΣB )WB1 .                          (17d)



C.1   F IXED P OINTS AND S ADDLES

By setting the gradients in Eq. (17) to zero, we find that the two manifolds of fixed points in Eq. (5)
exist in two-layer late fusion linear networks as well.
                              2
                              WA = 0, WA1 = 0
                                                     ⇒ M0 = {W |W = 0},                          (18a)
                              WB2 = 0, WB1 = 0
       ΣyxA − WA2 WA1 ΣA − WB2 WB1 ΣBA = 0

                                                     ⇒ M∗ = {W |W tot = Σyx Σ−1 }.               (18b)
       ΣyxB − WA2 WA1 ΣAB − WB2 WB1 ΣB = 0
In addition, there are two manifolds of saddles:
        ΣyxA − WA2 WA1 ΣA = 0

                                     ⇒ MA = {W |WAtot = ΣyxA ΣA −1 , WBtot = 0},                 (19a)
        WB2 = 0, WB1 = 0
        2
        WA = 0, WA1 = 0
                                     ⇒ MB = {W |WAtot = 0, WBtot = ΣyxB ΣB −1 }.                 (19b)
        ΣyxB − WB2 WB1 ΣB = 0
We plot the four manifolds M0 , M∗ , MA , MB in Fig. 6 in a scalar case introduced in Fig. 2d.

C.2   A S OLVABLE S IMPLE C ASE

If the two modalities are not correlated with each other (ΣAB = 0) and have white correlations
(ΣA = σA2 I, ΣB = σB2 I) the dynamics is equivalent to two separately trained unimodal two-layer
linear networks with whitened input, whose solution has been derived in Saxe et al. (2014). The
time course solution of total weights is
                                                                                         −1
                                                     ∥ΣyxA ∥           −2∥ΣyxA ∥ τt
           WAtot (t) = uA (t)σA−2 ΣyxA , uA (t) =               − 1  e              + 1      , (20a)
                                                     σA2 uA (0)
                                                                                        −1
             tot              −2                     ∥ΣyxB ∥          −2∥ΣyxB ∥ τt
           WB (t) = uB (t)σB ΣyxB , uB (t) =                    −1 e                +1      .  (20b)
                                                     σB2 uB (0)
The total weights for both modalities only evolve in scale along the pseudo-inverse solution di-
rection. The scale variables uA (t), uB (t) go through the same sigmoidal growth while modality A
grows approximately ∥ΣyxA ∥/∥ΣyxB ∥ times faster.


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                   1.0                                                     0
                                                                                           *
                                                                                           A
                                   0.5                                                     B
                                                                                         Path 1
                                                                                         Path 2
                                   0.0


                          uB
                                   0.5

                                   1.0

                                           1.0       0.5    0.0        0.5   1.0
                                                             uA

Figure 6: Phase portrait corresponding to learning dynamics in Fig. 2d. The horizontal axis uA is
the Frobenius norm of a layer in branch A as defined in Eq. (22); and similarly for the vertical axis
uB . Two-layer late fusion linear networks initialized with small weights either go along the solid or
the dotted green path to reach the solid red dot stable fixed point in M∗ at convergence. Via either
path, the network visits and lingers in a saddle in manifold MA , giving rise to the unimodal phase.


C.3     G ENERAL C ASES

In the general case of having arbitrary correlation matrices, the analytical solution in Eq. (20) does
not hold since the total weights not only grow in one fixed direction but also rotate. We then focus
on the early phase dynamics to compute the duration of the unimodal phase.

C.3.1    W HICH M ODALITY IS L EARNED F IRST AND W HEN ?
We assume that the modality learned first is modality A and specify the time tA and the condition for
prioritizing modality A in the following. During time 0 to tA , the total weights of both modalities
have not started to grow appreciably. Hence, the dynamics during time 0 ∼ tA in leading order
approximation are
                                                      ⊤                                   ⊤
                                   τ ẆA1 = WA2 ΣyxA , τ ẆA2 = ΣyxA WA1 ;                               (21a)
                                                      ⊤                                   ⊤
                                   τ ẆB1 = WB2 ΣyxB , τ ẆB2 = ΣyxB WB1 .                               (21b)
The first-layer weights WA1 , WB1 align with ΣyxA , ΣyxB respectively in the early phase when their
scale has not grown appreciably (Atanasov et al., 2022). We further have the balancing property (Du
et al., 2018; Ji & Telgarsky, 2019) between the two layers of modality A
                                    ⊤            ⊤                                                def
                     WA1 WA1             = WA2 WA2                ⇒      ∥WA1 ∥F = ∥WA2 ∥ = uA .          (22)
We conduct the following change of variable
                                                            ΣyxA                    ⊤
                               WA1 = uA (t)rA1                     , WA2 = uA (t)rA1 ,                    (23)
                                                           ∥ΣyxA ∥
where rA1 is a fixed unit norm column vector representing the freedom in the hidden layer and uA
is a scalar representing the norm of the two balancing layers (Advani et al., 2020). Substituting the
variables, we can re-write the dynamics of WA2 and obtain an ordinary differential equation about
uA :
                               ⊤      Σ⊤yxA      ⊤
                   τ u̇A rA1       = ΣyxA     rA1 uA ⇒                             τ u̇A = ∥ΣyxA ∥uA .    (24)
                                     ∥ΣyxA ∥
Separating variables and integrating both sides, we get
                                          t = τ ∥ΣyxA ∥−1 (ln uA − ln u0 ),                               (25)
where u0 denotes u0 = uA (0). Because the initialization u0 is very small compared to ∥ΣyxA ∥, the
time that uA grows to be comparable with ∥ΣyxA ∥ is
                                                          1
                                    tA ≈ τ ∥ΣyxA ∥−1 ln ,                                    (26)
                                                          u0


                                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


From Eq. (26), we can see that the condition for modality A to be learned first is that ∥ΣyxA ∥ >
∥ΣyxB ∥.
                                 1                   1
                τ ∥ΣyxA ∥−1 ln      < τ ∥ΣyxB ∥−1 ln                          ⇔          ∥ΣyxA ∥ > ∥ΣyxB ∥.   (27)
                                 u0                  u0

C.3.2    W HEN IS THE S ECOND M ODALITY L EARNED ?
We next calculate the time tB when modality B is learned. During time 0 to tA , the weight dynamics
of modality B takes the same form as modality A as described in Eq. (21b). Because the layers in the
modality B branch are balanced and WB1 aligns with the rank-one direction ΣyxB , we again change
variables and re-write the dynamics of WB2 , obtaining an ordinary differential equation about the
norm of the two balanced layers uB = ∥WB1 ∥F = ∥WB2 ∥:
              τ u̇B = ∥ΣyxB ∥uB       ⇒               t = τ ∥ΣyxB ∥−1 (ln uB − ln u0 ), t ∈ [0, tA ).         (28)
We assume uB (0) = u0 , since the initialization is small and the number of hidden neurons in the
modality B branch is of the same order as modality A. We plug tA from Eq. (26) into Eq. (28) and
get
                           ln uB (tA ) = 1 − ∥ΣyxA ∥−1 ∥ΣyxB ∥ ln u0 .

                                                                                             (29)
We then look into the dynamics during the time lag from tA to tB . During time tA to tB , the weights of
modality B are still small and negligible to leading ordering approximation. Meanwhile, the weights
of modality A have grown to be WAtot = ΣyxA ΣA −1 , which changes the dynamics of modality B
when the cross-covariance ΣAB ̸= 0. Taking this into consideration, the dynamics of modality B
during tA to tB is
                                  ⊤
                      τ ẆB1 = WB2 Σ                e yx W 1 ⊤ , t ∈ (tA , tB ),
                                    e yx , τ Ẇ 2 = Σ                                                         (30)
                                        B      B        B B
                                     −1
      e yx = Σyx − Σyx ΣA ΣAB . The first-layer weights W 1 rapidly rotate from Σyx to
where Σ    B        B        A                                       B                      B

ΣyxB at time tA and continue to evolve along Σ
e                                              e yx during tA to tB . Through the same manner of
                                                   B
changing variables, we obtain the ordinary differential equation about uB during tA to tB :
         τ u̇B = ∥Σ
                  e yx ∥uB       ⇒                 e yx ∥−1 (ln uB − ln uB (tA )), t ∈ (tA , tB ).
                                       t − tA = τ ∥Σ                                                          (31)
                      B                                B

Plugging in uB (tA ) obtained in Eq. (29), we get the time when uB grows to be comparable with
∥ΣyxB ∥:
                                                                   −1
                          e yx ∥−1 ln uB (tA ) ≈ tA + τ 1 − ∥ΣyxA ∥ ∥ΣyxB ∥ ln 1 .
             tB ≈ tA − τ ∥Σ                                                                                   (32)
                              B
                                                              ∥Σ
                                                               e yx ∥          u0            B

Dividing Eq. (32) by Eq. (26), we obtain the time ratio Eq. (8) in the main text:
                                 tB       ∥ΣyxA ∥ − ∥ΣyxB ∥
                                    =1+                       .                                               (33)
                                 tA     ΣyxB − ΣyxA ΣA −1 ΣAB

                                            1.5


                                            1.0                                WAtot
                                                                               WBtot
                                     Loss


                                            0.5                                Loss


                                            0.0
                                                  0    100   200    300 400   500      600
                                                                   Epoch


Figure 7: Loss and weight trajectories in a two-layer late fusion network when modalities have
collinearity. Inputs xA and xB are scalars with covariance matrix Σ = [4, 2; 2, 1]. The target output
is generated as y = xA + xB .

Note that if xA and xB have collinearity, the denominator in Eq. (33) is zero and the time ratio is
∞. As shown in Fig. 7, the late fusion network learns to fit the output only with modality A and
modality B will never be learned.


                                                                   16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D     D EEP I NTERMEDIATE & L ATE F USION L INEAR N ETWORKS
D.1     BALANCING P ROPERTIES

The full dynamics of deep intermediate and late fusion linear networks are given in Eqs. (3) and (4).
Between pre-fusion layers and between post-fusion layers, the standard balancing property (Du
et al., 2018; Ji & Telgarsky, 2019) holds true:
                              ⊤                    ⊤                   L         L ⊤
                   WA1 WA1         = WA2 WA2           = · · · = WA f WA f ,                                 (34a)
                           ⊤         ⊤             L   L ⊤
                   WB1 WB1 = WB2 WB2 = · · · = WB f WB f ,                                                   (34b)
                     Lf +1   Lf +1 ⊤   Lf +2   Lf +2 ⊤                                            ⊤
                   W          W              =W                 W               = · · · = W L W L.           (34c)
Between a pre-fusion layer and a post-fusion layer, the balancing condition takes a slightly different
form:
                              L      L ⊤               L        L ⊤                               ⊤
                          WA f WA f          + WB f WB f              = W Lf +1 W Lf +1 .                     (35)
Based on the standard balancing properties in Eq. (34), we have equal norm between pre-fusion
layers and between post-fusion layers.
                                                                            L      def
                           ∥WA1 ∥F = ∥WA2 ∥F = · · · = ∥WA f ∥F = uA ,                                       (36a)
                                                         L      def
                           ∥WB1 ∥F = ∥WB2 ∥F = · · · = ∥WB f ∥F = uB ,                                       (36b)
                                                                                            def
                           ∥W Lf +1 ∥F = ∥W Lf +2 ∥F = · · · = ∥W L ∥ = u.                                   (36c)
Based on Eq. (35), we have the balancing property between the norm of a pre-fusion layer and a
post-fusion layer.
                                                    u2A + u2B = u2 .                                          (37)
In addition to the balancing norm, we infer from the balancing properties that post-fusion layers
have rank-one structures as in standard linear networks (Ji & Telgarsky, 2019; Atanasov et al.,
2022). The pre-fusion layers are not necessarily rank-one due to the different balancing property
in Eq. (35). However, guided by empirical observations, we make the ansatz that the weights in
pre-fusion layers are also rank-one, which will enable us to conduct the change of variables similar
to what we have done in Appendix C.3.

D.2     T IME R ATIO FOR Lf ̸= 2

D.2.1    W HICH M ODALITY IS L EARNED F IRST AND W HEN ?
We adopt the convention that the modality learned first is modality A. During time 0 to tA , the
dynamics in leading order approximation are
                                          ⊤                  !⊤
                        L         Lf                   l−1
                       Y          Y                    Y
          τ ẆAl =          Wj        WAi  ΣyxA          WAi    , 1 ≤ l ≤ Lf ,          (38a)
                         j=Lf +1           i=l+1                           i=1
                                                          ⊤                          !⊤
                           L                Lf                             l−1
                           Y                Y                              Y
            τ ẆBl =              W   j
                                                   WBi         ΣyxB             WBi        , 1 ≤ l ≤ Lf ,   (38b)
                         j=Lf +1           i=l+1                           i=1
                                    ⊤                                               ⊤
                          L                                  l−1           Lf
                          Y                                  Y             Y
            τ Ẇ l =             W j  ΣyxA                        Wj          WAi 
                         j=l+1                             j=Lf +1         i=1
                                   ⊤                                                ⊤
                         L                                   l−1           Lf
                         Y                                   Y             Y
                 +              W j  ΣyxB                         Wj          WBi  , Lf + 1 ≤ l ≤ L.     (38c)
                        j=l+1                              j=Lf +1         i=1


                                                              17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We make the following change of variables
                                           ΣyxA                      ΣyxB
                   WA1 = uA (t)rA1                , WB1 = uB (t)rB1         ;                                      (39a)
                                          ∥ΣyxA ∥                   ∥ΣyxB ∥
                                                   ⊤                               ⊤
                   WAi = uA (t)rAi rAi−1 , WBi = uB (t)rBi rBi−1 , 2 ≤ i ≤ Lf − 1;                                 (39b)
                     L                           Lf −1 ⊤         L                     Lf −1 ⊤
                 WA f = uA (t)r Lf rA                      , WB f = uB (t)r Lf rB                ;                 (39c)
                                        j j−1 ⊤
                   W j = u(t)r r                   , Lf + 1 ≤ j ≤ L − 1;                                           (39d)
                       L                L⊤
                   W       = u(t)r           .                                                                     (39e)

where all r are fixed unit norm column vectors representing the freedom in hidden layers. By
substituing Eq. (39) into Eq. (38), we reduce the dynamics during time 0 to tA to a three-dimensional
dynamical system about uA , uB and u:
                                                   L −1 L−Lf
                         τ u̇A = ∥ΣyxA ∥uA f               u          ,                                            (40a)
                                            L −1
                           τ u̇B = ∥ΣyxB ∥uB f uL−Lf ,                                                             (40b)
                                            L                      L
                             τ u̇ = ∥ΣyxA ∥uA f uL−Lf −1 + ∥ΣyxB ∥uB f uL−Lf −1 .                                  (40c)

We divide Eq. (40b) by Eq. (40a) and reveal an equality between the two branches of a pre-fusion
layer:
                                   L −1                     2−Lf          2−Lf
            duB   ∥ΣyxB ∥uB f                              uB         − u0             ∥ΣyxB ∥ def
                =         L −1
                                                  ⇒         2−L    2−L
                                                                                   =           = k, Lf ̸= 2,        (41)
            duA   ∥ΣyxA ∥u f                               uA f − u0 f                 ∥ΣyxA ∥
                                   A

We assume Lf ̸= 2 in this section and handle the case of Lf = 2 in Appendix D.3. By utilizing two
equality properties in Eq. (41) and Eq. (37), we reduce Eq. (40a) to an ordinary differential equation:
                                                                                   L−L
                                                                               2   2f
                              L −1                 2     2−Lf            2−Lf 2−Lf
              τ u̇A = ∥ΣyxA ∥uA f                 uA + kuA    + (1 − k) u0             .                            (42)

The ordinary differential equation Eq. (42) is separable despite being cumbersome. By separating
variables and integrating both sides, we can write time t as a function of uA :
                                                                          L −L
                     Z uA                                             2   f2
                                 1−Lf     2     2−Lf            2−Lf 2−Lf
                t=           x           x + kx      + (1 − k) u0              dx.                                  (43)
                       u0

The time when uA grows to be comparable with ∥ΣyxA ∥, for instance ∥ΣyxA ∥/2, is
                                                                                          L −L
                           Z ∥Σyx ∥/2
                                    A
                                                                                      2   f2
                     −1                       1−L         2     2−Lf            2−Lf 2−Lf
    tA ≈ τ ∥ΣyxA ∥                           uA f        uA + kuA    + (1 − k) u0              duA
                            u0
                                  Z ∞                                                                Lf −L
                                                   h                                       2 i         2
        ≈ τ ∥ΣyxA ∥−1 u2−L                   1−L                              Lf −2
                                                                                         2−L
                       0                 x             1 + k + (1 − k) x                    f                dx.    (44)
                                   1

From Eq. (44), we find that the condition for modality A to be learned first in deep intermediate and
late fusion linear networks is the same as that for two-layer late fuison linear networks:

                2−Lf                                            2−Lf                        ∥ΣyxB ∥
  τ ∥ΣyxA ∥−1 u0       I(L, Lf ) < τ ∥ΣyxB ∥−1 u0                      I(L, Lf )       ⇔            ≡ k ∈ (0, 1), (45)
                                                                                            ∥ΣyxA ∥

where we use I(L, Lf ) to denote the integral
                                  Z ∞                                            Lf −L

                                             1−L
                                                   h                         2 i 2
                                                                      Lf −2 2−Lf
                 I(L, Lf ) =              x         1 + k + (1 − k) x                  dx .                         (46)
                                    1


                                                                 18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.2.2     W HEN IS THE S ECOND M ODALITY L EARNED ?
We next compute the time tB when modality B is learned. During time tA to tB , the network is in
manifold MA where
                                                                                1
               WAtot = ΣyxA ΣA −1        ⇒        uA = u = ΣyxA ΣA −1           L
                                                                                    , t ∈ (tA , tB ).         (47)
We plug uA (tA ), which is very large compared to u0 , into Eq. (41) and obtain uB (tA )
                                                               1
                           h                               i 2−L               1
                                                   2−L
                uB (tA ) = uA (tA )2−Lf + (1 − k)u0 f            f
                                                                   ≈ (1 − k) 2−Lf u0 .                        (48)

We then look into the dynamics during the time lag tA to tB . Substituting WAtot = ΣyxA ΣA −1 into
Eq. (3b), we get
                                             ⊤                   !⊤
                          L          Lf                    l−1
                          Y          Y                     Y
              τ ẆBl =        Wj         WBi  Σ e yx
                                                       B
                                                               WBi      , 1 ≤ l ≤ Lf ,        (49)
                          j=Lf +1        i=l+1                       i=1

                                    −1
      e yx = Σyx − Σyx ΣA ΣAB . The first-layer weights W 1 rapidly rotate from Σyx to
where Σ    B        B        A                                        B                      B

ΣyxB at time tA and continues to evolve along Σ
e                                               e yx during tA to tB . Through the same manner of
                                                    B
changing variables, we obtain an ordinary differential equation for uB during tA to tB :
                                         L
                                     1− Lf                L −1
             τ u̇B = ΣyxA ΣA −1                e yx ∥u f
                                              ∥Σ   B  B
                                                               2−Lf                                           (50)
                                         Lf
                                         L −1
                                                              uB       − uB (tA )2−Lf
      ⇒    t − tA = τ ΣyxA ΣA −1                   e yx ∥−1
                                                  ∥Σ   B
                                                                                      , t ∈ (tA , tB ).
                                                                       2 − Lf
Plugging in uB (tA ) obtained in Eq. (48), we get the time tB :
                                         uB (tB )2−Lf − uB (tA )2−Lf
                     tB = tA + τ                                     L
                                                                   1− Lf
                                    (2 − Lf ) ΣyxA ΣA −1                   ∥Σ
                                                                            e yx ∥
                                                                                B

                                                   −uB (tA )2−Lf
                        ≈ tA + τ                                     L                                        (51)
                                                                   1− Lf
                                    (2 − Lf ) ΣyxA ΣA −1                   ∥Σ
                                                                            e yx ∥
                                                                                B

                                             1 − ∥ΣyxA ∥−1 ∥ΣyxB ∥                    2−Lf
                        ≈ tA + τ                                    fL               u0      .
                                                             −1 1− L
                                    (Lf − 2) ΣyxA ΣA                       ∥Σ
                                                                            e yx ∥
                                                                                B

Dividing Eq. (51) by Eq. (44), we arrive at the time ratio Eq. (11) in the main text. For intermediate
and late fusion linear networks 2 < Lf ≤ L, the time ratio is
                                                                   L−Lf
          tB                         (∥ΣyxA ∥ − ∥ΣyxB ∥)u0
             =1+                                    L                                        I(L, Lf )−1 ,    (52)
          tA                                 −1   1− Lf                         −1
                    (Lf − 2) ΣyxA ΣA                        ΣyxB − ΣyxA ΣA           ΣAB
where the integral I(L, Lf ) has been defined in Eq. (46).

D.3     T IME R ATIO FOR Lf = 2

When the fusion layer is the second layer Lf = 2, the equality in Eq. (41) takes following form:
                       duA   ∥ΣyxA ∥uA                    ln uA − ln u0   ∥ΣyxA ∥
                           =                       ⇒                    =         .                           (53)
                       duB   ∥ΣyxB ∥uB                    ln uB − ln u0   ∥ΣyxB ∥
Consequently, fusion at the second layer is a special case with slightly different expressions for the
times. We follow the same procedure as Appendix D.2 and obtain the times for 2 = Lf < L:
                                Z ∞
                         u2−L                         1− L2
               tA ≈ τ 0              x−1 x2 + x2k           dx,                                 (54a)
                       ∥ΣyxA ∥ 1
                               1 − ∥ΣyxA ∥−1 ∥ΣyxB ∥                                 2
                                                                                     L −1
                                                                                                 1
                 tB ≈ tA + τ                                        ΣyxA ΣA −1              ln      .        (54b)
                               ΣyxB − ΣyxA ΣA −1 ΣAB                                             u0


                                                       19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The time ratio is

           tB               (∥ΣyxA ∥ − ∥ΣyxB ∥)uL−2
                                                0   ln u10                −1
              =1+                                                2 I(L, 2)   ,                             (55)
           tA                             −1
                  (Lf − 2) ΣyxB − ΣyxA ΣA ΣAB ΣyxA ΣA      −1 1− L


where the integral is given by
                                              Z ∞
                                                                    1− L2
                                 I(L, 2) =          x−1 x2 + x2k            dx.                            (56)
                                                1


D.4    T IME R ATIO FOR U NEQUAL D EPTH

Our time ratio calculations can be carried out for intermediate fusion linear networks with unequal
depth between modalities. Consider a intermediate fusion linear network with Lc post-fusion layers,
LA pre-fusion layers for the modality A branch, and LB pre-fusion layers for the modality B branch.
Assuming LA , LB > 2 and modality A is learned first, the time ratio is
                                 L +L −LB
                               u0 c A                       uLc
             tB                   LB −2       ∥ΣyxA ∥ − LA0−2 ∥ΣyxB ∥
                =1+                         Lc                                I(LA , LB , Lc )−1 ,         (57)
             tA
                            ΣyxA Σ−1
                                  A
                                          LA +Lc
                                                    ΣyxB − ΣyxA Σ−1
                                                                 A ΣAB

where the integral is given by

                     Z ∞         "                                                              2
                                                                                              2−L #− L2c
                                              (LB − 2)∥ΣyxB ∥ LB −LA 2−LA                            B
                           x1−LA x2 +

I(LA , LB , Lc ) =                                            u0     x    −1 +1                            dx.
                     1                        (LA − 2)∥ΣyxA ∥
                                                                                                           (58)

As a sanity check, setting LA = LB gives us back the same expression as Eq. (11).


E     F EATURE E VOLUTION IN M ULTIMODAL L INEAR N ETWORKS

We compare the feature evolution in two-layer early fusion and late fusion linear networks to gain
a more detailed understanding of their different learning dynamics. As studied by Atanasov et al.
(2022), features of linear networks lie in the first-layer weights. We thus plot the first-layer weights
in multimodal linear networks at different times of training to inspect the feature evolution.

E.1   F EATURE E VOLUTION IN E ARLY F USION L INEAR N ETWORKS
                                                                                                         ⊤
In early fusion linear networks with small initialization, the balancing property W 1 W 1 =
     ⊤
W 2 W 2 holds true throughout training, which implies W 1 is rank-one throughout training (Du
et al., 2018; Ji & Telgarsky, 2019). Specifically, W 1 initially aligns with Σyx during the plateau
and eventually aligns with Σyx Σ−1 after W 1 have grown in scale and rotated during the brief tran-
sitional period. We illustrate this process with Fig. 8b and videos in the supplementary material. In
deep early fusion linear networks, W 1 behaves qualitatively the same.

E.2   F EATURE E VOLUTION IN I NTERMEDIATE AND L ATE F USION L INEAR N ETWORKS

In intermediate and late fusion linear networks, the balancing property takes a different form as
given in Eqs. (34) and (35). Thus the first-layer weights are not constrained to be rank-one. Specifi-
cally, WA1 grows during the first transitional period while WB1 remains close to small initialization.
After a unimodal phase, WB1 starts to grow during the second transitional period while WA1 stays
unchanged, shrinks in scale, or expands in scale depending on modality B has zero, positive, or
negative correlation with modality A. We illustrate this process with Fig. 8d and videos in the sup-
plementary material. In deep late and intermediate fusion linear networks, W 1 behaves qualitatively
the same as in two-layer late fusion linear networks.


                                                       20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


1.0


                                    Loss
0.5                                 WAtot
                                    WBtot


0.0
      0   100   200    300 400    500       600
                      Epoch

          (a) Loss and weights                         (b) First layer weights evolution in early fusion linear network

1.0


                                    Loss
0.5                                 WAtot
                                    WBtot


0.0
      0   100   200    300 400    500       600
                      Epoch

          (c) Loss and weights                         (d) First layer weights evolution in late fusion linear network

Figure 8: Feature evolution in two-layer early fusion and late fusion linear networks. We plot the
feature evolution, which are first-layer weights in linear networks, corresponding to dynamics in
Figs. 2b and 2d. (a) Time trajectories of loss and total weights of the same two-layer early fusion
network as Fig. 2b. (b) First-layer weights at initialization, during training, and at convergence in
(a). The green arrow denotes the direction of Σyx . The red arrow denotes the direction of Σyx Σ−1 .
(c) Time trajectories of loss and total weights of the same two-layer late fusion network as Fig. 2d.
(d) First-layer weights at initialization, during training, and at convergence in (c). Complementary
videos can be found in the supplementary material.


F         S UPERFICIAL M ODALITY P REFERENCE
We impose that modality A contributes less to the output, meaning the loss would decrease more if
the network visited a saddle in MB instead of MA as illustrated in Fig. 4a:
                                         L(MA ) > L(MB )                                       (59)
Substituting in the saddles defined in Eq. (6), we expand and simplify the two mean square losses:
                  L(MA ) = (y − ΣyxA ΣA −1 xA )2
                                 = y 2 − 2ΣyxA ΣA −1 ⟨yxA ⟩ + ΣyxA ΣA −1 xA x⊤
                                                                             A ΣA
                                                                                  −1 ⊤
                                                                                    ΣyxA
                                 = y 2 − ΣyxA ΣA −1 Σ⊤
                                                     yxA ,                                                                (60a)
                                                          −1         2
                  L(MB ) = (y − ΣyxB ΣB                        xB )
                                                               −1
                                 = y    2
                                              − 2ΣyxB ΣA            ⟨yxB ⟩ + ΣyxB ΣB −1 xB x⊤
                                                                                            B ΣB
                                                                                                 −1 ⊤
                                                                                                   ΣyxB
                     = y 2 − ΣyxB ΣB −1 Σ⊤
                                         yxB .                                                                            (60b)
Plugging Eq. (60) into Eq. (59) gives us
                                                  ΣyxA ΣA −1 Σ⊤
                                                              yxA < ΣyxB ΣB
                                                                            −1 ⊤
                                                                              ΣyxB .                                       (61)
Since we are also assuming modality A is learned first, which is true when ∥ΣyxA ∥ > ∥ΣyxB ∥. We
thereby arrive at the two inequality conditions Eq. (9) in the main text.

G         U NDERPARAMETERIZATION AND OVERPARAMETERIZATION IN
          M ULTIMODAL L INEAR N ETWORKS
We have studied multimodal networks trained with sufficient noiseless data so far. In this section,
we consider the case where the training set contains noise and the amount of training samples vary.


                                                                         21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                    700 training samples                               70 training samples
                    2.0                                    Loss        2.0                                   Loss
                                                           Eg                                                Eg
                    1.5                                                1.5

                    1.0                                                1.0

                    0.5                                                0.5

                    0.0                                                0.0
                          0   200     400    600 800 1000 1200               0   200    400    600 800 1000 1200
                                            Epoch                                             Epoch

                      (a) Underparam early fusion                            (b) Overparam early fusion
                                    700 training samples                               70 training samples
                    2.0                                    Loss        2.0
                                                           Eg
                    1.5                                                1.5
                                                                                                             Loss
                    1.0                                                1.0                                   Eg
                    0.5                                                0.5

                    0.0                                                0.0
                          0   200     400    600 800 1000 1200               0   200    400    600 800 1000 1200
                                            Epoch                                             Epoch

                          (c) Underparam late fusion                         (d) Overparam late fusion

Figure 9: Overparameterized and underparameterized two-layer early and late fusion linear net-
works. Both modalities have 50 input dimensions with a total of 100. Further imlpementation
details can be found in Appendix I. The input covariance is ΣA = I, ΣB = 3I, ΣAB = 0. The tar-
get output is generated as y = w∗ x + ϵ, where w∗ = 1/10 and the noise is independently sampled
from ϵ ∼ N (0, 0.52 ). (a,b) Loss and generalization error trajectories of a two-layer early fusion
linear network trained with 700, 70 training samples. (c,d) Loss and generalization error trajectories
of a two-layer late fusion linear network trained with 700, 70 training samples.


G.1    U NDERPARAMETERIZED R EGIME

Training loss well reflects the corresponding generalization error in the underparameterized regime
as shown in Figs. 9a and 9c, where there is sufficient amount of data and thus the training data
distribution is close to the true data distribution. The convergent generalization error is lower than the
convergent training loss because the training set contains noise. In the underparameterized regime,
analysis on the training loss translates to the generalization error.

G.2    OVERPARAMETERIZED R EGIME

In the overparameterized regime, the number of samples is insufficient compared to the number of
effective parameters, which is the input dimensions for linear networks (Advani et al., 2020).
As shown in Fig. 9b, the overparameterized early fusion linear network learns both modalities dur-
ing one transitional period. The generalization error decreases during the transitional period and
increases afterwards as predicted by theory (Advani et al., 2020). If early stopping is adopted, we
obtain a model that has learned from both modalities and not overfitted.
As shown in Fig. 9d, the overparameterized late fusion linear network learns the faster-to-learn
modality first and overfits this modality during the unimodal phase when the training loss plateaus
but the generalization error increases. In this case, there is a dilemma between overfitting one
modality and underfitting the other. If optimal early stopping on the generalization error is adopted,
training terminates right after the first modality is learned while the second modality has not, yielding
a model with strong and permanent unimodal bias. If training terminates after both modalities are
learned, the network has overfitted the first modality, which can yield a generalization error higher
than that in early stopping. Thus overfitting is a mechanism that can convert the transient unimodal
phase to a generalization deficit and permanent unimodal bias.
As identified with empirical evaluations in Wang et al. (2020), different modalities overfit and gen-
eralize at different speeds in multimodal networks. With theoretical evidence, we elaborate on that
in late fusion linear network, the difference in speeds gives rise to the unimodal phase in both un-


                                                                  22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


derparameterized and overparameterized regime and further causes the dilemma between overfitting
one modality and underfitting the other in the overparameterized regime.


H     T WO -L AYER R E LU N ETWORKS

H.1   R E LU N ETWORKS WITH L INEAR TASK

Two-layer ReLU networks are trained to learn the same linear task introduced in Fig. 2. The loss
and weights trajectories in Fig. 10 are qualitatively the same as Fig. 2, except that learning evolves
about two times slower and the converged weights are two times larger.


                   1.0                                             1.0


                                                   Loss                                            Loss
                   0.5                             WAtot/2         0.5                             WAtot/2
                                                   WBtot/2                                         WBtot/2


                   0.0                                             0.0
                         0   200   400    600 800 1000 1200              0   200   400    600 800 1000 1200
                                         Epoch                                           Epoch

                               (a) Early fusion                                (b) Late fusion

Figure 10: Two-layer early fusion and late fusion ReLU networks trained on a linear tasks. The same
dataset, number of neurons, and initialization scale as Fig. 2 are used, except that ReLU activation
is added to the hidden layer. (a,b) Time trajectories of loss and total weights in the two-layer early
fusion (a) and late fusion (b) ReLU network.


H.2   R E LU N ETWORKS WITH N ONLINEAR TASK

We consider a simple nonlinear task of learning y = xA + XOR(xB ), where xA ∈ R, xB ∈
{[1, 1], [1, −1], [−1, 1], [−1, −1]}. The term XOR(xB ) refers to performing exclusive-or to the two
dimensions of xB . We train two-layer early fusion and late fusion ReLU networks to learn this task
with variance of the linear modality Var(xA ) ≡ σA = 1, 2 or 3. We inspect the features in ReLU
networks by plotting the first-layer weights since the features in a two-layer ReLU network lie in its
first-layer weights (Xie et al., 2017).
As shown in Figs. 11b, 11d and 11f, two-layer late fusion ReLU networks always solve the task by
consistently forming the four perpendicular XOR features. We can see two transitions in the loss
trajectories of late fusion ReLU networks, which are similar to the transitions in linear networks.
Late fusion ReLU newtorks learn the XOR modality during one transitional period and learn the
linear modality during the other. As an example of converged features shown in Fig. 11d, WB1 has
taken on the rank-two XOR structure and WA1 has grown in scale while preserving its independence
from WB1 at initialization.
As shown in Figs. 11a, 11c and 11e, two-layer early fusion ReLU networks struggle to extract the
XOR features. In the early stage of training, features in W 1 favor particular directions in the three-
dimensional space that are most correlated with the target output in early fusion ReLU networks. In
comparison with features in late fusion ReLU networks, the first layer weights for modality A do not
preserve its independence from weights modality B as shown in Fig. 11c. The larger the variance
of the linear modality, the closer the favorable direction is to the direction of the linear modality.
In later stage of training, features in W 1 can rotate or scatter, giving rise to multiple transitional
periods as shown in Fig. 11c and its corresponding video in the supplementary material. For a large
variance in the linear modality, the features are highly aligned with the linear modality direction and
the network can be stuck in a local minimum, failing to learn from the XOR modality as in Fig. 11e.


                                                              23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                  Epoch=3000                                                                                     Epoch=3000
                                                                                     0.4                                                                                            0.4
       1.0                                            0.2                                               1.0                                          0.2
                                                                                     0.2                                                                                            0.2


                                                WB2


                                                                                                                                               WB2
                                                      0.0                            0.0                                                             0.0                            0.0


                                                                                           WA1


                                                                                                                                                                                          WA1
                                                 1


                                                                                                                                                1
Loss


                                                                                                 Loss
       0.5                                                                                              0.5
                                                                                      0.2                                                                                            0.2
                                                      0.2                                                                                            0.2
       0.0                                                                            0.4               0.0                                                                          0.4
             0     1000           2000   3000               0.2      0.0       0.2                            0   1000           2000   3000               0.2      0.0       0.2
                          Epoch                                      WB1
                                                                      1                                                  Epoch                                      WB1
                                                                                                                                                                     1


                              (a) Early fusion, σA = 1                                                                       (b) Late fusion, σA = 1
                                                                  Epoch=3000                                                                                     Epoch=3000
                                                                                     0.4                                                                                            0.4
       1.0                                            0.2                                               1.0                                          0.2
                                                WB2                                  0.2                                                                                            0.2


                                                                                                                                               WB2
                                                      0.0                            0.0                                                             0.0                            0.0


                                                                                           WA1


                                                                                                                                                                                          WA1
                                                 1


                                                                                                                                                1
Loss


                                                                                                 Loss
       0.5                                                                                              0.5
                                                                                      0.2                                                                                            0.2
                                                      0.2                                                                                            0.2
       0.0                                                                            0.4               0.0                                                                          0.4
             0     1000           2000   3000               0.2      0.0       0.2                            0   1000           2000   3000               0.2      0.0       0.2
                          Epoch                                      WB1
                                                                      1                                                  Epoch                                      WB1
                                                                                                                                                                     1


                              (c) Early fusion, σA = 2                                                                       (d) Late fusion, σA = 2
                                                                  Epoch=3000                                                                                     Epoch=3000
                                                                                     0.4                                                                                            0.4
       1.0                                            0.2                                               1.0                                          0.2
                                                                                     0.2                                                                                            0.2
                                                WB2


                                                                                                                                               WB2
                                                      0.0                            0.0                                                             0.0                            0.0
                                                                                           WA1


                                                                                                                                                                                          WA1
                                                 1


                                                                                                                                                1
Loss


                                                                                                 Loss

       0.5                                                                                              0.5
                                                                                      0.2                                                                                            0.2
                                                      0.2                                                                                            0.2
       0.0                                                                            0.4               0.0                                                                          0.4
             0     1000           2000   3000               0.2      0.0       0.2                            0   1000           2000   3000               0.2      0.0       0.2
                          Epoch                                      WB1
                                                                      1                                                  Epoch                                      WB1
                                                                                                                                                                     1


                              (e) Early fusion, σA = 3                                                                           (f) Late fusion, σA = 3

Figure 11: Two-layer early fusion and late fusion ReLU networks trained on a XOR and linear task.
The early fusion network has 100 hidden neurons. The late fusion network has 100 hidden neurons
in both branches. In every panel, the loss trajectory is plotted on the left and the first-layer weights
at the end of training are plotted on the right. The first-layer weights are three-dimensional: the
two dimensions of WB1 are plotted as the position of the dots and WA1 is plotted as the color of the
dots. (a,c,e) Two-layer early fusion ReLU networks. (b,d,f) Two-layer late fusion ReLU networks.
Complementary videos can be found in the supplementary material.


I            I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
I.1              DATA G ENERATION

For data generation, we sample input data points from zero mean normal distribution x ∼ N (0, Σ)
and generate the corresponding target output from a groundtruth linear map y = w∗ x. All datasets
do not contain noise except Fig. 9. The number of training samples is 4096 for all experiments
except Fig. 9. Hence, all experiments, except Fig. 9, fall into the underparameterized regime where
the training loss well reflects the generalization error.
Note that we do not lose generality by using linear datasets because the learning dyanmics of linear
networks as given in Eqs. (3) and (4) only concern the input correlation matrix Σ and input-output
correlation matrix Σyx . Hence, datasets generated from any distribution and target map with the
same Σ, Σyx will have the same learning dynamics in linear networks.

I.2              M ULTIMODAL L INEAR N ETWORKS

All early fusion networks we used have 100 neurons in every hidden layer. Late fusion networks
have 100 neurons in every hidden layer for both branches. Intermediate fusion networks have 100
neurons in every pre-fusion hidden layer for both branches and 200 neurons in every post-fusion
hidden layer. All networks are trained with full batch gradient descent with learning rate η = 0.04.
For Figs. 3b, 3c and 5b to 5d, we run experiments with 5 random seeds and report the average.


                                                                                             24
