Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A P RECISE C HARACTERIZATION OF SGD S TABILITY
U SING L OSS S URFACE G EOMETRY
 Gregory Dexter1 , Borja Ocejo2 , Sathiya Keerthi2 , Aman Gupta2 ,
 Ayan Acharya2 & Rajiv Khanna1 ŌłŚ
 1
   Purdue University
 2
   LinkedIn Corporation



                                                A BSTRACT
            Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) stands as a cornerstone optimization algo-
            rithm with proven real-world empirical successes but relatively limited theoretical
            understanding. Recent research has illuminated a key factor contributing to its
            practical efficacy: the implicit regularization it instigates. Several studies have
            investigated the linear stability property of SGD in the vicinity of a stationary
            point as a predictive proxy for sharpness and generalization error in overparam-
            eterized neural networks (Wu et al., 2022; Jastrzebski et al., 2019; Cohen et al.,
            2021). In this paper, we delve deeper into the relationship between linear stability
            and sharpness. More specifically, we meticulously delineate the necessary and
            sufficient conditions for linear stability, contingent on hyperparameters of SGD and
            the sharpness at the optimum. Towards this end, we introduce a novel coherence
            measure of the loss Hessian that encapsulates pertinent geometric properties of the
            loss function that are relevant to the linear stability of SGD. It enables us to provide
            a simplified sufficient condition for identifying linear instability at an optimum.
            Notably, compared to previous works, our analysis relies on significantly milder
            assumptions and is applicable for a broader class of loss functions than known
            before, encompassing not only mean-squared error but also cross-entropy loss.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) is a fundamental optimization algorithm widely used in practice.
In addition to its computational efficiency, there is irrefutable evidence of its superior generalization
performance even on non-convex functions, including neural networks (Bottou, 1991). For large
over-parameterized neural networks, the number of points to fit is often much less than the number
of free parameters in the model. In this case, there is often a high-dimensional manifold of model
weights that can perfectly fit the data (Cooper, 2021); hence, focusing solely on the ability of an
optimizer to minimize the loss function ignores a central part of training such networks. The primary
goal in a model is not to achieve high performance on a training data set but rather to achieve strong
generalization performance on previously unseen data. Although we currently lack a comprehensive
theoretical explanation for the empirical success of SGD in these models, a promising hypothesis
suggests that SGD naturally applies a form of implicit regularization (Zhang et al., 2017; Neyshabur
et al., 2015) when multiple optima are present (Keskar et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2020). This phenomenon
guides the iterative process towards more favorable optima purely through algorithmic choices.
In order to measure this distinguishing favorability between more and less desirable optima, prior
work has proposed the concept of sharpness at a minimum as an indicator of the generalization
performance of the trained model. Lower sharpness is often indicative of better generalization
performance (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997). There is a wealth of empirical work exploring
the relationship between sharpness and generalization performance, particularly in networks trained
with SGD, e.g., (Jiang et al., 2019; Jastrzebski et al., 2019; Andriushchenko et al., 2023; Wu
et al., 2017; Chaudhari et al., 2017; Izmailov et al., 2018). Furthermore, these ideas have led to
new optimizers which deliberately reduce sharpness and are observed to attain improved empirical
performance (Behdin et al., 2023; Foret et al., 2020). Although the connection between sharpness
    ŌłŚ
        Correspondence to Rajiv Khanna {rajivak@purdue.edu}


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and generalization performance isnŌĆÖt precise or completely understood, the partial achievements of
this theory has inspired several works, including ours, to investigate how SGD implicitly tends to
converge to flatter optima.
Sharpness has been defined in several ways in prior literature, but most commonly, the sharpness of a
trained neural network at a minimum is the maximum eigenvalue of the Hessian of the loss with respect
to weights. Intuitively, one can see that if wŌłŚ is a stationary point of a smooth function f (w) with
Hessian H(w), then for perturbation v such that ŌłźvŌłź2 = ŽĄ, f (wŌłŚ +v) < f (wŌłŚ )+O(ŽĄ2 )┬Ę╬╗1 (H(wŌłŚ )),
where ╬╗1 (┬Ę) denotes the maximum eigenvalue. This relation follows from the Taylor expansion of
f (┬Ę) around wŌłŚ , and we see that the sharpness at wŌłŚ , i.e., ╬╗1 (H(wŌłŚ )), determines how rapidly small
perturbations to the weights w can increase the value of f (w). In other words, model sharpness
measures how robust the loss of the trained model is to small perturbations of the model parameters.
In this paper, our focus is on providing a precise characterization of how the SGD hyperparameters
and properties of the loss function affect its implicit regularization of model sharpness. Towards
this goal, we consider the linearized dynamics of SGD (defined in Section 2) close to the optimum.
When w is close to wŌŗå , it allows us to make a useful simplification by focusing on the quadratic
approximation of the loss function. In particular, we consider mean-squared stability, that is, wŌłŚ is
considered unstable if iterates of SGD diverge from wŌłŚ under the Ōäō2 -norm in expectation. Unlike
differential equation-based approaches, which liken the SGD dynamics to a continuous flow for
eliciting implicit regularization properties (Li et al., 2017; Xie et al., 2021), the linear stability
analysis does not break down in the regime of large step sizes. Moreover, the linearized dynamics in
gradient descent (GD) has been empirically validated to predict the sharpness of overparameterized
neural networks due to the Edge-of-Stability phenomenon (Wu et al., 2018; Cohen et al., 2021). This
behavior has also been observed in other optimizers (Cohen et al., 2022; Jastrzebski et al., 2019;
Bartlett et al., 2022; Wen et al., 2022; Ujv├Īry et al., 2022), lending further weight to this theoretical
framework (Agarwala & Dauphin, 2023). While prior work has already considered the linear stability
of SGD (Wu et al., 2022; 2018; Ma & Ying, 2021; Ziyin et al., 2023; Agarwala & Dauphin, 2023),
our analysis provides substantial advancement over these prior results as we detail below.
Contributions:

ŌĆó We offer an interpretable yet rigorously established sufficient condition to determine the instability
of a point wŌłŚ under the linearized dynamics of SGD (Theorem 1). Importantly, unlike previous
works, our bound applies to any additively decomposable loss function.
ŌĆó Our sufficient condition hinges on a coherence measure Žā, which we introduce to capture the
relevant geometric characteristics of the loss surface around a minimum. This measure is intuitively
connected to the Gram matrix of point-wise loss Hessians. We provide additional context and
rationale for introducing this measure in Section 3.1.
 ŌĆó We demonstrate that our bound is nearly optimal across a natural range of SGD hyperparameters
(Theorem 2). This implies that our analysis, which offers a sufficient condition for the stability of
linearized SGD dynamics, is precise and closely aligned with the behavior of SGD across various
choices for the coherence measure Žā, batch size, and learning rate.
ŌĆó In the course of deriving Theorem 1, we present an independently useful technical lemma (Lemma
4.1). This lemma provides sufficient conditions for (i) the divergence of linearized SGD dynamics
and (ii) the convergence of linearized SGD dynamics toward the specified minima. An intriguing
aspect of this lemma is that it suggests a multiplicative decoupling effect between the impact of batch
size and learning rate on instability and the instability introduced by the geometry of the Hessian.
ŌĆó Finally, we corroborate the validity of our theoretical findings through a series of experiments
conducted on additively decomposable quadratic loss functions. Our experimental results align with
our theory and underscore the significance of the Hessian coherence measure Žā in determining the
conditions under which SGD dynamics diverge.

Related Work: While extensive research investigates the intricate relationship between optimization
methods, generalization error, and sharpness, the prior work most relevant to ours focuses on a
linear stability analysis of SGD. In this section, we briefly compare our results to related research.
However, we defer a detailed comparison of our results until Section 3.2.1, which follows the formal
introduction of the problem setup and the presentation of our primary theorem.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


An important line of work in this area is that of Wu et al. (2018; 2022); Wu & Su (2023), which
progressively distill more theoretical insight into how the linear dynamics of SGD affect final
sharpness of a neural network. Our work goes beyond this in multiple ways. For sake of comparison,
the result in this line of work most related to our contribution is Theorem 3.3 in Wu et al. (2022), and
we restate this result in Appendix B. Our results are significantly more general than this theorem,
in that our results apply to any general additively decomposable loss function, which answers the
question raised in Agarwala & Dauphin (2023) on the behavior of SGD for cross-entropy loss.1
Additionally, we guarantee a stronger form of divergence. Even with relaxed conditions and stronger
implications, the condition of our theorem is practically easier to satisfy than Theorem 3.3 in Wu
et al. (2022).
Other research delves into related questions, although our study may not align directly with them.
For example, Jastrzebski et al. (2019) combine previous analysis by Wu et al. (2018) with additional
assumptions about how the optimizer behaves. The paper demonstrates the impact of learning rate
and batch size on sharpness throughout the training trajectories of SGD. Agarwala & Dauphin (2023)
examine how batch size affects sharpness within SGD training trajectories, particularly in the context
of second-order regression models. Ma & Ying (2021) provide a meticulous characterization of linear
stability. However, this characterization might not be immediately interpretable and is primarily used
to draw connections between behaviours of SGD and Sobolev regularization. Ziyin et al. (2023)
focuses on the convergence and divergence of linearized dynamics in probability rather than in
expected distance from the optimum, as considered by the other work we have mentioned.


2    P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

We considerP  the case where SGD is used to minimize an additively decomposable loss function
                n
L(w) = n1 i=1 Ōäōi (w), where each Ōäōi (w) is twice-differentiable and w Ōłł Rd . Given learning
rate ╬Ę >  0 and batch size B Ōłł [n], the dynamics of SGD are defined by the recurrence wt+1 =
      ╬Ę P
wt ŌłÆ B     iŌłłS ŌłćŌäōi (wt ), where S is uniformly sampled from all B sized subsets of [n]. To facilitate our
probabilistic analysis, we apply two standard simplifications. First, we consider Bernoulli sampling
rather than sampling with replacement so that i Ōłł S with probability B/n and the event i Ōłł S is
independent of the event j Ōłł S for all i ╠Ė= j. Second, we consider the quadratic approximation
to the loss around a fixed point wŌłŚ , so that Ōäōi (w) Ōēł Ōäōi (wŌłŚ ) + (w ŌłÆ wŌłŚ )T ŌłćŌäōi (wŌłŚ ) + 21 (w ŌłÆ
wŌłŚ )T Ōłć2 Ōäōi (wŌłŚ )(w ŌłÆ wŌłŚ ) (Wu et al., 2022; Ma & Ying, 2021). Since the dynamics of SGD are
shift-invariant, we can assume wŌłŚ = 0 without loss of generality. We restrict our attention to the
case where wŌłŚ is a local minimum of Ōäōi (┬Ę) for all i Ōłł [n]. This assumption is particularly relevant
in the context of overparameterized neural networks, where it is common for data to fit the model
almost perfectly (Allen-Zhu et al., 2019).
In the described linearized setting, ŌłćŌäōi (w) = Ōłćw (Ōäōi (wŌłŚ ) + 12 wT Ōłć2 Ōäōi (wŌłŚ )w) = Ōłć2 Ōäōi (wŌłŚ )w.
Define Hi = Ōłć2 Ōäōi (wŌłŚ ), which is the Hessian of Ōäōi (┬Ę) at wŌłŚ . Note that Hi Ōłł Rd├Śd is a Positive-
Semidefinitie matrix (PSD) since wŌłŚ is a local minimum of Ōäōi (┬Ę) (we refer the reader to Appendix A.1
for notation and necessary background). The linearized dynamics of SGD in our setting of interest
follows below.
Definition 1. Linearized SGD Dynamics: Let {Hi }iŌłł[n] be a set of d ├Ś d PSD matrices, and let
        Pn
H = n1 i=1 Hi . Let ╬Ę > 0 denote the learning rate and B Ōłł [n] be the batch size. The linearized
SGD dynamics are defined by the recurrence relation:
                                                       !
                                                ╬Ę X
                                wt+1 = I ŌłÆ           Hi wt ,                                  (1)
                                               B
                                                             iŌłłS

where i Ōłł S with probability B              i Ōłł S is independent from the event j Ōłł S for all i ╠Ė= j.
                             n and the eventP
                                         ╬Ę
We will refer to J = I ŌłÆ ╬ĘH and J╠é Ōł╝ I ŌłÆ B iŌłłS Hi as the Jacobians of GD and SGD respectively.
Note that using B = n recovers the gradient descent dynamics.
    1
      Note that linear stability is not meaningful for pure cross-entropy loss on perfectly fit data, since ŌłźwŌłŚ Ōłź2 is
not finite. However, our theory holds when using label smoothing (Szegedy et al., 2016), as commonly done in
practice.


                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3     T HE ROLE OF H ESSIAN G EOMETRY IN SGD I NSTABILITY
This section introduces and motivates the Hessian coherence measure Žā({Hi }iŌłł[n] ). Subsequently,
we utilize this measure to present our primary result, Theorem 1. This theorem furnishes a sufficient
condition for EŌłźwk Ōłź2 to diverge as k ŌåÆ Ōł×. Following this, we demonstrate that our established
sufficient condition in Theorem 1 is nearly optimal across a broad range of hyperparameters. We
formally state this optimality result in Theorem 2.

3.1   H ESSIAN C OHERENCE M EASURE

Note that, to understand the behavior of linearized SGD dynamics around a point wŌłŚ , it suffices to
consider how they operate under various configurations of ╬Ę, B, and {Hi }iŌłł[n] . To illustrate the
effect of {Hi }iŌłł[n] , let us explore two extreme scenarios.
First Setting: Suppose we have Hi = e1 eT1 ŌłĆi, where ei represents the i-th canonical basis vector.
In this scenario, with all Hi being identical, we anticipate that the stochastic dynamics
                                                                                      P will closely
resemble the deterministic dynamics. This expectation arises from the fact that B1 iŌłłS Hi should
exhibit strong concentration around H. Furthermore, when the elements of S are sampled from [n]
without replacement, the SGD dynamics coincide with the GD dynamics. Therefore, we expect no
difference in the characterization of stability of the respective linearized dynamics.
Second Setting: Now, let us consider the opposite extreme, where all Hi matrices are orthogonal,
meaning that their inner products satisfy tr[Hi Hj ] = 0 ŌłĆi ╠Ė= j. In this scenario, we anticipate that
randomness exerts a substantial influence on the steps taken by SGD. In the context of a full linear
GD step, the component projected onto the subspace defined by Hi is ╬ĘHi w/n. However, in the
stochastic setting, if Hi is not selected in the sampling process, no step is taken in this particular
subspace. Conversely, if it is selected, the step taken is ╬ĘHi w/B, which significantly overshoots the
deterministic step by a factor of n/B.
These extreme cases serve as illustrative examples, highlighting the importance of the relative geo-
metric arrangement within the set {Hi }iŌłł[n] in determining the stability of the dynamics (alongside
the learning rate and batch size). While we establish both sufficient and necessary conditions to
address this geometric aspect in Lemma 4.1, our aim is also to offer an intuitive characterization that
captures the significance of {Hi }iŌłł[n] without resorting to complex analytical expressions. To that
end, we introduce the following measure, which succinctly captures the geometric structure within
{Hi }iŌłł[n] .
Definition 2. Coherence Measure: For a given set of PSD matrices {Hi }iŌłł[n] , define S Ōłł Rn├Śn
                    1/2   1/2
such that Sij = ŌłźHi Hj ŌłźF . Equivalently, we may define S as the entry-wise square root of the
Gram matrix of {Hi }iŌłł[n] under the trace inner product. The coherence measure Žā is then defined
as:
                                                ╬╗1 (S)
                                     Žā=                     .
                                          maxiŌłł[n] ╬╗1 (Hi )

To provide some insight into this measure, we can consider {Hi }iŌłł[n] as a collection of n vectors
in Rd├Śd , endowed with the trace inner-product. The Gram matrix of a set of vectors compiles the
pairwise inner-products among the vectors, thus representing the relative alignments and magnitudes
of these vectors within the space, and the matrix S is an entry-wise renormalization of the Gram
matrix. In the case where rank(Hi ) = 1 for all i Ōłł [n], ╬╗1 (Hi ) is the i-th diagonal entry of S,
and Žā measure how close S is to being diagonally dominant. Due to the construction of S, Žā then
measures the cross-interactions within {Hi }iŌłł[n] relative to the magnitude of the individual Hessians
in {Hi }iŌłł[n] under the Frobenius norm. The case where all Hi are rank one is particularly important
since it occurs when ŌłćŌäō( wŌłŚ ) = 0 under loss functions such as cross-entropy loss.
Let us examine the two extreme cases mentioned earlier. In the first case, where Hi = e1 eT1 ŌłĆi, it
                 1/2 1/2
follows that ŌłźHi Hj ŌłźF = 1 ŌłĆi, j Ōłł [n]. Consequently, S becomes an n ├Ś n matrix consisting
                              ŌłÜ
of all ones, yielding ╬╗1 (S) = n. Meanwhile, in the scenario, where Hi matrices are mutually
                1/2 1/2
orthogonal, ŌłźHi Hj ŌłźF = 0 ŌłĆi ╠Ė= j. Therefore, S becomes the identity matrix I, and ╬╗1 (S) = 1.
                                                                                  ŌłÜ
In both cases, ╬╗1 (Hi ) = 1 for all i Ōłł [n]. Consequently, in the first case, Žā = n, and in the


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


second case, Žā = 1. This demonstrates that our coherence measure, Žā, effectively distinguishes
between these two extreme scenarios and increases as the alignment among the Hi matrices grows
stronger. Below, we show how this measure allows us to establish a natural sufficient condition for
the divergence of these linear dynamics.

3.2     S IMPLIFIED D IVERGENCE C ONDITION

We present our sufficient condition for the linear dynamics to diverge, which relies solely on the
values of ╬╗1 (H), ╬Ę, B, n, and our coherence measure Žā. Note that this bound aligns with
                                                                                       ŌłÜ our intuitive
expectations based on the extreme cases we examine. When all Hi = e1 eT1 and Žā = n, the second
condition in the theorem cannot be met. In such cases, we must resort to the GD condition for
instability, namely, ╬╗1 (H) > ╬Ę2 . Conversely, when Hi = ei eTi ŌłĆi and Žā = 1, the theorem asserts
that the linear dynamics will diverge even for small values of ╬╗1 (H), especially when B is small
relative to n. This behavior aligns with our expectations based on the different scenarios we consider.
Theorem 1. Let {J╠éi }iŌłłN be a sequence of i.i.d. copies of J╠é defined in Definition 1. Let {Hi }iŌłł[n]
have coherence measure Žā. If,
                  2               Žā  n           ŌłÆ1/2
        ╬╗1 (H) >     or ╬╗1 (H) > ┬Ę         ŌłÆ1         , then, lim EŌłźJ╠ék ...J╠é2 J╠é1 Ōłź2 = Ōł×.
                 ╬Ę                ╬Ę    B                       kŌåÆŌł×


We defer all proofs to Appendix A. Note that the quantity EŌłźJ╠ék ...J╠é1 Ōłź2 = E maxw0 :Ōłźw0 Ōłź2 =1 Ōłźwk Ōłź2 ,
where wk is the random vector determined by the SGD dynamics in Definition 1, when the dynamics
start from w0 . In other words, if EŌłźJ╠ék ...J╠é1 Ōłź2 , diverges as k ŌåÆ Ōł×, the linearized SGD dynamics
diverge from almost every starting point w0 Ōłł Rd . We highlight two observations of the condition in
Theorem 1. First, this analysis supports ŌĆ£squared-scalingŌĆØ between batch size and learning rate, that
is, if B is increased proportional to ╬Ę 2 , the stability will not increase. Second, the Hessian alignment
(captured by Žā) can cause instability even when ╬Ę is small and B is on the order of n.

3.2.1    C OMPARISON TO PRIOR WORK
Based on the formal introduction of our result, we now provide a more detailed comparison to the
result of Wu et al. (2022). The condition outlined in Theorem 3.3 of Wu et al. (2022) represents one
of the most recent findings in this research field, which we restate in Appendix
                                                                         q       B. The contrapositive
of this theorem provides a sufficient condition, namely ŌłźHŌłźF > ╬Ę1 ┬ĄB0 , to guarantee instability.
Here, ┬Ą0 serves as an alignment metric, empirically argued to have a practical lower bound.
Theorem 1 has multiple advantages over these prior results. First, the analysis in Wu et al. (2022) is
confined solely to the MSE loss function. Second, their definition of stability entails that E[L(wk )] Ōēż
C ┬Ę E[L(w1 )] ŌłĆk Ōłł N, where C > 1 is a constant. This definition is notably weaker than our notion
of stability. Finally, despite Theorem 1 holding for more general loss functions and guaranteeing a
stronger notion of stability/instability, it is also easier to satisfy under the typical setting where H
has low stable rank, i.e., when ŌłźHŌłź2F /ŌłźHŌłź22 is small. Let us ignore the effects of the measures ┬Ą0
and Žā by considering both equal to one, then Theorem 3.3 (Wu et al., 2022)        guarantees instability if
             ŌłÜ                                                             q
ŌłźHŌłźF > ╬Ę1 B while Theorem 1 guarantees instability if ╬╗1 (H) > ╬Ę1 B           n , which is a more general
condition when the stable rank of H is less than n, as is typical in practical settings (Xie et al., 2022).

3.3     O PTIMALITY OF T HEOREM 1

Theorem 1 provides a sufficient condition for the linear dynamics to diverge, where the condition is of
                                                                         ŌłÆ1/2
the form ╬╗1 (H) > f (╬Ę, Žā, n, B), where f (╬Ę, Žā, n, B) = Žā╬Ę B     n
                                                                    ŌłÆ1        . The next theorem shows
                                                                                              n
that our condition is optimal in the sense that, for a natural range of parameters (when Žā, B   = O(1)),
the function f (╬Ę, Žā, n, B) is within a constant factor of its lowest possible value. This shows that our
sufficient condition cannot be significantly relaxed without relying on other information about the set
{Hi } as we do in Lemma 4.1.
Overall, the following theorem demonstrates that our sufficient condition for divergent dynamics
approaches optimality among all sufficient conditions that rely solely on ╬Ę, Žā, B, ╬╗1 (H), and n.
However, it does not rule out further improvement in the important regime where B Ōē¬ n.


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 2. For every choice of ╬╗1 > 0, n Ōłł N, B Ōłł [n], ╬Ę > 0, and Žā Ōłł [n], that satisfies:
                                      2Žā         n       ŌłÆ1
                                ╬╗1 <      ┬Ę Žā+ ŌłÆ1           ,
                                       ╬Ę        B
There exists a set of PSD matrices {Hi }iŌłł[n] such that ╬╗1 (H) = ╬╗1 and limkŌåÆŌł× EŌłźJ╠ék ...J╠é1 Ōłź2F < n.

4        S HARP S TABILITY C ONDITIONS OF L INEARIZED SGD
In the previous section, we provide a measure of the geometric coherence in {Hi }iŌłł[n] along with a
theorem that provides sufficient conditions for the dynamics of SGD (Definition 1) to diverge. The
proof of this theorem relies on part (i) of the following technical lemma. Aside from its utility in
establishing the aforementioned theorem, the statement of the following lemma also imparts valuable
insights into the behavior of linearized SGD dynamics.
The proof of the following lemma relies on the observation that ŌłźMŌłź22 Ōēż ŌłźMŌłź2F Ōēż dŌłźMŌłź22 for
all M Ōłł Rd├Śd , where Ōłź ┬Ę ŌłźF denotes the Frobenius norm. Hence, we may focus on divergence in
the Frobenius norm of the k-step linearized dynamics. Now, EŌłźJ╠ék ...J╠é1 Ōłź2F = E[tr[J╠ék ...J╠é21 ...J╠ék ]] =
tr[E[J╠ék ...J╠é21 ...J╠ék ]] by linearity. By operator monotonicity of the trace, we further have tr[Nk ] Ōēź
tr[E[J╠ék ...J╠é21 ...J╠ék ]] Ōēź tr[Mk ], where Nk Ō¬░ E[J╠ék ...J╠é21 ...J╠ék ] Ō¬░ Mk under the Loewner ordering (see
Appendix A.1). The technical challenge in our proof lies in composing an inductive argument to
define matrices Nk and Mk . We opt for an approach that directly bounds the matrix of the k-step
linear dynamics under the Loewner ordering, which does introduce greater technical complexity
compared to using norm inequalities, as seen in previous work. However, this added complexity is
essential to accurately account for the alignment in the unstable eigenvectors of each J╠éi , allowing us
to provide a thorough characterization of the instability of SGD dynamics.
Lemma 4.1. Let J╠éi be independent Jacobians of SGD dynamics described in Definition 1.
(i) If
                                                               k       n
                                                 ╬Ę2  ╬Ę2

                            2                                          X
                   ╬╗1 (H) >   or       lim          ŌłÆ 2                           ŌłźHyk ...Hy1 Ōłź2F = Ōł×,
                            ╬Ę          kŌåÆŌł×       nB  n             y1 ...,yk =1

then limkŌåÆŌł× EŌłźJ╠ék ...J╠é1 Ōłź2F = Ōł×.
(ii) If, for some ŽĄ Ōłł (0, 1),
                                                                                    k      n
                                                                      ╬Ę2  ╬Ę2

  ŽĄ            2ŌłÆŽĄ                                     1                                   X
    < ╬╗i (H) <     for all i Ōłł [d] and              lim                  ŌłÆ 2                           ŌłźHyk ...Hy1 Ōłź2F = 0,
  ╬Ę             ╬Ę                                  kŌåÆŌł× ŽĄk             nB  n             y1 ...,yk =1

then limkŌåÆŌł× EŌłźJ╠ék ...J╠é1 Ōłź2F = 0.

Notice that part (i) and part (ii) of this theorem are complementary in the sense that the condition
of part (ii) is nearly the negation of the condition in part (i) except for the additional ŽĄ factor. In a
sense, the parameter ŽĄ captures the balance of how close we are to instability in GD dynamics, i.e.
╬╗1 (H) > ╬Ę2 , and how much additional instability is added by the stochasticity in the dynamics of
SGD. 2
To provide a more detailed explanation of this intuition, let us consider the setting where B Ōē¬ n.
The second term from part (ii) of the above Lemma can be approximated as:
  2          k X    n                                 n
  ╬Ę      ╬Ę2                                  ╬Ę 2k    X                          ╬Ę 2k
      ŌłÆ 2                 ŌłźHyk ...Hy1 Ōłź2F Ōēł k k             ŌłźHyk ...Hy1 Ōłź2F = k ┬Ę EŌłźAk ...A1 Ōłź2F ,
  nB     n     y ...,y =1
                                            n B y ...,y =1                      B
                     1    k                                   1       k
                                                                                                                         (2)
    2
        We believe that the requirement in part (ii) that ╬╗i (H) > ╬ĘŽĄ could likely be removed by more carefully
accounting for alignment of the negligible eigenvectors of J╠é and J and relaxing the theorem to imply boundedness
of the limit. However, given that the role of part (ii) in the theorem is only to contrast with part (i), we do not
think this is high priority for the purpose of this paper.


                                                          6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where Ai is independently sampled uniformly from the set {Hi }iŌłł[n] . Interestingly, this implies
that the effect of the parameters B and ╬Ę can be decoupled from the structure within {Hi }iŌłł[n] . In
other words, if we knew the minimal learning rate ╬Ę at which linearized SGD with a fixed batch size
diverges, then we would immediately be able to determine which parameter pairs (╬Ę, B) are divergent
at the given point wŌłŚ , since the term EŌłźAk ...A1 Ōłź2F does not change with these hyperparameters.
                                                2k
Note that determining whether the quantity ╬ĘB k EŌłźAk ...A1 Ōłź2F diverges for arbitrary inputs of ╬Ę, B,
and set of arbitrary symmetric matrices {Hi }iŌłł[n] would be an NP-Hard problem (see Section 3.3 of
Huang et al. (2022)). Even in our case, where we have the additional constraint that each Hi is PSD,
                                                              2k
we are unaware of an efficient method to determine whether ╬ĘB k EŌłźAk ...A1 Ōłź2F diverges, motivating
our simplified sufficient condition in Theorem 1.

5     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we support our prior theorems by empirically evaluating the behavior of SGD on
synthetic optimization problems with additively decomposable loss functions. The high-level points
our experiments support are:
ŌĆó Parameter tuples that Theorem 1 guarantees divergence do indeed diverge.
ŌĆó Parameter tuples that Theorem 2 guarantees no divergence indeed do not diverge.
ŌĆó The coherence measure Žā has an important effect on the instability of SGD.
ŌĆó Our theoretical results hold when using SGD that samples without replacement.
The first two points outlined above serve as validation for the accuracy and soundness of our theoretical
results and proofs. The third point enhances the rationale for adopting the Hessian coherence measure
we introduce. Lastly, the fourth point offers justification for employing SGD with Bernoulli sampling
in our theoretical analysis, as its behavior mirrors that of the more prevalent SGD approach that
samples without replacement. To ensure reproducibility, we include all our implementations in the
supplementary material.

5.1   E XPERIMENT SETUP

We leverage the construction used in the proof of Theorem 2 to verify our predictions empirically,
which offers two advantages: 1) we may apply the analysis of Theorem 2 for a condition that
guarantees no divergence, and 2) the construction is parameterized by Žā, and so we may easily
test the effect of varying Žā. In this construction, we set Hi = m ┬Ę e1 eT1 for all i Ōłł [Žā] and
Hi = m ┬Ę eiŌłÆŽā+1 eTiŌłÆŽā+1 otherwise, with m = 2n     Žā . We set the dimension of the space to n ŌłÆ Žā + 1, so
there is a unique minimizer of the loss, as this does not affect divergence. Notice that this construction
essentially interpolates the two extreme settings in Section 3.1 as Žā varies from Žā = 1 to Žā = n.
Additionally, note that ╬╗1 (H) = 2 by construction. In our experiments, ╬Ę Ōēż 1, hence the first
condition of Theorem 1, i.e., ╬╗1 (H) > 2/╬Ę will not hold or be relevant to characterizing stability.
The loss function that corresponds to the set of Hessians {Hi }iŌłł[n] is given by the additively
                                                  Pn
decomposable quadratic function L(w) = n1 i=1 Ōäōi (w), where Ōäōi (w) = wT Hi w. Note that, for
this construction of {Hi }iŌłł[n] , Ōäōi (w) is particularly easy to compute, as it is equivalent to squaring
and rescaling a single entry of w.
Across all experiments, we set n = 100. For each set of parameters (B, ╬Ę, Žā), we determine
whether the combination leads to divergence or not by executing SGD for a maximum of 1000 steps.
Specifically, we classify a tuple as divergent if, in the majority of the five repetitions, the norm of the
parameter vector w increases by a factor of 1000. Conversely, we terminate SGD prematurely and
classify the point as not divergent if the norm of w decreases by a factor of 1000 during the course of
the SGD trajectory.
It is possible to construct a regression problem with mean-squared error that results in exactly the
same optimization we describe. However, we note that Theorem 3.3 in Wu et al. (2022) does not
directly apply to this problem, since the corresponding loss is zero at the optimum, and hence the
loss-scaled alignment factor (see Equation 4 below) of Wu et al. (2022) is undefined at the optimum.
Therefore, the condition of Theorem 3.3 in Wu et al. (2022) (see Theorem 3) cannot be satisfied.


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         (a) Learning rate is set to ╬Ę = 0.8.                 (b) Learning rate is set to ╬Ę = 0.5.

Figure 1: The red area indicates where SGD diverges and blue where it does not diverge among
parameter pairs (Žā, B). The solid black line is where the condition of Theorem 1 attains equality and
the dashed line is where the condition of Theorem 2 attains equality.


5.2     E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS

5.2.1    E FFECT OF COHERENCE MEASURE AND BATCH SIZE
First, we look at how the stability of SGD changes as we vary coherence measure Žā and batch size B.
We show results for two fixed values of the learning rate, ╬Ę = 0.8 and ╬Ę = 0.5.
Two key observations in Figure 1 are that all tuples (Žā, B) that are below the boundary given by
Theorem 1 indeed diverge. This is visually shown as all points below the solid black line are red
(besides some aberration due to visual smoothing). Additionally, the fact that all points above the
dashed line are blue indicate that tuples (Žā, B) which the proof of Theorem 2 guarantees converge
indeed converge.
An intriguing observation is the pattern where the gap between the upper and lower bounds diminishes
as the batch size increases. Specifically, we notice that the lower bound more closely aligns with the
actual boundary between divergence and convergence across all batch sizes when ╬Ę = 0.5. However,
the upper bound is closer to the true boundary when ╬Ę = 0.8.
Finally, we observe that the coherence measure Žā exerts a substantial influence on the stability of
SGD. For small values of Žā, SGD demonstrates instability even at high values of B. This observation
underscores the importance of considering the geometry of the loss surface in understanding the
behavior of SGD. Furthermore, it highlights that the coherence measure is an effective tool for
capturing and accounting for the contribution of loss surface geometry to the stability of SGD.

5.2.2    E FFECT OF BATCH SIZE AND LEARNING RATE
Next, we examine how the stability of SGD evolves when we manipulate the batch size B and the
learning rate ╬Ę. For this analysis, we maintain a fixed value of Žā = 5, which provides a clear boundary
given the granularity of the point grid. We show both the log-scale plot, since learning rate generally
varies on a log-scale, and the linear-scale plot since we expect the relationship between B and ╬Ę 2 to
be roughly linear in the boundary.
The plots displayed in Figure 2 further corroborate the validity of Theorem 1 and Theorem 2.
Additionally, the pattern continues to support the facts that the lower bound condition more closely
approximates the true boundary as learning rate decreases, and the upper bound provides a tighter
approximation to the true boundary as learning rate increases.


6     C ONCLUSION

We present precise yet interpretable, necessary and sufficient conditions to determine when a point
wŌłŚ is stable under linearized SGD dynamics. The sufficient condition in Theorem 1 relies on a novel


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               (a) Žā = 5. Log-scale.                                 (b) Žā = 5. Linear-scale.

Figure 2: The red area indicates where SGD diverges and grey where it does not diverge among
parameter pairs (╬Ę, B). We plot the squared value of ╬Ę 2 to make the linear relation between B and ╬Ę 2
clearer. The solid black line is where the condition of Theorem 1 attains equality and the dashed line
is where the condition of Theorem 2 attains equality.


coherence measure Žā that summarizes relevant information in the loss surface geometry. We next list
some open questions our work raises:

       ŌĆó In future research endeavors, it would be intriguing to close the gap between Theorem 1 and
         Theorem 2 to establish the actual dependency of SGD stability on Žā and the hyperparameters
         of SGD.
       ŌĆó Additionally, it would be interesting to empirically measure the value of the coherence
         measure Žā in realistic neural networks. Acquiring knowledge about the practical range of
         values that Žā can assume would enhance the utility of the theoretical contributions provided
         here for predicting the behavior of SGD in real-world scenarios. Developing efficient
         approaches to approximate Žā in large neural networks would represent a valuable step
         toward achieving this objective.
       ŌĆó We may also consider extending the same proof techniques to characterize the stability
         of sharpness-aware methods (Behdin et al., 2023; Foret et al., 2020; Zhuang et al., 2022;
         Liu et al., 2022; Kwon et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2022), which are commonly employed for
         training many overparameterized models.
       ŌĆó Along these lines, it would also be useful to consider whether the stability of SGD with
         momentum or other adaptive gradient methods could be analyzed with this approach.
       ŌĆó The convergence analysis in Lemma 4.1 could possibly used to derive fine-grained local
         convergence rates of SGD depending on Hessian alignment.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
GD was partially supported by NSF AF 1814041, NSF FRG 1760353, and DOE-SC0022085. RK
would like to acknowledge support from AnalytiXIN Indiana.

R EFERENCES
A. Agarwala and Y. Dauphin. Sam operates far from home: eigenvalue regularization as a dynamical phenomenon.
   In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
Z. Allen-Zhu, Y. Li, and Z. Song. A convergence theory for deep learning via over-parameterization. In
   International conference on machine learning, pp. 242ŌĆō252. PMLR, 2019.
M. Andriushchenko, F. Croce, M. M├╝ller, M. Hein, and N. Flammarion. A modern look at the relationship
  between sharpness and generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.07011, 2023.
P. L. Bartlett, P. M. Long, and O. Bousquet. The dynamics of sharpness-aware minimization: Bouncing across
   ravines and drifting towards wide minima, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.01513.


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


K. Behdin, Q. Song, A. Gupta, A. Acharya, D. Durfee, B. Ocejo, S. Keerthi, and R. Mazumder. mSAM:
  Micro-batch-averaged sharpness-aware minimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.09693, 2023.

R. Bhatia. Matrix analysis, volume 169. Springer Science & Business Media, 2013.

L. Bottou. Stochastic gradient learning in neural networks. In Proceedings of Neuro-N├«mes 91, Nimes, France,
   1991. EC2. URL http://leon.bottou.org/papers/bottou-91c.

P. Chaudhari, A. Choromanska, S. Soatto, Y. LeCun, C. Baldassi, C. Borgs, J. Chayes, L. Sagun, and R. Zecchina.
   Entropy-SGD: Biasing gradient descent into wide valleys. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
   tations, 2017. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=B1YfAfcgl.

J. Cohen, S. Kaur, Y. Li, J. Kolter, and A. Talwalkar. Gradient descent on neural networks typically occurs at the
   edge of stability. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.00065, 2021.

J. M. Cohen, B. Ghorbani, S. Krishnan, N. Agarwal, S. Medapati, M. Badura, D. Suo, D. Cardoze, Z. Nado,
   G. E. Dahl, and J. Gilmer. Adaptive gradient methods at the edge of stability, 2022. URL https://arxiv.
   org/abs/2207.14484.

Y. Cooper. Global minima of overparameterized neural networks. SIAM Journal on Mathematics of Data
   Science, 3(2):676ŌĆō691, 2021.

P. Foret, A. Kleiner, H. Mobahi, and B. Neyshabur. Sharpness-aware minimization for efficiently improving
   generalization. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.

S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber. Flat Minima. Neural Computation, 9(1):1ŌĆō42, 01 1997. ISSN 0899-7667.

D. Huang, J. Niles-Weed, J. Tropp, and R. Ward. Matrix concentration for products. Foundations of Computa-
   tional Mathematics, 22(6):1767ŌĆō1799, 2022.

P. Izmailov, D. Podoprikhin, T. Garipov, D. Vetrov, and A. Wilson. Averaging weights leads to wider optima
   and better generalization. In 34th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence 2018, UAI 2018, pp.
   876ŌĆō885, 2018.

S. Jastrzebski, M. Szymczak, S. Fort, D. Arpit, J. Tabor, K. Cho, and K. Geras. The break-even point on
   optimization trajectories of deep neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
   2019.

Y. Jiang, B. Neyshabur, H. Mobahi, D. Krishnan, and S. Bengio. Fantastic generalization measures and where to
   find them, 2019.

N. Keskar, D. Mudigere, J. Nocedal, M. Smelyanskiy, and P. Tang. On large-batch training for deep learning:
  Generalization gap and sharp minima. ICLR, 2017.

M. Kim, D. Li, S. X. Hu, and T. M. Hospedales. Fisher sam: Information geometry and sharpness aware
  minimisation, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.04920.

J. Kwon, J. Kim, H. Park, and I. K. Choi. Asam: Adaptive sharpness-aware minimization for scale-invariant
   learning of deep neural networks. In Proc. of ICML, volume 139, pp. 5905ŌĆō5914, 2021.

Q. Li, C. Tai, and E. Weinan. Stochastic modified equations and adaptive stochastic gradient algorithms. In
  Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh (eds.), Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2101ŌĆō2110. PMLR, 06ŌĆō11 Aug
  2017.

S. Liu, D. Papailiopoulos, and D. Achlioptas. Bad global minima exist and sgd can reach them. Advances in
   Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:8543ŌĆō8552, 2020.

Y. Liu, S. Mai, X. Chen, C. Hsieh, and Y. You. Towards efficient and scalable sharpness-aware minimization. In
   Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 12360ŌĆō12370,
   2022.

C. Ma and L. Ying. On linear stability of sgd and input-smoothness of neural networks. Advances in Neural
   Information Processing Systems, 34:16805ŌĆō16817, 2021.

B. Neyshabur, R. Tomioka, and N. Srebro. In search of the real inductive bias: On the role of implicit
  regularization in deep learning, 2015.


                                                       10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C. Szegedy, V. Vanhoucke, S. Ioffe, J. Shlens, and Z. Wojna. Rethinking the inception architecture for computer
   vision. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2016, Las Vegas, NV,
   USA, June 27-30, 2016, pp. 2818ŌĆō2826. IEEE Computer Society, 2016.
S. Ujv├Īry, Z. Telek, A. Kerekes, A. M├®sz├Īros, and F. Husz├Īr. Rethinking sharpness-aware minimization as
   variational inference, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.10452.

K. Wen, T. Ma, and Z. Li. How does sharpness-aware minimization minimize sharpness?, 2022. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.05729.

L. Wu and W. Su. The implicit regularization of dynamical stability in stochastic gradient descent. In
   International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.

L. Wu, Z. Zhu, and E. Weinan. Towards understanding generalization of deep learning: Perspective of loss
   landscapes. ArXiv, abs/1706.10239, 2017.

L. Wu, C. Ma, et al. How sgd selects the global minima in over-parameterized learning: A dynamical stability
   perspective. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
L. Wu, M. Wang, and W. Su. The alignment property of sgd noise and how it helps select flat minima: A stability
   analysis. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:4680ŌĆō4693, 2022.

Z. Xie, I. Sato, and M. Sugiyama. A diffusion theory for deep learning dynamics: Stochastic gradient descent
   exponentially favors flat minima. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.

Z. Xie, Q. Tang, Y. Cai, M. Sun, and P. Li. On the power-law hessian spectrums in deep learning. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2201.13011, 2022.

C. Zhang, S. Bengio, M. Hardt, B. Recht, and O. Vinyals. Understanding deep learning requires rethinking
   generalization, 2017.

J. Zhuang, B. Gong, L. Yuan, Y. Cui, H. Adam, N. Dvornek, S. Tatikonda, J. Duncan, and T. Liu. Surrogate gap
   minimization improves sharpness-aware training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.08065, 2022.
L. Ziyin, B. Li, T. Galanti, and M. Ueda. The probabilistic stability of stochastic gradient descent. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2303.13093, 2023.


                                                        11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     P ROOFS

A.1    P ROOF PRELIMINARIES
In this section, we provide notation and necessary background for the following proofs.
Notation: Let [n] denote 1, 2, ..., n. Let ei denote i-th canonical basis vector. Let Bern(p) be Bernoulli
distribution with parameter p. Let 0 denote the all-zero matrix or vector, where the dimension will be clear
from context. Let 1 be defined similarly as the all-ones matrix or vector. Let ŌłźAŌłź2 denote the spectral norm
of matrix A. Let ╬╗i (A) denote the i-th largest eigenvalue of the matrix A. Let ŌłźAŌłźF denote the Frobenius
norm of matrix A. Let ŌłźAŌłźSp denote p-Schatten norm of matrix A, that is, the p-norm of the vector of singular
values of A.
                                                                           ŌłÜ
Fact 1. Ōäō1 -Ōäō2 Norm Inequality: For any vector x Ōłł Rd , ŌłźxŌłź2 Ōēż ŌłźxŌłź1 Ōēż dŌłźxŌłź2 .
Fact 2. Recursive Formula for Binomial Coefficients: For all n, k Ōłł N such that k Ōēż n, the binomial
coefficients satisfy the following recursive formula:
                                             !          !       !
                                           n        nŌłÆ1     nŌłÆ1
                                                =         +      .
                                           k        kŌłÆ1      k

The notion of PSD matrices can be used to define a partial order on the set of symmetric matrices as follows.
Definition 3. Loewner Order: The Loewner order is a partial order on the set of positive semidefinite symmetric
matrices. For two positive semidefinite matrices A and B, we write A Ō¬» B to denote that B ŌłÆ A is positive
semidefinite and A Ōē║ B to denote that B ŌłÆ A is positive definite.

Note that if A is a PSD matrix, then for any symmetric B, BAB must also be PSD.
We frequently use the following properties of the trace in our derivations.
Properties of the Trace:
                    Pn
        ŌĆó tr[A] =     i=1 ╬╗i (A).

        ŌĆó Invariance to cyclic permutation: tr[ABC] = tr[CAB].
        ŌĆó Linearity of the trace: tr[cA + B] = c tr[A] + tr[B], where c Ōłł R.
                                                                ŌłÜ
Lemma A.1. For any matrix M Ōłł Rn├Śn , ŌłźMŌłźF Ōēż ŌłźMŌłźS1 Ōēż               nŌłźMŌłźF .


Proof. This follows from the fact that ŌłźMŌłźF = ŌłźMŌłźS2 and ŌłźMŌłźSp is the p-norm of the spectrum of M along
with applying the Ōäō1 -Ōäō2 -norm inequality (Fact 1).

Lemma A.2. For any length k sequence of square matrices A1 ...Ak Ōłł Rd├Śd , tr[A1 A2 ...Ak ] Ōēż
ŌłÜ
 dŌłźA1 ŌłźF ŌłźA2 ŌłźF ...ŌłźAk ŌłźF .


Proof. First, it follows from WeylŌĆÖs Majorant Theorem that tr[A1 A2 ...Ak ] Ōēż ŌłźA1 A2 ...Ak ŌłźS1 (see Section
III.5 (Bhatia, 2013)). Then, applying Lemma A.1 implies,
                                                               ŌłÜ
                          tr[A1 A2 ...Ak ] Ōēż ŌłźA1 A2 ...Ak ŌłźS1 Ōēż dŌłźA1 A2 ...Ak ŌłźF .

Finally, we conclude the lemma statment by submultiplicativity of the Frobenius norm.

A.2    P ROOFS
Proof of Theorem 1


Proof. Note that ŌłźMŌłź22 Ōēż ŌłźMŌłź2F Ōēż dŌłźMŌłź22 for all M Ōłł Rd├Śd . Therefore, by Lemma 4.1, it suffices to show
that the condition of the theorem implies that the following quantity diverges towards infinity as k ŌåÆ Ōł×:
                                                  k      n
                                        ╬Ę2  ╬Ę2
                                                         X
                                           ŌłÆ 2                       ŌłźHyk ...Hy1 Ōłź2F
                                        nB  n         y1 ...,yk =1


                                                          12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


From here, we lower bound it by the following. Note that ŌłźMŌłź2F Ōēź d1 ŌłźMŌłź2S1 , where ŌłźMŌłźS1 is the 1-Schatten
norm (see Lemma A.1).
           2          k X     n                                    k X     n
                  ╬Ę2
                                                         2
            ╬Ę                                             ╬Ę    ╬Ę2                 1
                ŌłÆ 2                  ŌłźHyk ...Hy1 Ōłź2F Ōēź      ŌłÆ 2                     ŌłźHyk ...Hy1 Ōłź2S1
            nB    n     y1 ...,yk =1
                                                         nB    n     y1 ...,yk =1
                                                                                  d
                                                         2       2 k
                                                                           n
                                                          ╬Ę    ╬Ę         X        1
                                                     Ōēź      ŌłÆ 2                     tr[Hyk ...Hy1 ]2
                                                         nB    n     y1 ...,yk =1
                                                                                  d
                                                         2       2 k
                                                                          n
                                                          ╬Ę    ╬Ę     1X
                                                     Ōēź      ŌłÆ 2               tr[Hky ]2
                                                         nB    n     d y=1
                                                         2         k           n
                                                                                          !2
                                                          ╬Ę    ╬Ę2     1 X               k
                                                     Ōēź      ŌłÆ 2                   tr[Hy ]
                                                         nB    n     nd y=1

The last line follows by again applying the L1-L2 norm inequality. Now we show that the complexity measure Žā
satisfies:
                                                                  n
                                              nk           k
                                                                 X
                                                     ┬Ę tr[H  ] Ōēż     tr[Hky ].
                                            d2 ┬Ę Žā k             y=1


First, we bound the left-hand term as follows.                By Lemma A.2 we know that tr[A1 A2 ...Ak ] Ōēż
dŌłźA1 ŌłźF ŌłźA2 ŌłźF ...ŌłźAkŌłÆ1 ŌłźF ŌłźAk ŌłźF . Therefore,
                                   n
                           1     X
               tr[Hk ] =     ┬Ę           tr[Hyk ...Hy1 ]
                           nk y ...,y =1
                                  1     k
                                      n
                           1          X
                       =     ┬Ę           tr[(H1/2 1/2   1/2 1/2        1/2 1/2
                                              y1 Hyk )(Hyk HykŌłÆ1 )...(Hy2 Hy1 )]
                           nk y ...,y =1
                                  1     k
                                      n
                           d          X
                       Ōēż     ┬Ę           ŌłźH1/2 1/2       1/2 1/2               1/2 1/2
                                           y1 Hyk ŌłźF ┬Ę ŌłźHyk HykŌłÆ1 ŌłźF ┬Ę ... ┬Ę ŌłźHy2 Hy1 ŌłźF
                           nk y ...,y =1
                                  1     k
                               n
                         d   X
                       = k ┬Ę        Sy ,y Sy ,y ...Sy2 ,y1
                        n y ...,y =1 1 k k kŌłÆ1
                                  1     k

                         d            d2
                       = k ┬Ę tr[Sk ] Ōēż k ┬Ę ╬╗1 (S)k .
                        n             n
Therefore,
                                                                                           n
               nk           k     nk ┬Ę maxiŌłł[n] ╬╗1 (Hi )k       k                     k
                                                                                          X
                      ┬Ę tr[H  ] =                         ┬Ę tr[H  ] Ōēż max   ╬╗1 (H i )   Ōēż     tr[Hky ].
             d2 ┬Ę Žā k                   d2 ┬Ę ╬╗1 (S)k                  iŌłł[n]
                                                                                          y=1

Starting from where we left off before,
                                                                    k            n
                                                                                                  !2
                                                          ╬Ę2  ╬Ę2

                                                                         1       X
                        E tr[J╠ék ...J╠é21 ...J╠ék ] Ōēź          ŌłÆ 2                       tr[Hky ]
                                                          nB  n         nd       y=1
                                                                    k                                   2
                                                          ╬Ę2  ╬Ę2                   nk

                                                                         1
                                                Ōēź            ŌłÆ 2                          ┬Ę tr[Hk ]
                                                          nB  n         nd       d2 ┬Ę Žā k
                                                               k
                                                    ╬Ę2     ╬Ę2          n2k

                                                                  1
                                                Ōēź       ŌłÆ 2          ┬Ę      ┬Ę ╬╗1 (H)2k
                                                    nB     n     nd5 Žā 2k
                                                                   k
                                                   2k    n      1      1
                                                =╬Ę           ŌłÆ 2          ┬Ę ╬╗1 (H)2k
                                                        Žā2 B   Žā     nd5
                                                                                        ŌłÆ1/2
We see that by the condition of the theorem that ╬╗1 (H) > ╬Ę1 ┬Ę Žā2nB ŌłÆ Žā12                         that this above equation diverges
towards infinity as k ŌåÆ Ōł×. Hence, we conclude the theorem statement.

Proof of Theorem 2


                                                             13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. Construct {Hi }iŌłł[n] so that Hi = m ┬Ę e1 eT1 if i Ōłł [Žā] and Hi = 0 otherwise, where m = ╬╗1Žā┬Ęn . Note
              Žā                                           1/2 1/2
that ╬╗1 (H) = n  ┬Ę m = ╬╗1 . Furthermore, note that ŌłźHi Hj ŌłźF = m if i, j Ōłł [Žā] and zero otherwise.
                                                                                          1/2    1/2
Therefore, S, the entry-wise square root of the Gram matrix (i.e, Sij = ŌłźHi Hj ŌłźF ), has all of the first Žā ├Ś Žā
entries equal to m and the rest equal to zero. Therefore, ╬╗1 (S) = m ┬Ę Žā. Meanwhile, maxiŌłł[n] ╬╗1 (Hi ) = m.
Hence, we see the Hessian coherence measure for this constructed problem is indeed equal to the chosen value
of Žā.
We now show that limkŌåÆŌł× EŌłźJ╠ék ....J╠é1 Ōłź2F < n. Note that J╠é = I ŌłÆ ╬Ę n
                                                                              P
                                                                                 i=1 xi Hi , where the xi ŌĆÖs are i.i.d.
random variables sampled from a Bernoulli distribution with parameter p = B/n. A key observation here is
that all J╠é are diagonal (since I and all Hi are diagonal) and hence J╠é1 ...J╠ék commute. Therefore,

                       EŌłźJ╠ék ....J╠é1 Ōłź2F = E tr[J╠ék ...J╠é21 ...J╠ék ] = E tr[J╠é2k ...J╠é21 ] = tr[E[J╠é21 ]k ],

where in the last step we use the fact that all of the J╠é are independent and identically distributed. Recall that
the trace is the sum of the diagonal entries in a matrix and hence tr[E[J╠é21 ]k ] = n        T     2 k
                                                                                     P
                                                                                        i=1 ei E[J╠é1 ] ei . Note that
  T    2 k                                  2 k                      T       2 k
ei E[J╠é1 ] ei = 1 when i ╠Ė= 1, so tr[E[J╠é1 ] ] = (n ŌłÆ 1) + e1 tr[E[J╠é1 ] ]e1 . To show that this quantity is
bounded by n, we must show that eT1 E[J╠é21 ]k e1 = (eT1 E[J╠é21 ]e1 )k is bounded. Following the base case of part (i)
in Lemma 4.1, we have that:
                                                                                         n
                                                                           ╬Ę2  ╬Ę2
                                                                                         X
                               E[J╠é21 ] = I ŌłÆ 2╬ĘH + ╬Ę 2 H2 +                  ŌłÆ 2                H2i
                                                                           nB  n           i=1


We can then write eT1 E[J╠é21 ]e1 as:

                                                             Žā2                    ╬Ę2  ╬Ę2

                                                  Žā
                       eT1 E[J╠é21 ]e1 = 1 ŌłÆ 2╬Ę      ┬Ę m + ╬Ę 2 2 m2 +                  ŌłÆ 2           ┬Ę Žā ┬Ę m2 ,
                                                  n          n                     nB  n

where we used the fact that eT1 He1 = ╬╗1 (H) = nŽā
                                                  ┬Ę m in our construction and eT1 H2i e1 = m2 if i Ōłł [Žā] and
zero otherwise. To show convergence, we must show that the previous equation is less than 1. This is equivalent
to the following condition:

                                      Žā2 2            ╬Ę2  ╬Ę2

                                                                             Žā
                                 ╬Ę2      m +              ┬Ę Žā ┬Ę m2 < 2╬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę m
                                                         ŌłÆ 2
                                      n2              nB  n                  n
                                                  n
                                       2
                                                                 2
                                     Žā               ŌłÆ 1       Žā               Žā
                             ŌćÉŌćÆ ╬Ę 2 2 m2 + ╬Ę 2 B            ┬Ę      ┬Ę m2 < 2╬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę m
                                     n               Žā   n2                    n
                                                   n
                                                      ŌłÆ 1
                             ŌćÉŌćÆ ╬Ę 2 ╬╗1 (H)2 + ╬Ę 2 B          ┬Ę ╬╗1 (H)2 < 2╬Ę ┬Ę ╬╗1 (H)
                                                     Žā
                                                                          ŌłÆ1
                                                   2            n/B ŌłÆ 1
                                  ŌćÉŌćÆ ╬╗1 (H) < ┬Ę 1 +
                                                   ╬Ę                 Žā
                                                 2Žā             n       ŌłÆ1
                                     ŌćÉŌćÆ ╬╗1 <         ┬Ę Žā+          ŌłÆ1      .
                                                  ╬Ę            B

Therefore, we conclude the theorem statement


Proof of Lemma 4.1



Proof. First, note that ŌłźMŌłź2F = tr(MT M). Since J and J╠é are always symmetric, to prove the theorem
conclusion, we must show that limkŌåÆŌł× E[tr[J╠ék ...J╠é1 J╠é1 ...J╠ék ]] = Ōł×. We will achieve this by inductively
proving a PSD lower bound on the expectation of this product of matrices and then leveraging the operator
monotonicity of the trace. To that end, we define the matrix:
                                                               r      n
                                                  ╬Ę2  ╬Ę2
                                                                      X
                            Mr = J2r +               ŌłÆ 2                          Hyr ...H2y1 ...Hyr .
                                                  nB  n            y1 ...,yr =1


                                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We show that E[J╠ék ...J╠é1 J╠é1 ...J╠ék ] Ō¬░ Mk ŌłĆk Ōłł N. First, let us start with the base case r = 1. Recall that
H = n1 n
      P                         1
                                   Pn
         i=1 Hi and H╠é = B             i=1 xi Hi , where xi Ōł╝ Bern( /n).
                                                                   B


                            E[J╠é1 J╠é1 ] = E[(I ŌłÆ ╬Ę H╠é1 )(I ŌłÆ ╬Ę H╠é1 )]
                                       = E[I ŌłÆ 2╬Ę H╠é1 + ╬Ę 2 H╠é21 ]
                                           "            n
                                                                   !                         n
                                                                                                     !2 #
                                                     ╬Ę X                               ╬Ę X
                                       =E IŌłÆ2               xi Hi +                          xi Hi
                                                    B i=1                              B i=1
                                                    n          n
                                                 2╬Ę X      ╬Ę2 X
                                       =IŌłÆ             Hi + 2      E[xi xj ]Hi Hj
                                                 n i=1     B i,j=1

At this point, we have simply substituted in the relevant definitions and rearranged the terms. Now, note
                   2
that E[xi xj ] = B
                 n2
                     if i ╠Ė= j and E[xi xj ] = Bn
                                                   otherwise. We substitute this in, and use the fact that
  2     1
           P  n      2
H = n i=1 Hi .
                                           n             n            n
                                       2╬Ę X         ╬Ę2 X 2 ╬Ę2 X
                     E[J╠é1 J╠é1 ] = I ŌłÆ        Hi +          Hi + 2       Hi Hj
                                        n i=1       nB i=1       n
                                                                    i╠Ė=j
                                           n            n                        n
                                                    ╬Ę2 X
                                                                      2
                                       2╬Ę X                            ╬Ę     ╬Ę2 X 2
                                 =IŌłÆ          Hi + 2        Hi Hj +        ŌłÆ 2      Hi
                                        n i=1       n i,j=1            nB    n  i=1
                                                        2          n
                                                         ╬Ę     ╬Ę2 X 2
                                 = I ŌłÆ 2╬ĘH + ╬Ę 2 H2 +       ŌłÆ 2         Hi
                                                        nB     n   i=1
                                 = M1

Thus, we have proved the base case E[J╠é21 ] Ō¬░ M1 , which also implies E[J╠é2k ] Ō¬░ M1 , since they are identically
distributed. We next prove the inductive step under the assumption that E[J╠ékŌłÆ1 ...J╠é21 ...J╠ékŌłÆ1 ] Ō¬░ MkŌłÆ1 . By the
Law of Total Expectation and linearity,

      E[J╠ék ...J╠é21 ...J╠ék ] = E[E[J╠ék ...J╠é21 ...J╠ék |J╠ék ]] = E[J╠ék ┬Ę E[J╠ékŌłÆ1 ...J╠é21 ...J╠ékŌłÆ1 ] ┬Ę J╠ék ] Ō¬░ E[J╠ék MkŌłÆ1 J╠ék ].
The arithmetic in the next part of the argument is analogous to the argument in the base case.

           E[J╠ék MkŌłÆ1 J╠ék ] = E[(I ŌłÆ ╬Ę H╠ék )MkŌłÆ1 (I ŌłÆ ╬Ę H╠ék )]
                                                                 n
                                                                                       "                              #
                                                             ╬Ę2 X
                               = MkŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ╬ĘMkŌłÆ1 H ŌłÆ ╬ĘHMkŌłÆ1 + E  2
                                                                     xi xj Hi MkŌłÆ1 Hj
                                                             B i,j=1
                                                                                            n
                                                                                      ╬Ę2 X
                               = MkŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ╬ĘMkŌłÆ1 H ŌłÆ ╬ĘHMkŌłÆ1 +                                     Hi MkŌłÆ1 Hj
                                                                                      n2 i,j=1
                                                             n
                                                   1     1 X
                                                 + ╬Ę2  ŌłÆ 2      Hi MkŌłÆ1 Hi
                                                  nB    n   i=1
                                                              n
                                                2    1     1 X
                               = Jk MkŌłÆ1 Jk + ╬Ę         ŌłÆ 2       Hi MkŌłÆ1 Hi
                                                    nB    n   i=1

Next, we substitute in the definition of MkŌłÆ1 . Recall that if A is symmetric and B is PSD, then ABA is also
PSD.
                                ’Ż½                                                                      ’ŻČ
                                               2         2 kŌłÆ1
                                                                         n
                                                ╬Ę      ╬Ę               X
        E[J╠ék MkŌłÆ1 J╠ék ] = Jk ’ŻŁJ2(kŌłÆ1) +            ŌłÆ 2                         HykŌłÆ1 ...H2y1 ...HykŌłÆ1 ’ŻĖ Jk
                                               nB     n          y1 ...,ykŌłÆ1 =1
                                  ’Ż½                                                                     ’ŻČ
                        X n                     2          2
                                                               kŌłÆ1         n
       2    1       1                2(kŌłÆ1)       ╬Ę      ╬Ę               X                   2
   +╬Ę           ŌłÆ 2          Hi ’ŻŁJ          +        ŌłÆ 2                         HykŌłÆ1 ...Hy1 ...HykŌłÆ1 ’ŻĖ Hi
           nB      n     i=1
                                                 nB      n         y ...,y    =1  1        kŌłÆ1
                                             2        2
                                                           k      n
                                            ╬Ę   ╬Ę                 X
                            Ō¬░ J2k +            ŌłÆ 2                            Hyk ...H2y1 ...Hyk
                                            nB  n              y1 ...,yk =1

                            = Mk


                                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Note that we are able to drop the cross-terms in the first step since ABA Ō¬░ 0, whenever A is symmetric and B
is PSD. Therefore, we have show that E[J╠ék ...J╠é21 ...J╠ék ] Ō¬░ Mk for all k Ōłł [n]. By the operator monotonicity and
linearity of the trace,

              E[tr[J╠ék ...J╠é21 ...J╠ék ]] = tr[E[J╠ék ...J╠é21 ...J╠ék ]] Ōēź tr[Mk ]
                                                                               ’Ż«                               ’Ż╣
                                                         2              2 k
                                                                                      n
                                                             ╬Ę        ╬Ę             X
                                         = tr[J2k ] +             ŌłÆ 2       tr ’Ż░            Hyk ...H2y1 ...Hyk ’Ż╗
                                                           nB         n          y ...,y =1   1       k
                                                                    2         2
                                                                                   k      n
                                                                 ╬Ę   ╬Ę                    X
                                           = tr[J2k ] +             ŌłÆ 2                               ŌłźHyk ...Hy1 Ōłź2F
                                                                 nB  n                 y1 ...,yk =1



Hence, we have proved part (i) of the lemma. We will now prove part (ii). Define the following matrix:

                                                                  r        n
                                                   ╬Ę2  ╬Ę2
                                                                           X
                                 Nr =                 ŌłÆ 2                              Hyr ...H2y1 ...Hyr ,
                                                   nB  n                y1 ...,yr =1



and define N0 = I. We will prove that:

                                                                     k
                                                                                         !
                                                                                2(kŌłÆr) k
                                                                    X
                                         E[J╠ék ...J╠é21 ...J╠ék ] Ō¬»       (1 ŌłÆ ŽĄ)            Nr ,                                (3)
                                                                    r=0
                                                                                       r


for all k Ōłł N, where ŽĄ > 0. First, note that the condition of the theorem implies ŌłÆ(1 ŌłÆ ŽĄ)I Ōē║ J Ōē║ (1 ŌłÆ ŽĄ)I for
some ŽĄ > 0. First, note that the base case:

                                                                                                            n
                                                                                              ╬Ę2  ╬Ę2
                                                                                                            X
                       E[J╠é21 ] Ō¬» (1 ŌłÆ ŽĄ)2 N0 + N1 = (1 ŌłÆ ŽĄ)2 I +                                ŌłÆ 2               H2i ,
                                                                                              nB  n          i=1



holds from our computations in part (i), since J2 Ō¬» (1 ŌłÆ ŽĄ)2 N0 . Now for the inductive step. Under the
assumption that Equation 3 holds for k ŌłÆ 1, we show it also hold for k. By the same argument as in part (i), we
find that:
                                     "         kŌłÆ1
                                                                                  ! ! #
                                               X                              kŌłÆ1
        E[J╠ék ...J╠é21 ...J╠ék ] Ō¬» E       J╠ék           (1 ŌłÆ ŽĄ)2(kŌłÆ1ŌłÆr)
                                                                                   Nr J╠ék
                                               r=0
                                                                               r
                                          kŌłÆ1
                                                                               ! !
                                          X                                kŌłÆ1
                            = Jk                (1 ŌłÆ ŽĄ)2(kŌłÆ1ŌłÆr)                  Nr Jk
                                          r=0
                                                                            r
                                                                   n                   kŌłÆ1
                                                                                                                      ! !
                                                       ╬Ę2  ╬Ę2
                                                                   X                   X                           kŌłÆ1
                                               +          ŌłÆ 2                 Hi             (1 ŌłÆ ŽĄ)2(kŌłÆ1ŌłÆr)           Nr Hi
                                                       nB  n            i=1            r=0
                                                                                                                    r
                                                    kŌłÆ1
                                                                                       ! !
                                                    X                              kŌłÆ1
                            Ō¬» (1 ŌłÆ ŽĄ)2                    (1 ŌłÆ ŽĄ)2(kŌłÆ1ŌłÆr)               Nr
                                                    r=0
                                                                                    r
                                                                   n                   kŌłÆ1
                                                                                                                      ! !
                                                       ╬Ę2  ╬Ę2
                                                                   X                   X               2(kŌłÆ1ŌłÆr)    kŌłÆ1
                                               +          ŌłÆ 2                 Hi             (1 ŌłÆ ŽĄ)                   Nr Hi
                                                       nB  n            i=1            r=0
                                                                                                                    r
                                kŌłÆ1
                                                                 !
                                X                   2(kŌłÆr)    kŌłÆ1
                            =            (1 ŌłÆ ŽĄ)                   Nr
                                r=0
                                                               r
                                                   kŌłÆ1
                                                                 !                n
                                                   X                   ╬Ę2
                                                                 2(kŌłÆ1ŌłÆr)    ╬Ę2 X  kŌłÆ1
                                     +      (1 ŌłÆ ŽĄ)                ┬Ę       ŌłÆ 2       Hi Nr Hi
                                        r=0
                                                                       nB    n   i=1
                                                                                    r
                              kŌłÆ1
                                                      !      kŌłÆ1
                                                                                       !
                                          2(kŌłÆr) k ŌłÆ 1                  2(kŌłÆ1ŌłÆr) k ŌłÆ 1
                              X                              X
                            =     (1 ŌłÆ ŽĄ)               Nr +     (1 ŌłÆ ŽĄ)                Nr+1 ,
                              r=0
                                                    r        r=0
                                                                                   r


                                                                         16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                   2         2
                                                 P
                                     ╬Ę               n
where the last line follows from nB      ŌłÆ n╬Ę 2      i=1 Hi Nr Hi = Nr+1 . We can rewrite the second summation
to go from r = 1 to r = k by replacing r + 1 with r to combine the terms like so:
                        kŌłÆ1
                                                     !         k
                                                                                       !
                                    2(kŌłÆr) k ŌłÆ 1                          2(kŌłÆr) k ŌłÆ 1
                        X                                     X
                            (1 ŌłÆ ŽĄ)                    Nr +       (1 ŌłÆ ŽĄ)                Nr
                        r=0
                                                  r           r=1
                                                                                   rŌłÆ1
                                kŌłÆ1
                                     "                         !                         !#
                                                 2(kŌłÆr) k ŌłÆ 1                2(kŌłÆr) k ŌłÆ 1
                       2k
                                X
           = (1 ŌłÆ ŽĄ) N0 +              (1 ŌłÆ ŽĄ)                    + (1 ŌłÆ ŽĄ)                 Nr + Nk
                                r=1
                                                            r                       rŌłÆ1
                                                     kŌłÆ1
                                                                           !
                                                     X                   k
                               = (1 ŌłÆ ŽĄ)2k N0 +          (1 ŌłÆ ŽĄ)2(kŌłÆr)        Nr + Nk
                                                     r=1
                                                                         r
                                                  k
                                                                      !
                                               X                    k
                                           =        (1 ŌłÆ ŽĄ)2(kŌłÆr)      Nr .
                                                r=0
                                                                    r

Hence, we have completed the proof by induction. Note that to go from the second to the third line in the
previous equation block, we applied the recursive formula for binomial coefficients (see Fact 2). Now, doing the
same as before, we can conclude that:
                                                        k
                                                                            !
                                                                   2(kŌłÆr) k
                                          2
                                                       X
                            E tr[J╠ék ...J╠é1 ...J╠ék ] Ōēż     (1 ŌłÆ ŽĄ)            tr[Nr ].
                                                       r=0
                                                                          r
                                                                 k P
                                                    ╬Ę2     2             n
By the condition of the theorem that limkŌåÆŌł×         nB
                                                       ŌłÆ n╬Ę 2                                      2
                                                                         y1 ...,yk =1 ŌłźHyk ...Hy1 ŌłźF = 0, we have that:

                                                      r      n
                                           ╬Ę2  ╬Ę2
                                                             X
                           tr[Nr ] =          ŌłÆ 2                        tr[Hyr ...H2y1 ...Hyr ]
                                           nB  n          y1 ...,yr =1
                                                      r      n
                                           ╬Ę2  ╬Ę2
                                                             X
                                   =          ŌłÆ 2                        ŌłźHyr ...Hy1 Ōłź2F ,
                                           nB  n          y1 ...,yr =1

                                                              2
goes to zero as r ŌåÆ Ōł×. Let nr =      tr[Nr ] and ╬┤ = (1 ŌłÆ ŽĄ) . To prove the theorem statement, it suffices to
                   Pk       kŌłÆr k
show that limkŌåÆŌł× r=0 ╬┤           r
                                    nr = 0, when ╬┤ Ōłł (0, 1) and (nr )rŌłłN is a sequence of positive real numbers
converging to zero. By the theorem statement, we know that ŽĄ1r tr[Nr ] ŌåÆ 0. Therefore, there exists some
constant C such that ŽĄ1r tr[Nr ] Ōēż C for all r Ōłł [n], which implies tr[Nr ] Ōēż ŽĄr C. Therefore, by the Binomial
formula:
                    k
                                 !       k
                                                 !
                          kŌłÆr k                k                                         k
                  X                     X
                        ╬┤          nr Ōēż           (1 ŌłÆ ŽĄ2 )kŌłÆr ┬Ę CŽĄr = C (1 ŌłÆ ŽĄ)2 + ŽĄ .
                  r=0
                              r         r=0
                                               r

This term must go to zero as k ŌåÆ Ōł×, since (1 ŌłÆ ŽĄ)2 + ŽĄ = 1 ŌłÆ ŽĄ + ŽĄ2 < 1.


B     R ESULT OF W U ET AL . (2022)
Here, we summarize the relevant information needed to state Theorem 3.3 of Wu et al. (2022), which considers
the settings where one has access to a dataset of the form (xi , yi )iŌłł[n] , where xi Ōłł Rm , yi Ōłł R. f (xi , w) is a
function parameterized by w such that f : Rm ├Ś Rd ŌåÆ R. The loss function applied to each sample      P is MSE,
denoted by Ōäōi (w) = |f (xi , w)ŌłÆyi |2 , and the total loss over all the samples is given by L(w) = n1 n i=1 Ōäōi (w).
The linearized SGD dynamics considered is the same as Definition 1, except that S ŌŖé [n] is sampled from all
size B subsets of [n] uniformly.
One can now define two critical matrices. Let ╬Ż(w) = n1 n                                 T                   T
                                                                  P
                                                                     i=1 ŌłćŌäōi (w)ŌłćŌäōi (w) ŌłÆ ŌłćL(w)ŌłćL(w) be
                                                     1
                                                        P  n                           T
the noise covariance matrix, and let G(w) = n i=1 Ōłćf (xi , w)Ōłćf (xi , w) be the Fisher matrix that
characterizes the local geometry of the loss landscape. Next, Wu et al. (2022) define the loss-scaled alignment
factor (Equation 3 in Wu et al. (2022)):
                                                       tr[╬Ż(w)G(w)]
                                            ┬Ą(w) =                  .                                                 (4)
                                                      2L(w)ŌłźG(w)Ōłź2F
The last step before stating the theorem is the introduction of the definition of linear stability considered in Wu
et al. (2022).


                                                           17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Definition 4. (Linear stability in Wu et al. (2022)) A global minimum wŌłŚ is said to be linearly stable if there
exists a C > 0 such that it holds for linearized dynamics that E[L(wt )] Ōēż C ┬Ę E[L(w0 )] ŌłĆt Ōēź 0, with w0 being
sufficiently close to wŌłŚ .

Finally, the theorem follows.
Theorem 3. (Theorem 3.3 in Wu et al. (2022)) Let wŌłŚ be a global minima that is linearly stable (Definition
4).qDenote by ┬Ą(w) the alignment factors for linearized SGD (Equation 4). If ┬Ą(w) > ┬Ą0 , then ŌłźH(wŌłŚ )ŌłźF Ōēż
1   B
╬Ę   ┬Ą0
       .


                                                     18
