Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A U NIFIED C ONCEPT-BASED S YSTEM FOR L OCAL ,
G LOBAL , AND M ISCLASSIFICATION E XPLANATIONS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         Explainability of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) has been garnering increasing
         attention in recent years. Of the various explainability approaches, concept-based
         techniques stand out for their ability to utilize human-meaningful concepts instead
         of focusing solely on individual pixels. However, there is a scarcity of methods
         that consistently provide both local and global explanations. Moreover, most of
         the methods have no offer to explain misclassification cases. Considering these
         challenges, we present a unified concept-based system for unsupervised learning
         of both local and global concepts. Our primary objective is to uncover the intrinsic
         concepts underlying each data category by training surrogate explainer networks to
         estimate the importance of the concepts. Our experimental results substantiated the
         efficacy of the discovered concepts through diverse quantitative and qualitative as-
         sessments, encompassing faithfulness, completeness, and generality. Furthermore,
         our approach facilitates the explanation of both accurate and erroneous predictions,
         rendering it a valuable tool for comprehending the characteristics of the target
         objects and classes.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Understanding the behavior of intelligent models, such as Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), is be-
coming an increasingly important demand in the area of responsible AI Samek et al. (2019); Molnar
(2020). Indeed, the models should be able to explain how, why, and when they make a particular
prediction and whether their high accuracy is reliable. These requirements are necessary to establish
transparency, trustworthiness, and accountability between users and models Weller (2019).
In vision applications, most explainability methods are developed using feature-based approaches,
which attempt to reveal the contribution of every single feature/pixel in making certain predictions
Nguyen et al. (2019). Despite the wide range of these methods proposed to date and their capabilities
in addressing some application requirements, several challenges lie ahead of them. These methods
usually make no effective attempt to explain the misclassification cases. They may also be fragile and
vulnerable to adversarial attacks Ghorbani et al. (2019a). Moreover, these methods are inherently
local, providing no perspective of what, why, and how the models generally behave Zhou et al. (2022).
These challenges have led to a surge of interest in concept-based explanation methods Achtibat et al.
(2022); Mincu et al. (2021), which aim to identify the significance of a group of pixels that form
a cohesive and cognitively understandable concept. Specifically, in image data, pixels are grouped
into superpixels, segments, or comprehensible concepts. Although there is little consensus on these
terms in the literature Schwalbe (2022), they all share a common goal of investigating the group’s
contribution rather than the pixels’ individual roles.
The common concept learning methods typically consist of two main modules: one to form the
concepts and another to score them Escalante et al. (2018). Segmentation methods are commonly
used to define the concepts and scoring tools Kim et al. (2018) are widely employed to compute the
concepts’ importance scores. This study’s contribution lies in the second module, where a recent study
has shown that external scoring tools may be vulnerable methods against the perturbed input samples
Uesato et al. (2018); Brown & Kvinge (2021). Additionally, they may mistakenly overestimate
the concepts’ importance, which makes it potentially unfaithful and sensitive to irrelevant concepts
Schrouff et al. (2021). More importantly, in the supervised explanation methods, a set of prior


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


user-provided concept examples must be available to score and detect, while defining proper concepts
and labels, and the process of labeling itself might be impossible or laborious.
These challenges prompted us to explore ways to leverage the knowledge of trained networks to
eliminate the need for predefined concept examples and external scoring modules. We drew inspiration
from the Outlier Exposure technique in deep anomaly detection, which uses an auxiliary dataset to
teach the network better representations of anomaly cases Mirzaei et al. (2022); Hendrycks et al.
(2019). Indeed, we engage surrogate explainer networks and teach them the concepts’ representations
of the given target against some out-of-distribution samples from unrelated classes, rather than a
multi-class classification approach. This allows the networks to thoroughly learn the target’s objects
as well as their informative concepts.
From another perspective, similar to the feature-based explanation methods, the concepts can be
extracted locally per sample Liang et al. (2021); Ancona et al. (2017), or globally per class/set of
samples Ibrahim et al. (2019); Soares et al. (2021). While many methods focus on either one, few
approaches could provide a consistent framework for both local and global explanations simultane-
ously Clough et al. (2019); Schrouff et al. (2021). For instance, Schrouff et al. (2021) combined two
powerful existing techniques, one local, namely IG (Integrated Gradients), and one global, namely
TCAV (Testing with Concept Activation Vectors) Kim et al. (2018). However, there is a scarcity of
unified frameworks, while combining the two strategies in a single approach enhances understanding
of the correct predictions and facilitates further investigation of misclassification cases. A more
detailed overview of the related works can be found in the Appendix A.
In this paper, we propose a Unified Concept-Based System (UCBS) applicable to image data, which
is to the best of our knowledge one of the first unsupervised unified concept extraction frameworks.
This method utilizes surrogate networks and auxiliary datasets to direct the learning process towards
better representations of the targets’ objects as well as the targets’ concepts. Indeed, a number of
super-pixelated images (as the auxiliary dataset) are fed into the networks, facilitating the automatic
extraction of local and global concepts of the target of interest. Having the networks adapted, the
concepts are scored and the most influential ones are identified. These concept sets can serve as
explanations for the network’s performance. Our experimental results reveal that UCBS is able to
faithfully explain different target classes with sufficient sets of concepts. Additionally, the qualitative
evaluations indicate the applicability of UCBS in explaining misclassification cases and pinpointing
problematic regions within an image that lead the network to incorrect predictions.
2    N OTATION

Surrogate Networks come into the scene on-demand to explain the target of interest and assist in
the process of concept learning and scoring. In UCBS, we leverage pre-trained DNNs as the base
models, which are adapted to obtain surrogate networks. For the case of simplicity, we call these
networks NetB and NetS , respectively (see Appendix B.1 for detail).
Auxiliary Dataset is organized from the available samples to assist surrogate networks in learning
the distribution of the target concepts in addition to the target objects. Suppose that for the given
target class c, there is a set of n input images available in dataset Dc = {xc1 , xc2 , ..., xci , ..., xcn }. Each
of these images can be segmented into k segments/superpixels, i.e., for sample xci , a set of segments
as Sxc i = {sci,1 , sci,2 , ..., sci,k } is obtained. Each segment is padded with zero value up to the original
input size and labeled with the corresponding target class. To prepare the super-pixelated input data
for class c, a segmentation method is applied to a few of its images (e.g., m images), and DSc is
prepared as follows:
                                                DSc = Sxc 1 ∪ Sxc 2 ∪ ... ∪ Sxc m                                (1)
In addition, to fine-tune the binary surrogate models, we need some out-of-distribution examples,
                                                                                       c
which are randomly selected from the other classes and generally contained in Dout       . Summing up
these statements, the auxiliary dataset to explain target class c is obtained as Daux = Dc ∪ DSc ∪ Dout
                                                                                  c                 c
                                                                                                        .
For the sake of simplicity, we drop the index c from unnecessary cases in the remainder of this paper.

3    P ROPOSED METHOD

UCBS is an automated concept-based system that can explain a target of interest using local and global
concepts. This method utilizes surrogate models and auxiliary datasets to identify the most influential


                                                         2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


part(s) of the images and is developed using a set of super-pixelated images of the given target class,
feeding the DNNs’ training/fine-tuning process. The automated concept-based explanation methods
are typically composed of two main stages: one to form/learn the concepts and second to score the
importance of these concepts in making predictions. As Fig. 1 illustrates, the UCBS pipeline starts
with training/fine-tuning surrogate models to learn and score the concepts. Then, it is followed by
an extraction module, which is activated at the test time to provide local and global concepts. In
what follows, we first present the algorithm for learning and scoring the concepts, then describe
the concept extraction mechanism. It should be noted that while our emphasis is on fine-tuning
pre-trained models to use in the post-training explanation methods, UCBS serves as a general solution
that can readily be adapted for training the models from scratch.


                                CNN


                                                          CNN
                                                                             -


                                                                           Kmeans


                   a) Train: Concept learning                   b) Test: Concept scoring and extraction


Figure 1: UCBS general schema. For the target of interest, (a) and (b) are successively executed;
(a) surrogate networks are fine-tuned as binary classifiers (target vs. others) using auxiliary datasets
including a set of super-pixelated images of the target class, the original target images, and a set of
out-of-distribution samples; (b) the super-pixelated images as the potential concepts are scored and
ranked using the surrogate models. To identify the concepts, the p top concepts of each image are
selected as the local ones, and the embeddings of a set of candidate local concepts, associated with
a set of unseen images, are clustered and the g top groups, indicated with their best samples, are
selected as the global concepts.
Concept learning In the concept-based methods, particularly in image data, superpixels or segments
Schwalbe (2022) are typically treated as initial concepts that their importance in making predictions
should be determined and scored. Therefore, in this step, our goal is to obtain an explainer model
that estimates the concepts’ scores directly. To do so, we fine-tune surrogate networks, which are
able to output approximate concepts’ importance in a single forward pass.
Surrogate networks are indeed binary DNN classifiers built from the base (binary/multi-class) DNN
models to comprehensively detect and explain samples of the given target class, i.e., the target samples
vs. the non-target samples. As Fig 1-a shows, surrogate networks take the auxiliary datasets and
leverage the learned representations of the base models to be fine-tuned. Given NetS , in which
                              c
fθ : xi → p({0, 1}) ; xi ∈ Daux   and the original learning objective L, we formalize the concept
learning process as minimizing the following objective:
       E(x,y)∼Dc [L (f (x) , y)] + λ1 E(x,y)∼DSc [L (f (x) , y)] + λ2 E(x,y)∼Dout
                                                                              c [L (f (x) , y)]           (2)
in which λ1 and λ2 determine the relative influence of the super-pixelated and non-target samples,
which are considered to be equally important in this study. This process enables the surrogate
networks to learn the distribution of the concepts along with the original target images. For the
zero-pixel areas of the super-pixelated images, the output of the convolution operation as well as
the max or the average pooling, is zero. This prevents these regions’ weights from being updated
during the back-propagation operation (under some activation functions like relu or sigmoid) Apicella
et al. (2021). In fact, having only the weights associated with each segment updated assists in better
learning of those regions. On the other hand, this effect, together with learning the non-segmented
(original) images, makes the role of the most important parts of the images highlighted. For instance,


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


imagine two segments in the class of tiger cat: one for a part of the ears and another for a part of the
background. During the training process, on the one hand, the DNN learns these two segments are
commonly associated with the tiger cat class and puts a certain concentration on them; on the other
hand, in the learning of the complete images, the DNN learns that the similar parts of the former
segment (ear) contribute more to identifying the tiger cat class than the background-like parts. In
addition, the network observes the ear-like patterns more than the background-like data during the
training process, either in the segmented or non-segmented images. The surrogate model aggregates
these findings and assigns higher scores to the ear segments than to the background parts, and this is
what we exactly need to discover the most important concepts.
Concept scoring Initial concepts must be prioritized based on their contributions to the proper
predictions. To this end, UCBS utilizes the knowledge of the adapted surrogate models. Considering
the aforementioned framework, the importance score of segment si,j ∈ Sxi , with respect to the target
class c, is defined using NetS as follows:
                                        IS(si,j ) = fθ′,c (si,j )                                 (3)
in which fθ′,c returns the pre-softmax output associated with the given target class. The raw output
values were considered to preserve the original magnitude of the scores.
Concept extraction Having assigned scores to the concepts, they are ready to provide local expla-
nations for individual data points or global explanations for either a specific target class or a set of
examples. In what follows, we describe how UCBS extracts these two sets of concepts, namely local
and global concepts.
Local concepts To extract the local concepts of an unseen image xi with respect to the class c, the
image is first segmented and all its initial concepts are collected in Sxi , as annotated previously. The
importance scores of these concepts are then obtained by passing them through the surrogate network
of class c and the p highest-scoring ones are selected as the local concepts of sample xi . These local
concepts have been denoted as li,j in Fig. 1-b.
p is a user-defined parameter to provide different levels of complexity and accuracy, and our ex-
periments show that p = 3 is a well-set value and yields the most influential parts of each image
(Appendix C.2 provides an insight into the number of required concepts.). Local concepts help to
deepen our understanding of FP and FN predictions, discovering why the networks misclassify input
data inside or outside of the target classes (See section 4.3.3).
Global concepts provide a general view of each target class and reveal the common top concepts that
appear in most examples of that class. To obtain these concepts, UCBS takes a set of random target
images, extracts their local concepts, and groups them based on their similarity. Fig. 1-b shows this
process in detail, in which first, the top local concepts of the random images are given to the surrogate
network to be mapped to their embeddings (h(li,j )). The embedding values are then clustered using
their Euclidean distances as an effective perceptual similarity measure Zhang et al. (2018). The
clustering results in similar concepts being grouped together as examples of a specific global concept.
The clusters are sorted based on their population, and the g top clusters are assigned as the final
global concepts of the given target. To illustrate examples of each global concept, the densest areas
of the clusters are focused. Indeed, the clusters with the highest population are more prevalent and
examples with the lowest cost are more similar cases of each concept.

4       E XPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
This section presents a detailed discussion of the conducted experiments and evaluation of the UCBS.
First, the experimental framework is described, and next, the quantitative performance of the UCBS
is evaluated from different perspectives. Subsequently, we provide results of qualitative evaluations
including visualization of local and global concepts, as well as the application of UCBS in explaining
misclassification cases.

4.1       E XPERIMENTAL SETUP

In order to establish UCBS1 as well as other comparing methods, we employed the widely-used
ResNet model (34 layers) He et al. (2016), pre-trained on the ILSVRC2012 dataset (ImageNet)
    1
        All of the code necessary to reproduce our experimental findings can be found after the reviewing process.


                                                          4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Russakovsky et al. (2015) as the base model. As comparisons for the UCBS scoring performance,
we considered several existing approaches including two surrogate explanation methods, namely
LIME Ribeiro et al. (2016) and SHAP Lundberg & Lee (2017), and two attribution methods modified
for the concept-based explanations, namely GradCAM Selvaraju et al. (2017) and LRP (Layer-wise
relevance propagation) Bach et al. (2015). Regarding the evaluation criteria, we used Insertion and
Deletion Petsiuk et al. (2018), Sensitivity − n Ancona et al. (2017), Faithfulness Bhatt et al. (2021),
and SSC and SDC Dabkowski & Gal (2017); Ghorbani et al. (2019b). Some of these measures
have been adapted from the feature-based explanation approaches to the concept-based area. See
Appendix B for more implementation details, evaluation metrics, baseline methods, and the applied
modifications to provide concept-level results.

4.2     Q UANTITATIVE EVALUATIONS

This section covers quantitative analysis of the provided explanations in terms of accuracy, importance,
and generality. The performance of surrogate models in terms of accuracy is also evaluated in
Appendix C.1.

4.2.1    E VALUATING EXPLANATION ACCURACY
As the proposed method is unsupervised and the true concepts and their importance are unknown,
evaluating explanation accuracy is difficult. Therefore, we investigate the faithfulness of the explana-
tions by considering Insertion and Deletion that testify to the effect of important concepts on the
model predictions. To this end, we add/remove the concepts in descending order of their significance
and obtain the corresponding predictions. Then the Areas Under the Insertion/Deletion Curves of
the prediction probabilities are calculated (see Supp Fig. 9 as the sample curves used to calculate
these results). Table. 1 summarizes the performances of various explainability methods using the
average results of 1, 000 random images, with respect to their corresponding true classes. The values
of Insertion and Deletion show that UCBS surpassed other methods on both measures. These results
indicate a higher efficacy of the UCBS method in identifying critical regions that steer the predictions
toward a specific class with greater speed and accuracy. Moreover, it is noteworthy that the relative
significance of the concepts is more accurately reflected in the scores assigned by the UCBS (see
Appendix C.6, which visualizes score maps of different explanation methods) so that their deletion
and insertion results in more desirable values of Deletion and Insertion.
In addition to the importance rankings experiments, we include results of Sensitivity − n and
Faithfulness to take specifically attribution values into account. They measure the correlation of
the concepts’ scores and the model’s predictions. The Faithfulness results in Table. 1 show that the
UCBS and SHAP methods tend to be the most competitive methods of this perspective. Moreover,
Supp Fig. 10 indicates the Sensitivity of various explainability methods, where UCBS performs the
best overall, especially for the small subsets of concepts.


         Table 1: Results of evaluating explanations accuracy as well as concepts efficiency.
                     Insertion(↑)      Deletion(↓)        Faithfulness(↑)       SSC(↓)        SDC(↓)
LIME                     0.46              0.40                 0.46              13.4             1.8
SHAP                     0.64              0.31                 0.65               9.7             1.1
GradCAM                  0.39              0.33                 0.22              18.8             2.2
LRP                      0.43              0.40                 0.25              16.6             2.0
Ours (UCBS)              0.71              0.26                 0.66               8.3             1.6


4.2.2    E VALUATING THE EFFICIENCY OF TOP CONCEPTS
We analyze the efficiency of a concept set from two perspectives, namely completeness and compact-
ness. The former pertains to how sufficient a particular set of concepts is in explaining the model’s
predictions. Compactness, meanwhile, speaks to the size of the sets, i.e., the fewer concepts, the
quicker decisions. For the top concept set, these mean that a few of the most crucial concepts in the
model’s predictions should have the highest scores assigned. To address these aspects, we employed


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and adapted two importance measures that are primarily used in pixel-based approaches; Smallest
Sufficient Concepts (SSC), which determines the smallest set of concepts necessary for the accurate
prediction of the target class, and Smallest Destroying Concepts (SDC), which refers to the smallest
set of concepts whose removal results in incorrect predictions Ghorbani et al. (2019b); Dabkowski &
Gal (2017). For a more thorough understanding of these measures, please refer to the example in
Supp. Fig. 8 and the accompanying descriptions in Appendix C.2.
To assess compactness, the values of SSC and SDC (averaged over 1, 000 randomly selected valida-
tion images from the same 100 target classes) are presented in Table. 1. In terms of SSC, the UCBS
method offers the best concept set and reaches the proper predictions more quickly. However, when
it comes to SDC, the methods perform similarly, typically making incorrect predictions by removing
one or two of the most key concepts. On the other hand, to evaluate the completeness of the concept
sets, we refer to the completeness scores, which are measured by the ratio of the accuracy attained
by a given set of concepts to the original accuracy Yeh et al. (2020). Fig. 2 shows the values of
completeness scores for concept sets of varying sizes. We observe that UCBS outperforms all other
methods. Particularly, when selecting three concepts, UCBS achieves a completeness score above
0.5, meaning that such a set of concepts is sufficient to attain at least 50% of the original accuracy.
Moreover, we draw attention to the colored circles in the figure that highlight the completeness scores
of the SSC concept set, where for the UCBS approach, the SSC concept set’s completeness score
is 0.82, revealing that the SSC set is highly successfully representative of the base models and by
employing only 8.3 concepts, we can accurately recover the base models’ predictions up to 82%
accuracy.

4.2.3   E VALUATING THE GENERALITY OF EXTRACTED CONCEPTS

The generality of the concept-based explanations refers
to how meaningful the concepts are to the other classifi-
cation base models Guidotti et al. (2021). To assess this
perspective of the obtained concepts, we tested the per-
formances using various network architectures, namely
Inception Szegedy et al. (2015), EfficientNet Tan & Le
(2019), Vit Dosovitskiy et al. (2020), in addition to ResNet
(the original base model). Indeed, the accuracy of these
models is evaluated via the aforementioned process of
insertion and deletion, starting with the most important
concepts. Fig. 3 presents the average accuracy plots and
their AUCs, where we observe consistent results between
the original base model and the new ones, indicating that
the extracted concepts are general yet effective in explain- Figure 2: Completeness scores for the
ing different target classes irrespective of the employed concept sets of varying sizes.
model in the learning phase. We conducted statistical
tests to further assess the relative performance of the base
models in comparison to one another, as detailed in Appendix C.4.


Figure 3: Evaluating the performance of the obtained concepts using different base models, a) when
the concepts are progressively inserted, b) when they are deleted.


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.3     Q UALITATIVE EVALUATIONS

In the following sections, the outcomes of local, global, and misclassification explanations of the
UCBS are provided, specifically for three target classes: tiger cat, police van, and revolver. Additional
qualitative examples are also available in the Appendix C.6 and C.7.
4.3.1    L OCAL EXPLANATIONS
Fig. 4 displays examples of local concepts for the three classes. The first two rows suggest that (a
portion of) the animals’ faces and their body texture play a significant role in identifying the tiger cat
objects. In the case of the police van examples, the figures illustrate that the network focuses on the
police logo and various vehicle components, such as the tire, the windows, and the headlight. For the
revolver, the extracted local concepts verify that the network can successfully recognize different
parts of these objects, including the grip, the cylinder, and the barrel.

                         Input sample   Super-pixels   Scores       1st local concept   2nd local concept   3rd local concept
            Tiger cat
            Police van
            Revolver


Figure 4: Local concepts to explain individual images. For each class, there are two examples,
displaying the original image, the segmented version, the complete scoring map, and the top three
          3 class
local concepts      twoinstance.
               of each   sample for each one = 6 rows
4.3.2 G LOBAL EXPLANATIONS
To illustrate the global concepts, UCBS was applied to the three aforementioned target classes, and
Fig. 5 depicts their outputs. In this figure, the top three global concepts of each class have been
indicated via the best three representative samples (having minimum cost) of each group. About the
tiger cat class, UCBS proposes that the most crucial and general concepts for identifying such objects
include the animal’s (pointy) ears, the body texture (incorporating fur patterns), and a portion of their
mouth and nose (featuring cat whiskers). For police vans, it is evident that the network has primarily
concentrated on the standalone police text logo, the police text logo positioned on the front of the
vehicles (encompassing a section of the car bumper and headlight), and the van’s tire, respectively.
Regarding the revolver, UCBS clarifies that objects of this category can effectively be recognized
using the concepts of the barrel (incorporating the front sight), the cylinder, and the trigger.
4.3.3 E XPLAINING MISCLASSIFICATIONS
Explaining the network’s functionality based on the most impactful concepts assists in the clarification
of misclassification cases, either FP or FN ones. Fig. 6 presents one example of FP and one example
of FN for each target class. The first two rows pertain to the tiger cat class, where a cat image


                                                                7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                         1st global concept     2nd global concept        3rd global concept


            Tiger cat
            Police-van
            Revolver


Figure 5: Global concepts to explain one certain target class. For each class, the top three global
concepts are indicated via the best three representative samples of each group. The input images are
           3 class
shown in their      = 3sizes.
               original rows

could not be recognized and a dog image was mistakenly placed in the tiger cat class, respectively.
Considering the local concepts of the former case, it becomes apparent that the network struggled to
identify similarities to the global concepts of this class and primarily focused on irrelevant concepts.
Conversely, the striped-shaped portions of the dog image and its front paws led the network to
misclassify that image. The following two rows are associated with the police van class, where no
police logo or vehicle parts were recognized in the first case, and conversely, parts of the windshield,
bumper, headlight, and bus tire were detected in the FP case. These local concepts contributed to the
incorrect classification of the objects. In the FN case of the revolver, the network failed to identify
some influential parts of the object, as suggested by the global concepts. Additionally, in the FP case,
the detected tube-like part of the object may have misled the network.

5   D ISCUSSION , LIMITATIONS , AND FUTURE WORKS
The UCBS method is designed to automatically extract human-understandable and identifiable
concepts, such as “pointy ears” and “police logo”, eliminating the need for providing user-defined
concepts and applying external scoring methods. Providing human-meaningful concepts is beneficial
for explaining results to (non-expert) end-users, and the ability to comprehend local and global
concepts in a unified framework is promising for clarifying false predictions. This method is
developed based on image data, however, the general idea of taking advantage of surrogate models to
provide unified concept-based explainability frameworks is applicable to other data types.
We demonstrated the effectiveness and generality of the extracted concepts. However, it is important
to acknowledge that the limitations and drawbacks of superpixels are inherited by the UCBS, which
may potentially result in the creation of meaningless concepts. Moreover, the automatic extraction


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               Input sample              Super-pixels       Scores   Top local concepts


           Tiger cat    Tiger cat predicted as others


                         Others predicted as tiger cat
           Police van


                        Police van predicted as others


                        Others predicted as police van
           Revolver


                        Revolver predicted as others


                         Others predicted as revolver


Figure 6: Explaining misclassification cases: two examples of FN and FP are represented for each
target class, and theone
           3 class,   input image (in
                         sample   forits
                                      FPoriginal
                                         and FNsize), the segmented
                                                  in each  class = 6 version,
                                                                      rows the complete scoring
map, and the scoring map of the top three local concepts are indicated for each example.


of abstract and complex concepts may be challenging or necessitate additional post-processing.
Addressing these challenges presents an intriguing direction for future research, particularly in
identifying and surrounding the most influential concepts within bounding boxes, which could help
mitigate the issues. In addition, in this study, we used a binary classifier for each target class in
the concept learning and network adaptation process. Although only a few epochs are required to
fine-tune the surrogate networks, the approach may seem time-consuming when applied to multi-class
datasets. Therefore, we plan to apply super-pixelated images for the simultaneous concept learning
of multiple target classes as a whole in future research. Appendix C.5 presents several examples of
the limitations, including imperfectly super-pixelated inputs and dataset biases.

6    C ONCLUSION
This work proposed UCBS to bridge the gap between local and global explanation techniques as
well as to analyze misclassification cases. We took advantage of super-pixellating of the training
data and incorporating them into the learning process. This resulted in not only improving the
performances but also facilitating the identification and scoring of the most influential concepts. In
practical applications, we are interested in obtaining a cognitively comprehensible rationale for the
model’s predictions, either for a single data point or a set of them. In the proposed UCBS, the former
was achieved by ranking the concepts locally, and the latter was attained by tracking the concepts
globally. Furthermore, by closely monitoring the local concepts and comparing them to the global
ones, UCBS was able to clarify the false predictions. Insights gained from this research may promote
the safer use of AI models in vision-based applications within safety-critical fields such as healthcare
or finance. Additionally, these insights may facilitate the design, development, and debugging process
of the models, from the perspective of the developers.


                                                                        9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Radhakrishna Achanta, Appu Shaji, Kevin Smith, Aurelien Lucchi, Pascal Fua, and Sabine Süsstrunk.
  SLIC superpixels compared to state-of-the-art superpixel methods. IEEE Transactions on pattern
  analysis and machine intelligence, 34(11):2274–2282, 2012.
Reduan Achtibat, Maximilian Dreyer, Ilona Eisenbraun, Sebastian Bosse, Thomas Wiegand, Wojciech
  Samek, and Sebastian Lapuschkin. From" where" to" what": Towards human-understandable
  explanations through concept relevance propagation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.03208, 2022.
Marco Ancona, Enea Ceolini, Cengiz Öztireli, and Markus Gross. Towards better understanding of
 gradient-based attribution methods for deep neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.06104,
 2017.
Andrea Apicella, Francesco Donnarumma, Francesco Isgrò, and Roberto Prevete. A survey on
  modern trainable activation functions. Neural Networks, 138:14–32, 2021.
Sebastian Bach, Alexander Binder, Grégoire Montavon, Frederick Klauschen, Klaus-Robert Müller,
  and Wojciech Samek. On pixel-wise explanations for non-linear classifier decisions by layer-wise
  relevance propagation. PloS one, 10(7):e0130140, 2015.
Umang Bhatt, Adrian Weller, and José MF Moura. Evaluating and aggregating feature-based model
 explanations. In Proceedings of International Conference on International Joint Conferences on
 Artificial Intelligence, pp. 3016–3022, 2021.
Davis Brown and Henry Kvinge. Making corgis important for honeycomb classification: Adversarial
  attacks on concept-based explainability tools. arXiv e-prints, pp. arXiv–2110, 2021.
James R Clough, Ilkay Oksuz, Esther Puyol-Antón, Bram Ruijsink, Andrew P King, and Julia A
  Schnabel. Global and local interpretability for cardiac mri classification. In Proceedings of Medical
  Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention, pp. 656–664. Springer, 2019.
Ian Connick Covert, Chanwoo Kim, and Su-In Lee. Learning to estimate shapley values with vision
  transformers. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Piotr Dabkowski and Yarin Gal. Real-time image saliency for black box classifiers. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An image
  is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2020.
Hugo Jair Escalante, Sergio Escalera, Isabelle Guyon, Xavier Baró, Yağmur Güçlütürk, Umut Güçlü,
  Marcel van Gerven, and Rob van Lier. Explainable and interpretable models in computer vision
  and machine learning. Springer, 2018.
Milton Friedman. The use of ranks to avoid the assumption of normality implicit in the analysis of
 variance. Journal of the american statistical association, 32(200):675–701, 1937.
Amirata Ghorbani, Abubakar Abid, and James Zou. Interpretation of neural networks is fragile. In
 Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, pp. 3681–3688, 2019a.
Amirata Ghorbani, James Wexler, James Y Zou, and Been Kim. Towards automatic concept-based
 explanations. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019b.
Riccardo Guidotti, Anna Monreale, Dino Pedreschi, and Fosca Giannotti. Principles of explainable
  artificial intelligence. Explainable AI Within the Digital Transformation and Cyber Physical
  Systems: XAI Methods and Applications, pp. 9–31, 2021.
Thomas Hartley, Kirill Sidorov, Christopher Willis, and David Marshall. Swag: Superpixels weighted
  by average gradients for explanations of CNNs. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference
  on Applications of Computer Vision, pp. 423–432, 2021.


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 770–778, 2016.
Dan Hendrycks, Mantas Mazeika, and Thomas Dietterich. Deep anomaly detection with outlier
  exposure. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Fred Hohman, Haekyu Park, Caleb Robinson, and Duen Horng Polo Chau. S ummit: Scaling
  deep learning interpretability by visualizing activation and attribution summarizations. IEEE
  transactions on visualization and computer graphics, 26(1):1096–1106, 2019.
Mark Ibrahim, Melissa Louie, Ceena Modarres, and John Paisley. Global explanations of neural net-
 works: Mapping the landscape of predictions. In Proceedings of the 2019 AAAI/ACM Conference
 on AI, Ethics, and Society, pp. 279–287, 2019.
Been Kim, Martin Wattenberg, Justin Gilmer, Carrie Cai, James Wexler, Fernanda Viegas, et al.
  Interpretability beyond feature attribution: Quantitative testing with concept activation vectors
  (TCAV). In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2668–2677, 2018.
Yu Liang, Siguang Li, Chungang Yan, Maozhen Li, and Changjun Jiang. Explaining the black-box
  model: A survey of local interpretation methods for deep neural networks. Neurocomputing, 419:
  168–182, 2021.
Scott M Lundberg and Su-In Lee. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Scott M Lundberg, Gabriel Erion, Hugh Chen, Alex DeGrave, Jordan M Prutkin, Bala Nair, Ronit
  Katz, Jonathan Himmelfarb, Nisha Bansal, and Su-In Lee. From local explanations to global
  understanding with explainable AI for trees. Nature machine intelligence, 2(1):56–67, 2020.
Diana Mincu, Eric Loreaux, Shaobo Hou, Sebastien Baur, Ivan Protsyuk, Martin Seneviratne, Anne
  Mottram, Nenad Tomasev, Alan Karthikesalingam, and Jessica Schrouff. Concept-based model
  explanations for electronic health records. In Proceedings of the Conference on Health, Inference,
  and Learning, pp. 36–46, 2021.
Hossein Mirzaei, Mohammadreza Salehi, Sajjad Shahabi, Efstratios Gavves, Cees GM Snoek,
  Mohammad Sabokrou, and Mohammad Hossein Rohban. Fake it until you make it: Towards
  accurate near-distribution novelty detection. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
 Representations, 2022.
Christoph Molnar. Interpretable machine learning. Lulu. com, 2020.
Anh Nguyen, Jason Yosinski, and Jeff Clune. Understanding neural networks via feature visualization:
  A survey. Explainable AI: interpreting, explaining and visualizing deep learning, pp. 55–76, 2019.
Vitali Petsiuk, Abir Das, and Kate Saenko. Rise: Randomized input sampling for explanation of
  black-box models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.07421, 2018.
Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. Why should I trust you? explaining the
 predictions of any classifier. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference
 on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 1135–1144, 2016.
Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng Huang,
  Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, et al. Imagenet large scale visual recognition
  challenge. International journal of computer vision, 115:211–252, 2015.
Wojciech Samek, Grégoire Montavon, Andrea Vedaldi, Lars Kai Hansen, and Klaus-Robert Müller.
 Explainable AI: interpreting, explaining and visualizing deep learning, volume 11700. Springer,
 2019.
Jessica Schrouff, Sebastien Baur, Shaobo Hou, Diana Mincu, Eric Loreaux, Ralph Blanes, James
  Wexler, Alan Karthikesalingam, and Been Kim. Best of both worlds: local and global explanations
  with human-understandable concepts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.08641, 2021.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Gesina Schwalbe. Concept embedding analysis: A review. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.13909, 2022.
Ramprasaath R Selvaraju, Michael Cogswell, Abhishek Das, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Devi Parikh,
  and Dhruv Batra. Grad-CAM: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based local-
  ization. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 618–626,
  2017.
Eduardo Soares, Plamen P. Angelov, Bruno Costa, Marcos P. Gerardo Castro, Subramanya Nageshrao,
  and Dimitar Filev. Explaining deep learning models through rule-based approximation and
  visualization. IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems, 29(8):2399–2407, 2021.
Christian Szegedy, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, Pierre Sermanet, Scott Reed, Dragomir Anguelov, Du-
  mitru Erhan, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Andrew Rabinovich. Going deeper with convolutions. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1–9, 2015.
Mingxing Tan and Quoc Le. Efficientnet: Rethinking model scaling for convolutional neural networks.
 In International conference on machine learning, pp. 6105–6114, 2019.
Sana Tonekaboni, Shalmali Joshi, Melissa D McCradden, and Anna Goldenberg. What clinicians
  want: contextualizing explainable machine learning for clinical end use. In Machine learning for
  healthcare conference, pp. 359–380, 2019.
Jonathan Uesato, Brendan O’donoghue, Pushmeet Kohli, and Aaron Oord. Adversarial risk and the
  dangers of evaluating against weak attacks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  5025–5034, 2018.
Adrian Weller. Transparency: motivations and challenges. In Explainable AI: Interpreting, Explaining
  and Visualizing Deep Learning, pp. 23–40. Springer, 2019.
Weibin Wu, Yuxin Su, Xixian Chen, Shenglin Zhao, Irwin King, Michael R. Lyu, and Yu-Wing
 Tai. Towards global explanations of convolutional neural networks with concept attribution. In
 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 8649–8658,
 2020.
Chih-Kuan Yeh, Been Kim, Sercan Arik, Chun-Liang Li, Tomas Pfister, and Pradeep Ravikumar.
  On completeness-aware concept-based explanations in deep neural networks. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 33:20554–20565, 2020.
Mateo Espinosa Zarlenga, Zohreh Shams, and Mateja Jamnik. Efficient decompositional rule
 extraction for deep neural networks. In 1st Workshop on eXplainable AI approaches for debugging
 and diagnosis (XAI4Debugging), NeurIPS, 2021.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
  effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 586–595, 2018.
Yilun Zhou, Serena Booth, Marco Tulio Ribeiro, and Julie Shah. Do feature attribution methods
  correctly attribute features? In Proceedings of the 36th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
  AAAI, 2022.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX

A. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORKS

In vision-based applications, the significance of the pixels is usually determined in the scope of a
single image, and it is not straightforward to determine important pixels for a variety of images of a
certain class Ribeiro et al. (2016). However, the fact is that the practitioners are eager to make sense
of the overall reasoning of the models in addition to the individual explanations Tonekaboni et al.
(2019); Zarlenga et al. (2021). Wu et al. (2020) proposed a novel two-stage framework composed of
a feature occlusion analysis and a mapping stage, which explains the model decisions in terms of the
importance of category-wide concepts. Summit Hohman et al. (2019) proposed a dynamic platform
to summarize and visualize the learned features of a DNN and their interaction. It introduced two
summarization techniques, namely activation aggregation and neuron-influence aggregation.
Despite these single-purpose works, having local and global approaches in a single framework
can make explanations practical for comparing assessment tasks, especially in the concept-based
approaches where we are not faced with firm pre-defined concepts (ground truths). Indeed, in unified
frameworks Lundberg et al. (2020); Schwalbe (2022); Lundberg & Lee (2017), local and global
explanations can directly be contrasted. This assists in highlighting the unique characteristics of
each sample against the representative concepts of the understudied target class. In this context,
there are few frameworks, and most of them extract and score discovered concepts in separate
modules. Ghorbani et al. proposed ACE, an Automated Concept-based Explanation, which aggregates
relevant image segments across multiple input data to obtain global concepts Ghorbani et al. (2019b).
ACE tends to provide global concept samples and has no straightforward suggestions for local
interpretations of either true or false predictions. Moreover, these methods used TCAV to score
the discovered concepts, which has its own fragility, as discussed in the introduction. It is worth
mentioning that TCAV and UCBS are not directly comparable, because TCAV is a supervised
explanation method and needs predefined concept examples, unlike UCBS.


B. A DDITIONAL IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS

This section provides additional details on implementation settings, evaluation metrics, baseline
comparison methods, and the applied modifications to provide concept-level results.


B.1 BASE MODELS AND HYPER - PARAMETERS SETTINGS

We selected the ResNet model He et al. (2016), comprising 34 layers and pre-trained on the ImageNet
dataset, as the base model. This network has the classification head for a total of 1000 classes. To
adapt this network for binary classification (surrogate networks), we replaced the classification head
with a binary one, as illustrated in Supp. Fig. 7. Furthermore, the maximum softmax probability
baseline detector and the cross-entropy loss were used to fine-tune the networks.
The target classes were randomly selected among the ImageNet classes (generally 100 classes to
report the following measures). For each target class, we segmented 50 random images of the training
set into 50 super-pixels using the SLIC segmentation method Achanta et al. (2012). This resulted in a
maximum of 2, 500 super-pixelated images. The SLIC segmentation method was employed due to
its speed and simplicity. Furthermore, 1, 300 random images from the other classes were selected
to make the out-of-distribution dataset, and they were used to fine-tune the surrogate models for a
few epochs (50). This UCBS hyper-parameters setup proved sufficient for our experiments with the
ImageNet dataset, allowing the networks to learn the targets’ concepts in addition to the original
targets’ objects.
During the testing phase, three local concepts were extracted and visualized for each input image, and
three global concepts were identified for every target class (see Appendix C.2 about the number of
required concepts). The latter were obtained using the candidate local concepts of 20 unseen images.
To determine the global concepts, we performed KMeans clustering with K = 5, and the three best
representatives of each group are illustrated in the following figures.


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                      CNN
                     Supplementary Figure 7: The base and surrogate networks


B.2 E VALUATION METRICS

This section presents additional details about the evaluation criteria used in the experiments of this
study (Section 4).

• Deletion and Insertion: These two metrics are to investigate the faithfulness of an explanation
  to the base model. They explore whether pixels/concepts with high scores are really important to the
  predictions. They operate on the premise that the removal or insertion of the regions important to a
  network will force the base model to alter its decision. Specifically, the Deletion metric quantifies
  the reduction in the probability of the predicted class as progressively more important pixels are
  removed, i.e., the sharper drop and consequently lower Area Under the probability Curve (AUC)
  indicate strong explanations. Conversely, the Insertion metric takes a complementary approach. It
  gauges how fast the probability increases as pixels are inserted into an empty canvas in descending
  order, i.e., the larger Insertion AUC, the better faithfulness Petsiuk et al. (2018). In this study, we
  adapted the Deletion and Insertion AUCs for the concept-based applications, in which the deletion
  and insertion operations were applied using the concepts of individual images, and then the AUC
  results were averaged across 1, 000 random examples for their true classes. We call these metrics
  Deletion and Insertion for short.
  In addition to the above local measures, in order to evaluate the faithfulness of the extracted
  concepts to different base models, we also adapted these measures for the global evaluation of a
  set of examples. Indeed, we calculated the Deletion/Insertion AUCs for the accuracy curves of
  the validation sets obtained from different base models. In this way, we are able to evaluate how
  precise the concepts/explanations are, considering new base models and regardless of the model
  employed in the scoring phase.
• Sensitivity − n: The aim of this metric is to assess whether the attribution scores are in line
  with the changes in the model’s predictions when features are removed. To achieve this, different
  subsets of features are randomly selected and their individual attribution scores are computed.
  Then, the correlation between the predictions made with each subset and the sum of their respective
  attribution scores are calculated. Typically, the calculations are performed across subsets with a
  fixed size of n. This is done repeatedly for multiple predictions, and the results are averaged for a
  more accurate metric Ancona et al. (2017); Covert et al. (2023). We also adapted this metric for the
  extracted local concepts and computed it for subsets ranging from 3 to a maximum of 50 concepts,
  with a step size of 3. To obtain these measures, we utilized 1, 000 random images, each of which
  was sampled 100 times.
• Faithfulness: is a similar metric to Sensitivity-n in which the correlation is jointly calculated
  across subsets of all sizes Bhatt et al. (2021). Similarly, the Faithfulness values were obtained by
  calculating them for 1, 000 random images, each of which was sampled 100 times.
• SSC and SDC: These two metrics are used to evaluate the efficiency of a concept set. SSC
  (Smallest Sufficient Concepts) seeks the smallest set of concepts necessary for the accurate pre-
  diction of the target class, and SDC (Smallest Destroying Concepts) refer to the smallest set of


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  concepts whose removal will result in incorrect predictions Ghorbani et al. (2019b); Dabkowski &
  Gal (2017). These measures can be considered as local metrics, i.e., for input sample xi , the values
  of SSC(xi ) and SDC(xi ) are calculated with the cardinality of the aforementioned sets obtained
  from xi . From the global point of view, they are averaged over all the images of a dataset (D) and
  notated as SSC(D) and SDC(D).
• Completeness: quantifies how sufficient a particular set of concepts is in explaining a model’s
  predictions. It is calculated using the ratio of the accuracy attained by a given set of concepts to the
  original accuracy Yeh et al. (2020).

B.3 BASELINE METHODS

This section provides an overview of the baseline explanation methods. We used two surrogate
models, one gradient-based and one activation-based method, and we modified the last two ones to
arrive at concept-level attribution scores.

• LIME ( Local Interpretable Model-agnostic Explanations ): is an explanation method that can
  be applied to any classifier or regressor in a faithful way. LIME works by perturbing the input
  features and locally approximating the model around the given predictions. It generates a dataset
  of modified samples and trains an inherently interpretable model over it. Then, the surrogate
  trained models are used to compute feature importances and explanations for the original model’s
  predictions Ribeiro et al. (2016).
• SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations): is an explanation method that uses Shapley values, a
  concept from cooperative game theory, to assign a numerical value to each feature. Shapley
  values measure the contribution of each feature in predicting the outcome, considering several
  combinations of the features. SHAP uses a model-agnostic algorithm to estimate the contribution
  scores and they are aggregated across samples to generate the final features’ importances Lundberg
  & Lee (2017).
• GradCAM (Gradient-weighted Class Activation Mapping): is an explanation method that high-
  lights the regions of an input image that are important for the decision of a convolutional neural
  network (CNN). It works by computing the gradient of the predicted class score with respect to
  the feature maps of the last convolutional layer of the CNN and generates a heatmap that visually
  indicates which parts of an image the CNN is focusing on to make its prediction. The gradients
  represent the importance of each feature map in predicting the output class. This method is useful
  in object detection, segmentation, classification, and other computer vision problems Selvaraju
  et al. (2017).
• LRP (Layer-wise relevance propagation): is a backpropagation-based neural network explanation
  method that computes each input feature’s contribution to the output. It computes the relevance
  scores of each neuron, which score represent the contribution of the neurons to the prediction.
  LRP works by dividing the output relevance scores proportionally to the input features that were
  responsible for the neuron’s activation during the forward pass. This process is done layer-by-layer
  with the relevance scores being propagated backwards through the layers of the network Bach et al.
  (2015).

To tailor the GradCAM and LRP methods for the concept-based applications, we calculate the weight
of each concept (superpixel) by adding up the absolute values of its constituent pixels. However, we
explored alternative approaches to transform the pixel values into superpixel scores, we concluded
that the sum of absolute values was the most effective one, as reported in similar works Hartley et al.
(2021).

C. A DDITIONAL RESULTS
This section provides additional experimental results.

C.1 E VALUATING PERFORMANCE OF SURROGATE MODELS

Surrogate models are trained to imitate the behavior of the original base models, making them
more straightforward to explain and analyze. Therefore, incorporating super-pixelated images in


                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the fine-tuning process should not compromise the performance of the models. To investigate this,
we evaluated the discrimination capability of the models using the ImageNet validation set. We
conducted two assessments: one without the super-pixelated samples and another with them. We
examined the validation set in three different scenarios: 1) Only including images from the target
class (val pure ), 2) Including an equal number of images from the target class and the other class
(val equal ), and 3) Including images from the target class and randomly selecting 1, 000 images from
other classes (val1000 ). Supp. Table 2 presents the average loss and accuracy values for these three
scenarios.

Supplementary Table 2: The performance results of NetS , with and without feeding the super-
pixelated samples.
                     val pure                          val equal                     val1000
 State           ACC(%)          Loss            ACC(%)            Loss          ACC(%)          Loss
 Without      93.16 ± 6.09       0.37          93.36 ± 4.72        0.37        92.78 ± 4.30      0.38
 With         95.93 ± 4.29       0.35          95.04 ± 4.19        0.36        94.80 ± 3.79      0.36


The findings clearly demonstrate that the networks’ discrimination capabilities have not only been
maintained but also improved across all scenarios. This improvement can be attributed to the
utilization of super-pixelated images, which facilitate more effective learning of the target objects. In
other words, they progressively assist in focusing on different parts of the target images, compelling
the networks to grasp the finer details of the target concepts in addition to the overall target objects.
Consider that for a super-pixelated sample, the weights of the superpixels are updated, while the
corresponding weights of the (black) padding pixels remain unchanged. Furthermore, the super-
pixelated samples aid the networks in learning the common and frequent concepts associated with
each target class. As a result of these two features, the networks are directed to make more precise
predictions based on the importance and relevance of the target concepts rather than the role of
individual pixels. This effect persists even when the number of images from other classes increases
up to 1, 000 cases, implying that learning the target concepts enhances the networks’ ability to better
differentiate the non-target objects as well. Consequently, this approach can be considered a valuable
tool for directing the networks to make predictions based on the target concepts and mitigating the
influence of irrelevant factors such as background, potential biases, and so on.

C.2 I NSIGHTS INTO THE NUMBER OF REQUIRED CONCEPTS

To illustrate the SSC and SDC measures, Supp. Fig. 8 has been provided. It shows the images
including/excluding the top concepts in addition to the values of SSC and SDC for one example
of the tiger cat class. We passed these images through the NetS as well as NetB and reported the
predictions below of each image. We did this experiment to evaluate the effectiveness of the obtained
concepts in distinguishing the target images not only in a binary manner (target or non-target) but
also among all the 1000 classes of the ImageNet. In the latter, the tiger cat object can wrongly be
recognized as a Conch, a Tabby, an Egyptian cat, a Persian cat, and so on.
In this context, the minimum number of top local concepts to recognize objects of target class c is
obtained as follows:

                                pc = M ax SSC (Dc ) , SDC (Dc )

                                                                                                     (4)

in which Dc is the training set of this target. Although it is better to determine the values of pc per
target class, we suggest defining hyper-parameter p as follows:
                                                                               !
                                     1 X                    1   X
                      p = M ax               SSC (Dc ) ,            SDC (Dc )                       (5)
                                    |C|                   |C|
                                         c∈C                   c∈C

in which the average values are calculated across all the considered classes and utilized in the max
operator to ensure that no useful concepts are lost. These settings are applicable for both base and
surrogate networks.


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               𝑥𝑖


           Smallest Destroying
               Cconcepts

                                                                      1          2                   3

                                 Net S :    SDC(𝑥𝑖 ) = 3      Tiger cat     Tiger cat         others
                                 Net B :    SDC(𝑥𝑖 ) = 2      Tiger cat    Triceratops          --
           Smallest Sufficient


                                                                                         …
               Concepts


                                                                     1           2       …       9

                                 Net S :    SSC(𝑥𝑖 ) = 2          others    Tiger cat           --
                                 Net B :    SSC(𝑥𝑖 ) = 9          Quill      Conch       …   Tiger cat


   Supplementary Figure 8: Illustration of SSC and SDC for an instance of the tiger cat class.


According to our experiments, which involve 100 selected classes from the ImageNet dataset, we set
the value of p = 3 to distinguish target class images from all unrelated ones. The average values of
SSC and SDC are reported in Supp. Table. 3. These values indicate that NetS requires at least 3.6
concepts to perform proper predictions. On the other hand, removing an average of 3.4 key concepts
from the images causes NetS to make inaccurate predictions. For NetB , these values are 7.93 and
1.9, respectively.
Comparing the SSC measures of the two networks implies that explaining targets in a binary manner
is more straightforward and requires fewer concepts than the multi-class approach, which necessitates
a greater number of concepts (NetB ). To put it another way, as illustrated in Supp. Fig. 8, it takes
longer for NetB to recognize a tiger cat among other specific classes, some of which resemble
the tiger category closely (such as Tabby, Egyptian cat, and Persian cat), than it does for NetS to
comprehend that a tiger cat is a tiger cat and nothing else in general. Furthermore, from another
perspective, the SDC values demonstrate that NetB is prone to make errors more quickly than NetS .
In summary, the concepts extracted using surrogate networks are useful and important, as we generally
require 7 such concepts for proper recognition of an image among the 1000 classes of ImageNet
images. Despite these findings, we hypothesize that integrating these networks and feeding super-
pixelated images into the main network will lead to lower numbers and eliminate the need for
individual fine-tuning processes, which will be investigated in our future plans.


     Supplementary Table 3: The values of SSC and SDC over all the training target classes.

                                                           SSC             SDC               p
                                     NetS                   3.6            3.4               3
                                     NetB                  7.93            1.9               7


C.3 C OMPLEMENTARY RESULTS OF EVALUATING EXPLANATION ACCURACY

To complete the findings of Section 4.2.1, we include Supp Figs. 9 and 10. The former is for the
local performance of the UCBS and the latter indicates the Sensitivity − n of various explainability
methods. In Supp Fig. 9, several examples with their concept scoring maps and the Insertion and


                                                                      17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Deletion curves have been illustrated. These curves were utilized to compute the local AUC per
sample and then average across all the random images to have the final Insertion/Deletion measures
in Table. 1. As stated, the higher Insertion AUC and the lower Deletion are desirable, indicating the
higher faithfulness of the concepts.
Sensitivity values were calculated using 1, 000 random images and then they were averaged across
different subsets of concepts with step size 3. Supp Fig. 10 illustrates that UCBS outperforms the
other methods overall, particularly when dealing with small subsets of concepts, while SHAP also
demonstrates strong performance. These findings provide further evidence of the significant correla-
tions between the concepts’ importance and models’ predictions, as indicated by the Faithfulness
measures.

                        Input sample     Scores           Insertion         Deletion
             Revolver


Supplementary Figure 9: The local performance of UCBS: Left) original images and the concepts’
scores, Right) the Insertion and Deletion curves, which indicate the probability of the corresponding
class after the insertion or deletion of important concepts (higher AUC is better for insertion, lower
for deletion).


Supplementary Figure 10: Evaluation of Sensitivity − n. The measures were calculated for various
subsets of concepts (step size 3) and then averaged across all 1, 000 random images.


C.4 C OMPLEMENTARY RESULTS OF EVALUATING THE GENERALITY OF THE CONCEPTS :
S TATISTICAL TESTS

In order to calculate the Insertion/Deletion accuracies presented in Fig. 3 of section 4.2.3, we used
1, 000 random samples from the validation sets of the considered 100 target classes. Each image
was processed by various base models, and the accuracy of each class was computed. Then, the
accuracies were averaged to generate the final Insertion/deletion plots. Before averaging, we applied
Freidman’s test Friedman (1937) to statistically evaluate and rank the base models. Supp. Table .4


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


presents the results and its last row shows that the default equivalency hypothesis H0 is rejected,
because p − value is lower than α. This means that the models perform differently in this perspective.
Therefore, we refer to the rank values, where the lower ranks indicate better performance. The
results indicate that, for insertion, Vit and EfficentNet are the top-ranked models, which surprisingly
outperform the original base model, namely ResNet. On the other hand, for deletion, ResNet and Vit
are the best performers. The AUC values displayed in Fig. 3 confirm these ranking results (consider
that, as noted in Appendix B.2, when the best concepts are progressively removed, the quickest
performance drops and, therefore, the lower accuracies are more desirable, implying that the removed
concepts are more meaningful to the corresponding base model.). Summing up, the results suggest a
potential connection between the concepts’ performance and the patch-based learning method used
by Vit, and this model showcases the most promise for our future analyses.


Supplementary Table 4: Results of ranking the accuracy of different base models, using Freidman’s
test with significance level α = 0.1.
               Models                            Insert                                       Delete
                                                 Rank(↓)                                     Rank(↓)
               Vit                                1.18                                             1.91
               EfficientNet                      2.11                                              2.75
               ResNet                            3.27                                              1.69
               Inception                         3.42                                              3.60
               p − value = 1e − 5                H0 is rejected                    H0 is rejected


C.5 M ORE DISCUSSION ON LIMITATIONS : I MPERFECTLY SUPER - PIXELATED INPUTS AND
DATASET BIASES

Applying super-pixelating methods, even the multi-resolution ones, to obtain initial segments presents
several limitations; large segments containing multiple meaningful concepts or very small segments
with no discernible concept can be generated; a single concept may be fragmented across several
segments. Moreover, super-pixelating methods typically offer no solution for tracking entirely or
partially abstract concepts such as brightness, daylight, and sun angle in sunrise or sunset images.
Supp. Fig. 11 illustrates some of these cases. Future works remain to see whether a sliding window
approach that reflects the influence of the network’s prediction on different parts of the images could
overcome these issues.
                        Input sample   Super-pixels        1st local concept   2nd local concept


                   a
                                                                                      --



                   b
                                                                                      --


                   c


Supplementary Figure 11: The effect of imperfectly super-pixelated inputs: a) a large superpixel
contains background b) Several concepts (different parts of the airplane) in one superpixel c) one
concept (blue-red ambulance light) fragmented into two segments.

Our experiments encountered another challenge. That is the possible dataset biases, where the
extracted concepts are considerably influenced by the images available in the dataset. This results in
concepts that may deviate from human intuition. For instance, as illustrated in Supp. Fig. 15, the
most important concept for predicting mountain bike images is the driver rather than the bike itself.
This occurs because most ImageNet mountain bike images mainly contain drivers. Another example
is the restaurant class, which contains images that differ from the main context, rendering the UCBS


                                                      19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


concepts inapplicable and leading to unhelpful misclassification explanations, as shown in Supp. Fig.
12. Such biases present considerable challenges to explainable methods, and exclusive research is
necessary for devising methods that mitigate them.



                                Input sample           Super-pixels        Scores   Top local concepts


                             Restaurant predicted as
                                     others
                Restaurant


                             Restaurant predicted as
                                     others


                             Restaurant predicted as
                                     others


Supplementary Figure 12: Restaurant uncommon images and failure of misclassification explanations.


C.6 M ORE QUALITATIVE EXAMPLES

This section provides more qualitative examples for the UCBS as well as the baseline explanation
methods. Supp. Figs. 13 shows a comparison between explanations for several examples from
the ImageNet dataset. As can be seen, in UCBS, the importance scores are relative scores; even
background regions have a slight influence in making predictions. This is because UCBS assigns
the importance score to a concept considering all other parts of the image that the model has already
learned, whereas in the other methods, concepts are investigated either completely or partially
independent of each other. This may lead to some concepts being overlooked even though they
indirectly influence predictions. For example, the color and texture of the basketball court, the street
asphalt in detecting a police van, or a human hand holding a revolver.

C.7 M ORE EXAMPLES OF UCBS

Results of local, global, and misclassification explanations for six other ImageNet classes are provided
in Supp. Figs. 14-19.


                                                                      20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 Input sample       UCBS       SHAP               LIME             GradCAM               LRP


                 Tiger cat
                 Police van
                 Revolver


Supplementary Figure 13: More qualitative examples of the UCBS method as well as the baseline
explanation methods.

                                Input sample    Super-pixels   Scores        1st local concept   2nd local concept   3rd local concept
          Electric locomotive
          Mountain bike
          Basketball


Supplementary Figure 14: Local concepts to explain individual images. For each class, there are two
examples, displaying the original image, the segmented version, the complete scoring map, and the
top three local concepts of each instance.


                                                                        21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        1st global concept    2nd global concept              3rd global concept
  Electric locomotive
  Mountain bike
  Basketball


Supplementary Figure 15: Global concepts to explain one certain target class. For each class, the top
three global concepts are indicated via the best three representative samples of each group.


                                                 22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               Input sample               Super-pixels        Scores   Top local concepts
 Electric locomotive


                       Electric locomotive predicted as
                                    others


                         others predicted as Electric
                                 locomotive


                         Mountain bike predicted as
 Mountain bike


                                  others


                        Others predicted as Mountain
                                    bike
 Basketball


                        Basketball predicted as others


                        others predicted as Basketball


Supplementary Figure 16: Explaining misclassification cases: two examples (if available) of FN and
FP are represented for each target class, and the original image, the segmented version, the complete
scoring map, and the scoring map of the top three local concepts are indicated for each example.


                                                                         23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              Input sample   Super-pixels   Scores        1st local concept   2nd local concept   3rd local concept
 Accordion
 Restaurant
 Pool table


Supplementary Figure 17: Local concepts to explain individual images. For each class, there are two
examples, displaying the original image, the segmented version, the complete scoring map, and the
top three local concepts of each instance.


                                                     24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                   1st global concept                2nd global concept            3rd global concept


            Accordion
            Restaurant
            Pool table


Supplementary Figure 18: Global concepts to explain one certain target class. For each class, the top
three global concepts are indicated via the best three representative samples of each group.
                                Input sample              Super-pixels                    Scores          Top local concepts
           Accordion


                         Accordion predicted as others


                         Others predicted as Accordion
           Pool table


                         Others predicted as pool table


                         Others predicted as Pool table


Supplementary Figure 19: Explaining misclassification cases: two examples (if available) of FN and
FP are represented for each target class, and the original image, the segmented version, the complete
scoring map, and the scoring map of the top three local concepts are indicated for each example.


                                                                         25
