MATT: R ANDOM L OCAL I MPLICIT P URIFICATION FOR
D EFENDING Q UERY- BASED ATTACKS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Black-box query-based attacks constitute significant threats to Machine Learning
         as a Service (MLaaS) systems since they can generate adversarial examples with-
         out accessing the target model’s architecture and parameters. Traditional defense
         mechanisms, such as adversarial training, gradient masking, and input transfor-
         mations, either impose substantial computational costs or compromise the test
         accuracy of non-adversarial inputs. To address these challenges, we propose an
         efficient defense mechanism, MATT, that employs random patch-wise purifica-
         tions with an ensemble of lightweight purification models. These models leverage
         the local implicit function and rebuild the natural image manifold with low in-
         ference latency. Our theoretical analysis suggests that this approach slows down
         the convergence of query-based attacks while preserving the average robustness
         improvement by combining randomness and purifications. Extensive experiments
         on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet validate the effectiveness of our proposed purifier-
         based defense mechanism, demonstrating significant improvements in classifier
         robustness against query-based attacks.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Deep neural networks (DNNs), while presenting remarkable performance across various applica-
tions, are mostly leaning to become subject to adversarial attacks, where even slight perturbations
to the inputs can severely compromise their predictions (Szegedy et al., 2014). This notorious vul-
nerability significantly challenges the inherent robustness of DNNs and could even make the sit-
uation much worse when it comes to security-critical scenarios, such as facial recognition (Dong
et al., 2019) and autonomous driving (Cao et al., 2019). Accordingly, attackers have devised both
white-box attacks if having full access to the DNN model and black-box attacks in case the model is
inaccessible. While black-box attacks appear to be more challenging, it is often considered a more
realistic threat model, and its state-of-the-art (SOTA) could leverage a limited number of queries
to achieve high successful rates against closed-source commercial platforms, i.e., Clarifai (Clarifai,
2022) and Google Cloud Vision API (Google, 2022), presenting a disconcerting situation.
Defending black-box query-based attacks in real-world large-scale Machine-Learning-as-a-Service
(MLaaS) systems calls for an extremely low extra inference cost. This is because business com-
panies, such as Facebook (VentureBeat, 2022), handle millions of image queries daily and thereby
increase the extra cost for defense a million-fold. This issue prohibits testing time defenses to
run multiple inferences to achieve certified robustness (Cohen et al., 2019; Salman et al., 2020b).
Moreover, training time defenses, i.e., retraining the DNNs with large datasets to enhance their ro-
bustness against adversarial examples (e.g., adversarial training (Madry et al., 2018) and gradient
masking (Tramèr et al., 2018)), impose substantial economic and computational costs attributed to
the heavy training expense. Therefore, there is a critical need for a lightweight yet effective strategy
to perform adversarial purifications to enable one inference cost for achieving robustness.
Given the aforementioned challenges, recent research efforts have been devoted to either eliminating
or disturbing adversarial perturbations prior to the forwarding of the query image to the classifier.
Nevertheless, the existing methods that include both heuristic transformations and neural network-
based adversarial purification models have certain limitations in removing adversarial perturbations.
While heuristic transformation methods cause minimal impact on cost, they merely disrupt adver-
sarial perturbations and often negatively impact the testing accuracy of non-adversarial inputs Xu


                                                   1
et al. (2018); Qin et al. (2021). Moreover, purification models aiming to completely eradicate ad-
versarial perturbations can even exceed the computational burden of the classifier itself Carlini et al.
(2023). Consequently, there have been no effective defense mechanisms that can achieve both high
robustness and low computational cost against query-based attacks.
In this paper, we propose a novel random patch-wise image purification mechanism leveraging the
local implicit function to improve the robustness of the classifier against query-based attacks. The
idea of local implicit function is first proposed for super-resolution tasks (Lim et al., 2017; Zhang
et al., 2018), and has recently been showing potentiality in defending against white-box attacks with
low computational cost (Ho & Vasconcelos, 2022). Nonetheless, we find that the naive local implicit
function combined with the classifier forms a new black-box system that is still vulnerable to query-
based attacks (6.8% robust accuracy on ImageNet datasets under strong attack), and our theoretical
analysis attributes this to the lack of randomness inside the purifier. Although randomness can be
introduced using an ensemble of purifiers, the inference cost of encoding-querying structure within
the local implicit function almost increases linearly with the number of purifiers. To address these
challenges, we design an end-to-end purification model and only approximate the local implicit
function in a local patch using a randomly chosen purifier from a diversified pool. Our method
allows a significant diversity gain with more purifiers while keeping almost the same inference cost.
Our theoretical analysis shows that our system is more robust with more different purifiers and slows
down the convergence of the query-based attacks.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:

       • We propose a novel defense mechanism using the local implicit function to randomly purify
         patches of the image to improve the robustness of the classifier. Our work is the first to
         extend the local implicit function to defend against query-based attacks.
       • We provide a theoretical analysis on the effectiveness of our proposed purifier-based de-
         fense mechanism based on the convergence of black-box attacks. Our theoretical analysis
         points out the potential vulnerabilities of deterministic transformation functions and sug-
         gests the robustness of our system increase with the number of purifiers.
       • Our theoretical investigation reveals the connection between the attack’s convergence rate
         and transformation function used under the black-box setting, offering a new perspective
         on understanding the efficacy of defense mechanisms employed at the preprocessing stage.
       • We conduct extensive experiments on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet on current SOTA query-
         based attacks and verify the effectiveness of our methods in defending query-based attacks.

2   R ELATED W ORK

Query-based Attacks. Query-based attacks, continually querying the models to generate adver-
sarial examples, are categorized as either score-based or decision-based, based on their access to
confidence scores or labels, respectively.
Score-based attacks perceive the MLaaS model, inclusive of pre-processors, the core model, and
post-processors, as a black-box system. The objective function, in this case, is the marginal loss
of the confidence scores, as depicted in Equation (1). Black-box optimization techniques, such as
gradient estimation and random search, can be harnessed to tackle this issue. Ilyas et al. (2018)
developed the pioneering limited query score-based attack using Natural Evolutionary Strategies
(NES) for gradient estimation. This sparked a flurry of subsequent studies focusing on gradient
estimation, including ZO-SGD (Liu et al., 2019) and SignHunter (Al-Dujaili & O’Reilly, 2020).
The current cutting-edge score-based attack, Square attack (Andriushchenko et al., 2020), utilizes
random search through localized patch updates. It is frequently cited as a critical benchmark in
evaluating model robustness (Croce et al., 2021). Other attack algorithms like SimBA (Guo et al.,
2019) also employ random search but not as effectively as the Square attack.
Regarding decision-based attacks, the label information typically serves as a substitute since confi-
dence values are not provided. An early work by Ilyas et al. (2018) uses NES to optimize a heuristic
proxy with limited queries. The gradient estimation method for decision-based attacks evolves to
be more efficient by forming new optimization-based problems (e.g., OPT (Cheng et al., 2019)) and
utilizing the sign of the gradient instead of the estimated value (e.g., Sign-OPT (Cheng et al., 2020)


                                                   2
                               Random Noise
                              Local Smoothing
                                                           Cloud Server


                                     ...
                              Diffusion Models         MLaaS Pipeline
                                                                                   Score Label
                            ...                          Preprocessor Classifier     C     L
                          Queries
                                                  Score-based
            Attacker                             Decision-based


Figure 1: Illustration of the MLaaS system with defense mechanism within preprocessor under attack. The
attackers can query the model with input x and get the returned information M(x) which can be the confidence
scores or the predicted label.



and HopSkipJump (Chen et al., 2020)). While direct search used in Boundary Attack (Brendel et al.,
2018) is the first decision-based attack, the HopSkipJump Attack is currently considered the most
advanced attack.
Adversarial Purification. Recently, the employment of testing-time defenses has witnessed a sig-
nificant surge, primarily for the purpose of adversarial purification in order to improve the model’s
robustness. Yoon et al. (2021) leverages a score-based generative model to eliminate the adversarial
perturbations. Techniques in self-supervised learning like contrastive loss are used by Mao et al.
(2021) to purify the image. Subsequent to the success attained by diffusion models, they have been
deployed for the development of certified robustness for image classifiers (Nie et al., 2022; Carlini
et al., 2023). Nonetheless, due to the vast number of parameters contained within diffusion models,
they suffer from much lower inference speed compared to classifiers. Recently, the introduction of
the local implicit function model for defending white-box attacks has been noted (Ho & Vasconcelos,
2022). However, they only apply the purifier model trained on a handful of white-box attacks, and
haven’t established a resilient defense system with any theoretical assurance for defending black-
box attacks. In our paper, we have redesigned the network structure by eliminating multi-resolution
support, resulting in inference time acceleration by a factor of four. Moreover, the design of our de-
fense mechanism ensure the inference speed does not increase linearly with the number of purifier
models, which is the case for DISCO (Ho & Vasconcelos, 2022) when randomness is introduced.
Furthermore, we offer a theoretical analysis emphasizing the efficacy of our proposed purifier-based
defense mechanism against query-based attacks, centering around the convergence of black-box at-
tacks. We provide more detailed background information on other general defense mechanism for
the readers interest in Appendix A.


3     P RELIMINARIES

3.1     T HREAT M ODEL

In the context of black-box query-based attacks, our threat model presumes that attackers possess
only a limited understanding of the target model. Their interaction with the model, which is typically
hosted on cloud servers, is restricted to querying the model and receiving the resultant data in the
form of confidence scores or labels. They lack additional insight into the model or the datasets used.
An illustration of the MLaaS system under attack is shown in Figure 1.

3.2     Q UERY- BASED ATTACKS

3.2.1    S CORE - BASED ATTACKS

Assume a classifier M : X → Y is hosted on a cloud server, where X is the input space and Y is
the output space. Attackers can query this model with an input x ∈ X and obtain the corresponding
output M(x) ∈ Y. In scenarios where the model’s output, frequently in the form of a confidence
score, is directly returned to the attackers, this is identified as a score-based attack.


                                                           3
Table 1: List of heuristic transformations and SOTA purification models. Randomness is introduced
in DISCO (Ho & Vasconcelos, 2022) by using an ensemble of DISCO models to generate features
for random coordinate querying, which is of high computational cost.

         Method                                     Randomness         Type       Inference Cost
         Bit Reduction (Xu et al., 2018)                 ✗           Heuristic        Low
         Local Smoothing (Xu et al., 2018)               ✗           Heuristic        Low
         JPEG Compression (Raff et al., 2019)            ✗           Heuristic        Low
         Random Noise (Qin et al., 2021)                 ✓           Heuristic        Low
         Score-based Model (Yoon et al., 2021)           ✓            Neural         High
         DDPM (Nie et al., 2022)                         ✓            Neural         High
         DISCO (Ho & Vasconcelos, 2022)                 ✗/✓           Neural      Median / High
         MATT (Ours)                                     ✓            Neural        Median


In this setting, attackers generate an adversarial example xadv based on the clean example x with
the true label y, aiming to solve the following optimization problem to execute an untargeted attack:
                     min     f (xadv ) =     min (My (xadv ) − max Mj (xadv )).                   (1)
                  xadv ∈NR (x)           xadv ∈NR (x)                 j̸=y
                       ′   ′
Here, NR (x) = {x |∥x − x∥p ≤ R} represents a ℓp ball around the original example x. In the
case of targeted attacks, j is fixed to be the target label instead of the index of the highest confidence
score excluding the true label. The attack is deemed successful if the value of the objective function
is less than zero.
While projected gradient descent algorithm is used in white-box attacks, the attackers under black-
box setting do not have access to the gradient information. Thus, black-box algorithms usually
leverage the following techniques to estimate the function descent direction: gradient estimation
and heuristic search. Further details of these techniques are included in Appendix B.

3.2.2    D ECISION - BASED ATTACKS
Attackers have explored various ways of forming optimization problems for decision-based attacks,
since the landscape of the objective function is discontinuous Cheng et al. (2019). For example,
Ilyas et al. (2018) uses a proxy of the objective function, Cheng et al. (2020) and Aithal & Li (2022)
forms new problems based on geometry, and Chen et al. (2020) deal with the original problem but
with the sign of the gradient. Our theoretical analysis can be also applied to decision-based attacks
as they employ similar techniques in solving this black-box optimization problem.

3.3     A DVERSARIAL P URIFICATION

Adversarial purification has recently emerged as a central wave of defense against adversarial at-
tacks, which aims to remove or disturb the adversarial perturbations via heuristic transformations
and purification models. We have provided a list of widely heuristic transformations and SOTA
purification models in Table 1.
Heuristic Transformations. Heuristic transformations are unaware of the adversarial perturbations
and aim to disturb the adversarial perturbations by shrinking the image space (Bit Reduction and
Local Smoothing etc.) or deviating the gradient estimation (Random Noise).
Purification Models. Powerful purification models are trained to remove the adversarial perturba-
tions and project the adversarial images back to the natural image manifold. Popular purification
models include Score-based Model (Yoon et al., 2021) and DDPM (Nie et al., 2022), and local im-
plicit purification models, such as DISCO (Ho & Vasconcelos, 2022). Among them, only the local
implicit purifier has moderate inference cost and be suitable for defending query-based attacks.
With defense mechanisms deployed as pre-processors in the MLaaS system as shown in Figure 1, the
attackers need to break the whole MLaaS pipeline to achieve a successful attack. While randomness
is considered as a key factor of improving the robustness of such systems (Raff et al., 2019; Sitawarin
et al., 2022), naively introducing them by ensembling multiple purifiers (DISCO) will lead to a linear
increase in the inference cost.

                                                    4
                                                   Purifier Feature Encodings
                                Image Patch
                                                                                 Local
                                                     Encoder                    Implicit      [R, G, B]
                                                                                Decoder

                               Pixel to repair
        Adversarial Image      High-dimensional Feature


Figure 2: An illustration of repairing a pixel with our end-to-end purification model. The encoder diffuse
nearby information of the pixel into its high-dimensional feature. Then the decoder reconstruct its RGB value
with respect to this feature information. Note that the inference of pixels of one image patch can be performed
in parallel in a batch.


4     R ANDOM L OCAL I MPLICIT P URIFICATION
4.1   O UR M OTIVATION

While purifiers can execute adversarial purification on incoming images, our research, as eluci-
dated in section 4.3 and substantiated in section 5.2, suggests that a single deterministic purifier
cannot enhance the system’s robustness. A straightforward ensembling method, albeit theoretically
sound, increases the inference cost linearly with the number of purifiers, rendering it nonviable for
real-world MLaaS systems. We address this issue by developing an end-to-end purification model
applying local implicit function to process input images of any dimension. We further introduce a
novel random patch-wise purification algorithm that capitalizes on a group of purifiers to counter
query-based attacks. Our theoretical findings illustrate that the augmented robustness of our system
is directly proportional to the number of the purifiers. Importantly, this approach maintains a fixed
inference cost, regardless of the number of purifiers, aligning well with practical real-world MLaaS
systems (refer to Appendix C for details).

4.2   I MAGE P URIFICATION VIA L OCAL I MPLICIT F UNCTION

Under the hypothesis that natural images lie on a low-dimensional manifold in the high-dimensional
image space, adversarial perturbations can be viewed as a deviation from the natural manifold.
Assume that we have a purification model m(x) : X → X that can project the adversarial images
back to the natural manifold. If the attackers are generating adversarial examples x′ from the original
images x randomly drawn from the natural image manifold distribution D, the purification model
m(x) can be trained to minimize the following loss:
                              L = ED ∥x − m(x′ )∥ + λED ∥x − m(x)∥,                                        (2)
where λ controls the trade-off between the two terms. A larger λ means a lower deviation from
clean images. In practice, the second term is often ignored.
Efficient Unique Design. Based on prior works on local implicit function, we design an end-to-end
purification model that can be trained with the above loss function, shown in Figure 2. Different from
the first attempt of using an implicit function for defending white-box attack (Ho & Vasconcelos,
2022), we remove the multi-scale support by eliminating the positional encoding (structure level)
and local ensemble inference (implementation level). By doing so, we achieve a 4x inference time
speedup. The detailed introduction of this speed up can be found in Appendix F.1.
Random Patch-wise Purification. Aside from the unique design of the purification model, our
main contribution lies in random patch-wise reconstruction. Although the purification model can
take in images of any size and reconstruct a local area of the image, the former practice reconstructs
the pixel by encoding the whole image and perform random selection from the output features to
introduce randomness, as shown in Figure 3. However, since the encoder is the bottleneck of the
whole model, this practice leads to a almost linear increase in the inference time with the number
of purifiers. In contrast, we propose to reconstruct the pixel only using nearby pixels and introduce
randomness by using a pool of purifiers. We have validated this inference speedup in Appendix C.
The comparison of encoding process from the previous method and our method is shown in Figure 3.
Although each purifier can be deterministic, the randomness is introduced by randomly picking


                                                          5
(I) Ensembling                  High-dimension Random
                                   Features    Selection    Feature Encodings
                Encoder 0
                Encoder 1                                                                                        Clean Image


                      ...


                                         ...


                                                                                                                                               L1
                Encoder K


                                                                                                                                                Lo
                                                                                                                                          L1
                                                                                                                 Training Loop


                                                                                                                                                    ss
                                                                                                       D
(II) Random Patch-wise Encoding


                                                                                                      M


                                                                                                                                           Lo
                                                                                                    PG
                                                                   Feature Encodings


                                                                                                                                     L1
                                                                                                           BIM
                                                                                                  FGS


                                                                                                                                               ss
                                                                                                                                     Los
                Image Patches Random                         Combination
                                         Encoder 0


                                                                                                                                      s
                              Dispatch                                                                           MATT
                                                                                                                        Purifier 0                        3N
                                         Encoder 1


                                                                                                                                                    ...
           Cut Up
                                                                                                                        Purifier 1              1


                                               ...



                                                           ...


                                                                                                                            ...
                                         Encoder K                                             Adv. Image               Purifier N
                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                               Output


Figure 3: An illustration of the encoding process of en- Figure 4: The training process of MATT. Firstly,
sembling (Ho & Vasconcelos, 2022) and our method. En-                                     different adversarial images are generated using
sembling: Ensembling method first encodes the image into                                  various white-box attack algorithms. Then, we
multiple high-dimension features and then randomly com-                                   use every purifier in MATT to perform the pu-
bines them to form the final feature representation. Ran-                                 rification on the adversarial images. Thus, we
dom Patch-wise: Our method split the images into patches,                                 have 3 × N training samples for each clean im-
forward them to randomly selected encoders, and use the                                   age (3 attack algorithms and N purifiers). Fi-
combination as the final feature.                                                         nally, we train the purifiers with these samples
                                                                                          using ℓ1 loss


a purifier from the pool and performing purification on randomly selected image patches. This
practice enables us to largely increase the diversity of purifiers and maintain a moderate inference
time. Moreover, it allows us to actually use the purifier from a larger purification function space, if
we view the combinations of used purifiers as a new purifier. The full training process is shown in
Figure 4. More on the training details can be found in Appendix F.

4.3   T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS AGAINST G RADIENT- BASED ATTACKS

Assume we have K +1 purifiers {m0 , . . . , mK }, the output of the new black-box system containing
the i-th purifier is defined as F (i) (x) = f (mi (x)). Without loss of generality, we now perform
analysis on breaking the system of the purifier m0 , denoted as F (x) = f (m0 (x)). Our following
analysis utilizes the ℓ2 -norm as the distance metric, which is the most commonly used norm for
measuring the distance between two images.
Suppose the index of two independently drawn purifiers in our defense are k1 and k2 , the attacker
approximate the gradient of the function F (x) with the following estimator:
                                                           f (mk1 (x + µu)) − f (mk2 (x))
                                          Gµ,K =                                          u.                                                                   (3)
                                                                         µ

The above gradient estimator provides an unbiased estimation of the gradient of the function:
                                                                                    K
                                                                        1 X
                                                 Fµ,K (x) =                 fµ (mk (x)),                                                                       (4)
                                                                      K +1
                                                                                    k=0

where fµ is the gaussian smoothing function of f . The detailed definition of the gaussian smoothing
function is included in Appendix G.1. So now we can see that the convergence of the black-box
attack is moving towards an averaged optimal point of the functions of the systems formed with
different purifiers, which suggests an averaged robustness across different purifiers.
Now we assume the purifiers has the following property:
                                   ∥mi (x) − mj (x)∥ < ν,                           ∀i, j ∈ {0, . . . , K − 1}                                                 (5)
where ν can reflect the diversity of the purifiers. We cannot directly measure ν, but we intuitively
associate it with the number of purifiers. The larger the number of purifiers, the larger ν is.
We have the following assumptions for the original function f (x):
Assumption 1. f (x) is Lipschitz-continuous, i.e.,, |f (y) − f (x)| ≤ L0 (f )∥y − x∥.


                                                                                6
Assumption 2. f (x) is continuous and differentiable, and ∇f (x) is Lipschitz-continuous, i.e.,,
|∇f (y) − ∇f (x)| ≤ L1 (f )∥y − x∥.
For the purifiers, we assume each dimension of their output also has the property in Assumption 1
and Assumption 2. Then, we denote L0 (m) = maxi L0 (mi ) and L1 (m) = maxi L1 (mi ), where
mi is the i-th dimension of the output of the purifier m.
Notations. We denote the sequence of standard Gaussian noises used to approximate the gradient
as Ut = {u0 , . . . , ut }, with t to be the update step. The purifier index sequence is denoted as
kt = {k0 , . . . , kt }. The generated query sequence is denoted as {x0 , x1 , . . . , xQ }. d = |X | as the
input dimension.
With the above definitions and assumptions, we have Theorem 1 for the convergence of the gradient-
based attacks. The detailed proof is included in Appendix G.2.
                                                                                         Q
Theorem 1. Under Assumption 1, for any Q ≥ 0, consider a sequence {xt }t=0 generated us-
ing
q the update rule     q of gradient-based score-based attacks,         with constant step size, i.e.,, η =
       2Rϵ                      1                           4ν 2     4ν          1
                                                                                             2
   (Q+1)L0 (f )3 d2 ·   L0 (m0 )γ(m0 ,ν) , with γ(m0 , ν) = µ2 + µ L0 (m0 )d + L0 (m0 ) d. Then, the
                                                                                 2


squared norm of gradient is bounded by:
                                                       s
                      Q
               1 X                                        2L0 (f )5 Rd2 p
                         EUt ,kt [∥∇Fµ,K (xt )∥2 ] ≤                     · γ(m0 , ν)L0 (m0 )3           (6)
           Q + 1 t=0                                       (Q + 1)ϵ
The lower bound for the expected number of queries to bound the expected squared norm of the
gradient of function Fµ,K of the order δ is
                                        L0 (f )5 Rd2
                                   O(                γ(m0 , ν)L0 (m0 )3 )                                (7)
                                            ϵδ 2

Single Deterministic Purifier. Setting ν to 0, we have γ(m0 , 0)L0 (m0 )2 = L0 (m0 )5 , which is
the only introduced term compared to the original convergence rate (Nesterov & Spokoiny, 2017)
towards f (x). Meanwhile, the new convergence point becomes Fµ∗ (x). We have the following
conclusion for the convergence of the attack:
       • Influence of L0 (m0 ): For input transformations that shrink the image space, since their
         L0 (m0 ) < 1, they always allow a faster rate of convergence for the attack. For neural
         network purifiers, the presence of this term means their vulnerabilities is introduced into
         the black-box system, making it hard to quantify the robustness of the system.
       • Optimal point Fµ∗ (x): By using a deterministic transformations, the optimal point of
         the attack is changed from f ∗ to Fµ∗ (x). If we can inversely find an adversarial image
         x∗ = m(x∗ ), the robustness of the system is not improved at all. No current work can
         theoretically eliminate this issue. This may open up a new direction for future research.

 Research implications. From the above analysis, we can see that a single deterministic purifier may 1)
 accelerate the convergence of the attack, and 2) cannot protect the adversarial point from being exploited.

Pool of Deterministic Purifiers. The introduced term γ(m0 , ν)L0 (m0 )2 increase quadratically
with ν. This along with our intuition mentioned above suggests that the robustness of the system
increases with the number of purifiers. While adversarial optimal points persist, the presence of
multiple optimal points under different purifiers serve as the first trial to enhance the robustness of
all purification-based methods.
To validate our theoretical analysis, we first conduct experiments on a subset of the CIFAR-10
dataset (Krizhevsky, 2009) with a ResNet-18 model (Dadalto, 2022) as the classifier. The general
settings are the same as used in section 5. We use the Square Attack (Andriushchenko et al., 2020)
as the attack algorithm. The convergence of the attack against our model and other input transforma-
tions is shown in Figure 5. We can see a clear acceleration of the convergence of the attack with the
introduction of transformations that shrink the image space and powerful deterministic models fails
to improve the robustness of the system. Another validation of our theoretical analysis is shown in
Figure 6 for proving the robustness of the system increases with the number of purifiers (associated
with ν).


                                                      7
                            None                       SpatialSmoothing         MATT
                            FeatureSqueezing           DISCO                    Rand                                                 K=2         K=6      K=8          K=12
                     1.0

                     0.8
    Attack Success Rate                                                                                            0.8


                                                                                                 Attack Success Rate
                     0.6                                                                                           0.6

                     0.4                                                                                           0.4

                     0.2
                                                                                                                   0.2
                     0.0
                            0.0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4 0.5 0.6    0.7   0.8   0.9   1.0                                 0.0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4 0.5 0.6    0.7   0.8   0.9   1.0
                                                      Iterations                      1e3                                                          Iterations                      1e3


Figure 5: The convergence of the Square Attack                                                  Figure 6: The convergence of the Square Attack
on CIFAR-10 using different heuristic transfor-                                                 on CIFAR-10 using with different numbers of
mations and purifiers.                                                                          purifiers used.


4.4                        T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS AGAINST G RADIENT- FREE ATTACKS

The heuristic direction of random search becomes:

                                                        HK (x) = f (mk1 (x + µu)) − f (mk2 (x + µu)).                                                                               (8)

Theorem 2. Under Assumption 1, using the update in Equation (8),

                                                                                                                                 2νL0 (f )
                                                         P (Sign(H(x)) ̸= Sign(HK (x))) ≤                                                                                           (9)
                                                                                                                                  |H(x)|

A similar increase in the robustness as Theorem 1 can be observed with the increase of ν. The
detailed proof is included in Appendix G.3. This ensures the robustness of our defense against
gradient-free attacks.


5                         E VALUATION

5.1                        E XPERIMENT S ETTINGS

Datasets and Classification Models. For a comprehensive evaluation of MATT, we employ two
widely used benchmark datasets for testing adversarial attacks: CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky, 2009) and
ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009). Our evaluation is conducted on two balanced subsets, which contain
1,000 and 2,000 correctly classified test images from CIFAR-10 and ImageNet, respectively. These
images are uniformly spread across 10 classes in CIFAR-10 and 200 randomly selected classes in
ImageNet. For classification models, we adopt models from the RobustBench (Croce et al., 2021).
For standardly trained models, WideResNet-28-10 (Zagoruyko & Komodakis, 2016) with 94.78%
for CIFAR-10 and ResNet-50 (He et al., 2016) with 76.52% for ImageNet are used. For adversarially
trained models, we use the WideResNet-28-10 model with 89.48% trained by Gowal et al. (2020)
for CIFAR-10 and ResNet-50 model with 64.02% trained by Salman et al. (2020a) for ImageNet.
Attack and Defense Methods. We consider 5 SOTA query-based attacks for evaluation: NES (Ilyas
et al., 2018), SimBA (Guo et al., 2019), Square (Andriushchenko et al., 2020), Boundary (Brendel
et al., 2018), and HopSkipJump (Chen et al., 2020). Comprehensive descriptions and configurations
of each attack can be found in Appendix D. The perturbation budget of ℓ∞ attacks is set to 8/255
for CIFAR-10 and 4/255 for ImageNet. For ℓ2 attacks, the perturbation budget is set to 1.0 for
CIFAR-10 and 5.0 for ImageNet. For defense mechanism, adversarially trained models are used as
a strong robust baseline. Moreover, we include SOTA deterministic purification model DISCO Ho
& Vasconcelos (2022) and spatial smoothing (Xu et al., 2018) for direct comparison. Finally, widely
used random noise defense (Qin et al., 2021) serve as a baseline for introducing randomness. The
detailed settings of each defense method are described in Appendix E. We report the robust accuracy
of each defense method against each attack with 200/2500 queries for CIFAR-10/ImageNet.


                                                                                            8
Table 2: Evaluation results of MATT and other defense methods on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet under
5 SOTA query-based attacks. The robust accuracy under 200/2500 queries is reported. The best
defense mechanism under 2500 queries are highlighted in bold and marked with gray.

          Datasets         Methods       Acc.    NES(ℓ∞ )        SimBA(ℓ2 )   Square(ℓ∞ )   Boundary(ℓ2 )   HopSkipJump(ℓ∞ )
                             None        100.0   88.0/12.6       51.8/3.16     28.1/0.90      93.2/62.0         75.9/76.6
                              AT          90.2   88.4/83.1       87.5/79.0     81.7/71.0      89.3/88.8         90.0/88.6
         CIFAR-10         Smoothing       80.6   53.5/8.00       45.0/5.50     6.00/0.00      74.6/42.0         68.1/66.1
      (WideResNet-28)     Input Rand.     81.4   78.8/75.0       75.4/69.6     67.6/63.8      78.5/80.6         74.9/78.2
                            DISCO         91.1   87.6/36.6       82.0/16.6     22.1/2.20      88.7/69.6         85.4/86.2
                         MATT (Ours)      88.7   88.8/86.3       85.6/78.5     81.5/71.5      87.4/87.4         87.0/89.4
                        MATT-AT (Ours)    89.2   88.3/85.6       87.9/85.0     86.0/83.0      89.0/88.7         88.9/88.7
                             None        100.0   95.3/80.0       85.6/66.4    49.2/6.80       92.4/84.8         89.3/86.3
                              AT          75.2   68.2/66.8       71.2/66.3    69.2/61.2       74.7/74.5         75.1/74.9
         ImageNet         Smoothing       89.1   93.5/77.7       80.2/36.8    37.7/3.00       86.9/78.9         84.2/84.2
        (ResNet-50)       Input Rand.     84.6   83.6/82.4       80.6/76.2    81.4/78.5       85.4/84.8         84.7/85.6
                            DISCO         88.5   86.2/79.6       79.8/33.6    45.1/6.70       86.2/82.8         87.6/84.4
                         MATT (Ours)      87.2   85.6/82.2       82.5/80.1    85.0/77.2       87.0/85.3         86.5/86.3
                        MATT-AT (Ours)    75.5   73.2/71.5       70.6/69.9    72.4 /69.5      74.2/74.7         74.3/73.3


5.2    OVERALL D EFENSE P ERFORMANCE

Our numerical results on the effectiveness of the defense mechanisms are shown in Table 2.
Clean Accuracy. One major concern about performing input transformations is that they may com-
promise the accuracy of non-adversarial inputs. We observe that MATT achieves comparable clean
accuracy to the standardly trained model on both CIFAR-10 and ImageNet. Moreover, we observe
that MATT can be combined with adversarially trained models to improve its clean accuracy for
free. Detailed information on the influence of MATT on clean accuracy can be found in Appendix I.
Failure of Deterministic Purification. As suggested in our theoretical analysis, deterministic trans-
formations, face the risk of introducing extra vulnerability and accelerating the attacks. As shown in
Table 2, spatial smoothing always accelerating the attack and DISCO suffer from a significant drop
in robust accuracy under 2500 queries against strong attack (Square Attack). These results reflect
the importance of introducing randomness in purification.
Effectiveness of MATT. Our mechanism, built upon adversarial purification, achieves moderate
clean accuracy to be the highest or the second to be the highest. This desired property allows for
getting trustworthy results. Moreover, it achieves the highest robust accuracy under 2500 queries on
CIFAR-10 and ImageNet almost for all the attacks. Surprisingly, the random noise defense performs
well on natural images from ImageNet datasets, while MATT achieves a comparable results when
random noise defense achieved the best results. This suggests that MATT can be used as a general
defense mechanism for both ℓ∞ and ℓ2 attacks.


6     C ONCLUSION

This paper introduces a novel theory-backed image purification mechanism utilizing local implicit
function to defend deep neural networks against query-based adversarial attacks. The mechanism
enhances classifier robustness and reduces successful attacks whilst also addressing vulnerabilities
of deterministic transformations. Its effectiveness and robustness, which increase with the addition
of purifiers, have been authenticated via extensive tests on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet. Our work
highlights the need for dynamic and efficient defense mechanisms in machine learning systems.


R EFERENCES
Manjushree B. Aithal and Xiaohua Li. Boundary defense against black-box adversarial attacks. In
 26th International Conference on Pattern Recognition, ICPR. IEEE, 2022.

Abdullah Al-Dujaili and Una-May O’Reilly. Sign bits are all you need for black-box attacks. In 8th
  International Conference on Learning Representations, (ICLR), 2020.


                                                             9
Maksym Andriushchenko, Francesco Croce, Nicolas Flammarion, and Matthias Hein. Square at-
 tack: A query-efficient black-box adversarial attack via random search. In Computer Vision -
 (ECCV) - 16th European Conference, Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer, 2020.
Wieland Brendel, Jonas Rauber, and Matthias Bethge. Decision-based adversarial attacks: Reliable
 attacks against black-box machine learning models. In 6th International Conference on Learning
 Representations (ICLR), 2018.
Yulong Cao, Chaowei Xiao, Benjamin Cyr, Yimeng Zhou, Won Park, Sara Rampazzi, Qi Alfred
  Chen, Kevin Fu, and Z. Morley Mao. Adversarial sensor attack on lidar-based perception in
  autonomous driving. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
  Communications Security, (CCS). ACM, 2019.
Nicholas Carlini and David A. Wagner. Towards evaluating the robustness of neural networks. In
  2017 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, (SP). IEEE Computer Society, 2017.
Nicholas Carlini, Florian Tramèr, Krishnamurthy (Dj) Dvijotham, Leslie Rice, Mingjie Sun, and
  J. Zico Kolter. (certified!!) adversarial robustness for free! In The Eleventh International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, ICLR, 2023.
Jianbo Chen, Michael I. Jordan, and Martin J. Wainwright. Hopskipjumpattack: A query-efficient
   decision-based attack. In 2020 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) 2020. IEEE, 2020.
Sizhe Chen, Zhehao Huang, Qinghua Tao, Yingwen Wu, Cihang Xie, and Xiaolin Huang. Adversar-
  ial attack on attackers: Post-process to mitigate black-box score-based query attacks. In NeurIPS,
  2022.
Yinbo Chen, Sifei Liu, and Xiaolong Wang. Learning continuous image representation with lo-
  cal implicit image function. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  (CVPR). Computer Vision Foundation / IEEE, 2021.
Minhao Cheng, Thong Le, Pin-Yu Chen, Huan Zhang, Jinfeng Yi, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. Query-
 efficient hard-label black-box attack: An optimization-based approach. In 7th International Con-
 ference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2019.
Minhao Cheng, Simranjit Singh, Patrick H. Chen, Pin-Yu Chen, Sijia Liu, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. Sign-
 opt: A query-efficient hard-label adversarial attack. In 8th International Conference on Learning
 Representations (ICLR), 2020.
Inc. Clarifai. The generative developer platform. https://www.clarifai.com/, 2022. Ac-
  cessed: 2023-09-25.
Jeremy Cohen, Elan Rosenfeld, and J. Zico Kolter. Certified adversarial robustness via randomized
   smoothing. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML,
   Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, 2019.
Francesco Croce, Maksym Andriushchenko, Vikash Sehwag, Edoardo Debenedetti, Nicolas Flam-
  marion, Mung Chiang, Prateek Mittal, and Matthias Hein. Robustbench: a standardized adver-
  sarial robustness benchmark. In Proceedings of the Neural Information Processing Systems Track
  on Datasets and Benchmarks 1, (NeurIPS), 2021.
Eduardo Dadalto. Resnet18 trained on cifar10. https://huggingface.co/edadaltocg/
  resnet18_cifar10, 2022. Accessed: 2023-07-01.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2009.
Yinpeng Dong, Hang Su, Baoyuan Wu, Zhifeng Li, Wei Liu, Tong Zhang, and Jun Zhu. Efficient
  decision-based black-box adversarial attacks on face recognition. In IEEE Conference on Com-
  puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, (CVPR). Computer Vision Foundation / IEEE, 2019.
Ian J. Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial
  examples. In 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, (ICLR), 2015.


                                                 10
Google. Visual ai. https://cloud.google.com/vision, 2022. Accessed: 2023-09-25.

Sven Gowal, Chongli Qin, Jonathan Uesato, Timothy A. Mann, and Pushmeet Kohli. Uncovering
  the limits of adversarial training against norm-bounded adversarial examples. CoRR, 2020.

Chuan Guo, Jacob R. Gardner, Yurong You, Andrew Gordon Wilson, and Kilian Q. Weinberger.
  Simple black-box adversarial attacks. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, (ICML), Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, 2019.

Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2016.

Chih-Hui Ho and Nuno Vasconcelos. DISCO: adversarial defense with local implicit functions. In
  NeurIPS, 2022.

Andrew Ilyas, Logan Engstrom, Anish Athalye, and Jessy Lin. Black-box adversarial attacks with
  limited queries and information. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, (ICML). PMLR, 2018.

A. Krizhevsky. Learning Multiple Layers of Features from Tiny Images. Technical report, Univ.
  Toronto, 2009.

Alexey Kurakin, Ian J. Goodfellow, and Samy Bengio. Adversarial machine learning at scale. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2017.

Bee Lim, Sanghyun Son, Heewon Kim, Seungjun Nah, and Kyoung Mu Lee. Enhanced deep resid-
  ual networks for single image super-resolution. In 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition Workshops, (CVPR) Workshops. IEEE Computer Society, 2017.

Sijia Liu, Pin-Yu Chen, Xiangyi Chen, and Mingyi Hong. signsgd via zeroth-order oracle. In 7th
   International Conference on Learning Representations, (ICLR), 2019.

Xuanqing Liu, Minhao Cheng, Huan Zhang, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. Towards robust neural networks via
  random self-ensemble. In Computer Vision - ECCV 2018 - 15th European Conference, Lecture
  Notes in Computer Science. Springer, 2018.

Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu.
  Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks. In 6th International Conference on
  Learning Representations, (ICLR). OpenReview.net, 2018.

Chengzhi Mao, Mia Chiquier, Hao Wang, Junfeng Yang, and Carl Vondrick. Adversarial attacks are
  reversible with natural supervision. In 2021 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
  Vision, (ICCV). IEEE, 2021.

Yurii E. Nesterov and Vladimir G. Spokoiny. Random gradient-free minimization of convex func-
  tions. Found. Comput. Math., 2017.

Maria-Irina Nicolae, Mathieu Sinn, Minh Ngoc Tran, Beat Buesser, Ambrish Rawat, Martin Wis-
 tuba, Valentina Zantedeschi, Nathalie Baracaldo, Bryant Chen, Heiko Ludwig, Ian Molloy, and
 Ben Edwards. Adversarial robustness toolbox v1.2.0. CoRR, 2018.

Weili Nie, Brandon Guo, Yujia Huang, Chaowei Xiao, Arash Vahdat, and Animashree Anandkumar.
 Diffusion models for adversarial purification. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
 (ICML), Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, 2022.

Nicolas Papernot and Patrick D. McDaniel. On the effectiveness of defensive distillation. CoRR,
  2016.

Zeyu Qin, Yanbo Fan, Hongyuan Zha, and Baoyuan Wu. Random noise defense against query-based
  black-box attacks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34: Annual Conference
  on Neural Information Processing Systems 2021, NeurIPS 2021, December 6-14, 2021, virtual,
  2021.


                                                11
Edward Raff, Jared Sylvester, Steven Forsyth, and Mark McLean. Barrage of random transforms for
  adversarially robust defense. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  (CVPR). Computer Vision Foundation / IEEE, 2019.
Jonas Rauber, Roland Zimmermann, Matthias Bethge, and Wieland Brendel. Foolbox native: Fast
  adversarial attacks to benchmark the robustness of machine learning models in pytorch, tensor-
  flow, and jax. Journal of Open Source Software, 2020.
Hadi Salman, Andrew Ilyas, Logan Engstrom, Ashish Kapoor, and Aleksander Madry. Do adver-
  sarially robust imagenet models transfer better? In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, (NeurIPS),
  2020a.
Hadi Salman, Mingjie Sun, Greg Yang, Ashish Kapoor, and J. Zico Kolter. Denoised smoothing: A
  provable defense for pretrained classifiers. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
  33: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS, 2020b.
Chawin Sitawarin, Zachary J. Golan-Strieb, and David A. Wagner. Demystifying the adversarial
  robustness of random transformation defenses. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  ICML, Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, 2022.
Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan, Ian J. Goodfel-
  low, and Rob Fergus. Intriguing properties of neural networks. In 2nd International Conference
  on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2014.
Torchvision. Resnet50 - torchvision main documentation. https://pytorch.org/vision/
  main/models/generated/torchvision.models.resnet50.html, 2023.                  Ac-
  cessed: 2023-11-11.
Florian Tramèr, Alexey Kurakin, Nicolas Papernot, Ian J. Goodfellow, Dan Boneh, and Patrick D.
  McDaniel. Ensemble adversarial training: Attacks and defenses. In 6th International Conference
  on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2018.
VentureBeat. Facebook user data: 845m monthly users, 2.7b daily likes & comments. https:
  //venturebeat.com/business/facebook-ipo-usage-data/, 2022. Accessed:
  2023-09-25.
Weilin Xu, David Evans, and Yanjun Qi. Feature squeezing: Detecting adversarial examples in deep
 neural networks. In 25th Annual Network and Distributed System Security Symposium, NDSS.
 The Internet Society, 2018.
Greg Yang, Tony Duan, J. Edward Hu, Hadi Salman, Ilya P. Razenshteyn, and Jerry Li. Random-
  ized smoothing of all shapes and sizes. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, (ICML), Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, 2020.
Jongmin Yoon, Sung Ju Hwang, and Juho Lee. Adversarial purification with score-based generative
  models. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, (ICML).
  PMLR, 2021.
Sergey Zagoruyko and Nikos Komodakis. Wide residual networks. In Proceedings of the British
  Machine Vision Conference 2016, (BMVC), 2016.
Yulun Zhang, Kunpeng Li, Kai Li, Lichen Wang, Bineng Zhong, and Yun Fu. Image super-
  resolution using very deep residual channel attention networks. In Computer Vision - ECCV
  2018 - 15th European Conference, Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer, 2018.


A    BACKGROUND FOR G ENERAL D EFENSE

More on General Defense for Query-based Attacks The defense for black-box query-based at-
tacks remain relatively unexplored compared to the defense for white-box methods Qin et al. (2021).
Under considerations of real-world constraints such as clean accuracy and inference speed, most


                                                12
training-time and testing-time defenses present significant limitations for deployment in real-world
MLaaS systems. For training-time defense, the aim is to improve the worst-case robustness of the
models. Adversarial training (AT) has been considered as one of the fundamental practices of train-
ing time defense, where models are trained on augmented datasets with specially-crafted samples
to ensure robustness of the models (Madry et al., 2018). Other training-time examples like gradient
masking (Tramèr et al., 2018) and defensive distillation Papernot & McDaniel (2016) are also pro-
posed to improve the robustness of the models. Nonetheless, such methods are unsuitable for MLaaS
systems because of the extensive training costs and potential for decreased accuracy on clean exam-
ples. With regards to testing-time defense, a prominent defense from white-box attacks, randomized
smoothing, can ensure the robustness of the model within a certain confidence level (Yang et al.,
2020), a feature known as certified robustness. Another example for multiple inference to improve
the robustness is called random self-ensemble Liu et al. (2018). However, the inference speed of
randomized smoothing is too slow to be deployed on real-world MLaaS systems. Other testing-time
defenses tend towards randomization of the input or output. Rand noise defense proposed by Qin
et al. (2021) leverages Gaussian noises as the input to the model to disturb the gradient estima-
tion. Yet, the defense is ineffective against strong attack methods and hurts the clean accuracy. The
output-based defense, like confidence poisoning (Chen et al., 2022) influences the examples on the
classification boundary and cannot defend against the decision-based attacks.


B    S EARCH T ECHNIQUES FOR BLACK - BOX ATTACKS

Projected Gradient Descent A common approach of performing adversarial attacks (often white-
box) is to leverage projected gradient descent algorithm (Carlini & Wagner, 2017):

                                 xt+1 = P rojNR (x) (x − ηt g(x)t ).                              (10)

Gradient Estimation While there can be various gradient estimators, we consider the following
gradient estimator in our theoretical analysis:

                                            f (x + µu) − f (x)
                                   g(x) =                      u.                                 (11)
                                                    µ

Heuristic Search For heuristic search, the main issue is to determine the search direction. One
commonly used search direction can be:

                 s(x) = I(h(x) < 0) · µu,      where h(x) = f (x + µu) − f (x),                   (12)

where I is the indicator function. The search direction is determined by the sign of the objective
function. If the objective function is negative, the search direction is the gradient direction. Oth-
erwise, the search direction is the opposite of the gradient direction. The corresponding updating
direction will be Equation (10) with −ηt g(x)t replaced by s(xt ).


C    C OMPARISON OF THE I NFERENCE S PEED

We have tested the inference speed of DISCO and MATT using a workstation with a single NVIDIA
RTX 4090 GPU. We set the batch size of inference to be 1 and vary the number of the purifiers from 1
to 10. We record the time of the last 900 inferences of a total of 1000 iterations. Moreover, to ensure
a fair comparison on the inference mechanism, we use the same encoder and decoder for DISCO
and MATT so that they only differ in the way of inference. Note that any software and services that
may affect the test has been turned off. We use the same standardly and adversarially trained models
as section 5 as the baseline of the comparison. The results for CIFAR-10 and ImageNet datasets are
shown in Figure 7 and Figure 8, respectively. While our mechanism does not increase inference cost
with the increase of the purifiers, the inference cost of DISCO almost increase linearly. Moreover,
we have noticed that on ImageNet datasets, the inference speed of MATT is even faster than the
baseline model, which makes our mechanism suitable for real-world MLaaS systems.


                                                  13
                      Adv           Std         MATT        DISCO                                       Adv           Std     MATT          DISCO
                                                                                                0.04
               0.04

                                                                                                0.03

     Latency (s)


                                                                                      Latency (s)
               0.03

                                                                                                0.02
               0.02


               0.01                                                                             0.01



                      1     2   3     4 5 6 7 8               9     10                                  1     2   3     4 5 6 7 8            9   10
                                    Number of Purifiers                                                               Number of Purifiers


Figure 7: The inference speed of DISCO and                                       Figure 8: The inference speed of DISCO and
MATT on CIFAR-10 dataset.                                                        MATT on ImageNet dataset.


D    D ETAILS OF THE ATTACKS

We utilize 5 SOTA query-based attacks for evaluation: NES (Ilyas et al., 2018), SimBA (Guo
et al., 2019), Square (Andriushchenko et al., 2020), Boundary (Brendel et al., 2018), and Hop-
SkipJump (Chen et al., 2020). The category of them is listed below in Table 3.

                          Table 3: The category of the attacks along with the techniques they use.

                                                                    Gradient Estimation                Random Search
                                      Score-based                          NES                         Square, SimBA
                                     Decision-based                      Boundary                      HopSkipJump


Implementation For Boundary Attack and HopSkipJump Attack, we adopt the implementation
from Foolbox (Rauber et al., 2020). For Square Attack and SimBA, we use the implementation from
ART library (Nicolae et al., 2018). For NES, we implement it under the framework of Foolbox.
Hyperparameters The hyperparameters used for the attacks are listed below for full reproducibility.
                       Table 4: The hyperparameters used for NES.

                                                                                                    CIFAR-10            ImageNet
                η (learning rate)                        0.01       0.0005
                q (number of points used for estimation) 100         100
Table 5: The hyperparameters used for SimBA. Table 6: The hyperparameters used for Square.

                                    CIFAR-10             ImageNet                                                             CIFAR-10           ImageNet
          η (step size)                   0.2              0.2               µ (Fraction of Pixel Changed)                    0.05 ∼ 0.5         0.05 ∼ 0.5
Table 7: The hyperparameters used for Bound- Table 8: The hyperparameters used for Hop-
ary Attack.                                  SkipJump Attack.

                                                CIFAR-10   ImageNet
                                                                                                                            CIFAR-10         ImageNet
               ηsph (Spherical Step)              0.01       0.01
               ηsrc (Source Step)                 0.01       0.01             n (number for estimation)                         100              100
               ηc (Source Step Converge)          1E-7       1E-7
               ηa (Step Adaptation)                1.5        1.5             γ (Step Control Factor)                            1                1


E    D ETAILED I NFORMATION FOR THE D EFENSE

We compare our algorithm with three types of baseline defense. For random noise defense, we
use a Gaussian noise with σ = 0.041 as the input to the classifier. For the spatial smoothing
transformations, we set the size of the kernel filter to be 3. For DISCO model, we implement a naive
version without randomness using pre-trained models from the official implementation. We pick


                                                                            14
the pre-trained model under PGD attack (Madry et al., 2018) as the core local implicit model for
DISCO.

F     D ETAILS FOR MATT
F.1   E FFICIENT S TRUCTURE FOR I NFERENCE S PEED U P

After we delve into the local implicit function implementation Chen et al. (2021), we find that the
local ensemble mechanism that used to improve the performance of the local implicit function in
super-resolution tasks is not necessary for our task. A conceptual illustration of this technique is
shown in Figure 9. As image purification is a one-to-one pixel mapping task, the local ensemble
mechanism inference the same pixel four times and take the average value, which is meaningless for
our task. Therefore, we remove this mechanism and only use the local implicit function to purify
the image. This modification accelerates the inference speed by a factor of four.

                                      Low-Res Pixel      H-Res Pixel


Figure 9: An illustration of the local ensemble mechanism in the local implicit function for multi-
resolution support. High resolution pixels are predicted based on high-level features from nearby
low resolution pixels.


F.2   T RAINING D IVERSIFIED P URIFIERS

For improving the diversity of the purifiers, we consider the following influence factors in Table 9
and use their combinations to train 12 different purification models for each dataset. For CIFAR-10,
we use a pre-trained ResNet-18 model (Dadalto, 2022) for generating adversarial examples. For
ImageNet, we use a pre-trained ResNet-50 model (Torchvision, 2023) for generating adversarial
examples.

       Table 9: The factors that are considered when training diversified models for MATT.

                      Hyperparameter                       Value
                                             FGSM (Goodfellow et al., 2015)
                        Attack Tyep            PGD (Madry et al., 2018)
                                               BIM Kurakin et al. (2017)
                     Encoder Structure      RCAN (Zhang et al., 2018), EDSR
                      Feature Depth                    32, 64


We diversify the purifiers from the following aspects:

       • Structural Diversity: By leveraging different structures of encoders and decoders, we can
         diversify the purifiers.
       • Random Patch-wise Diversity: By performing random patch-wise purification, we are
         actually combining different purifiers to form a new purifier.


                                                  15
G     S UPPLEMENTARY M ATERIALS FOR T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS
G.1      I MPORTANT D EFINITIONS

Definition 1. The Gaussian-Smoothing function corresponding to f (x) with µ > 0, u ∼ N (0, I)
is                                         Z
                                      1                    ∥u∥2
                                                          − 2
                          fµ (x) =            f (x + µu)e       du                       (13)
                                   (2π)d/2

G.2      P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

The essential lemmas are given as follows, the complete proofs are shown in Nesterov & Spokoiny
(2017).
Lemma 1. Let f (x) be the Lipschitz-continuous function, |f (y) − f (x)| ≤ L0 (f )∥y − x∥. Then
                                                        1
                                                       d2
                                         L1 (fµ ) =       L0 (f )
                                                       µ

We define the p-order moment of normal distribution as Mp . Then we have
Lemma 2. For p ∈ [0, 2], we have
                                                   p
                                          Mp ≤ d 2
If p ≥ 2, the we have two-side bounds
                                          p                       p
                                        d 2 ≤ Mp ≤ (p + d) 2
Lemma 3. Let f (x) be the Lipschitz-continuous function, |f (y) − f (x)| ≤ L0 (f )∥y − x∥. And
m(x) is Lipschitz-continuous for every dimension. Then
                                     L0 (f ◦ m) ≤ L0 (f )L0 (m)
where L0 (m) is defined as L0 (m) = maxi L0 (mi ).

Proof.
                    |f (m(y)) − f (m(x))| ≤ L0 (f )∥m(y) − m(x)∥
                                                   v
                                                   u d
                                                   uX
                                          = L (f )t0   L (m )2 (y − x )2
                                                                      0   i   i   i              (14)
                                                            i=1

                                              ≤ L0 (f )L0 (m)∥y − x∥


This is the proof for Theorem 1.

Proof. According to the property of Lipschitz-continuous gradient,
                                                             1
   Fµ,K (xt+1 ) ≤ Fµ,K (xt ) − ηt ⟨∇Fµ,K (xt ), Gµ,K (xt )⟩ + ηt2 L1 (Fµ,K )∥Gµ,K (xt )∥2        (15)
                                                             2
The Gµ,K (xt ) can be decomposed as
                 f (mkt1 (x + µu)) − f (mkt2 (x))
    Gµ,K (xt ) =                                  ut
                                 µ
                 f (mkt1 (x + µu)) − f (m0 (x + µu)) + f (m0 (x + µu)) − f (m0 (x))
               =                                                                    ut           (16)
                                                   µ
                 f (m0 (x)) − f (mkt2 (x))
               +                           ut
                             µ
The squared term ∥Gµ,K (xt )∥2 is bounded by
                              4ν 2                   4ν
            ∥Gµ,K (xt )∥2 ≤     2
                                   L0 (f )2 ∥ut ∥2 +    L0 (F )L0 (f )∥ut ∥3 + L0 (F )2 ∥ut ∥4   (17)
                              µ                      µ

                                                   16
Take the expectation over ut , kt1 , and kt2 , use Lemma 2, we have
   Fµ,K (xt+1 ) ≤ Fµ,K (xt ) − ηt ∥∇Fµ,K (xt )∥2
                   1             4ν 2            4ν                       3
                + ηt2 L1 (Fµ,K )( 2 L0 (f )2 d +    L0 (F )L0 (f )(d + 3) 2 + L0 (F )2 (d + 4)2 )
                   2             µ               µ
                                                                                                (18)
For L1 (Fµ,K ), we have:
                                                   K                               1
                                             1 X                 L0 (F )d 2
                           L1 (Fµ,K ) =          L1 (fµ (mk )) ≤                                      (19)
                                             K                       µ
                                                  k=1

Use Lemma 1, and the dimension d is high, we have
           Fµ,K (xt+1 ) ≤ Fµ,K (xt ) − ηt ∥∇Fµ,K (xt )∥2
                                                        3
                          1 L0 (f )3 L0 (m0 )d 2 4ν 2 4ν           1                                  (20)
                         + ηt2                  ( 2 +    L0 (m0 )d 2 + L0 (m0 )2 d)
                          2           µ          µ    µ

We take the expectation over Ut , kt .
     EUt ,kt [Fµ,K (xt+1 )] ≤ EUt−1 ,kt−1 [Fµ,K (xt )] − ηt EUt ,kt [∥∇Fµ,K (xt )∥2 ]
                                                            3
                            1 L0 (f )3 L0 (m0 )d 2 4ν 2 4ν           1                                (21)
                           + ηt2                  ( 2 +    L0 (m0 )d 2 + L0 (m0 )2 d)
                            2           µ          µ    µ
Now consider constant step size ηt = η, and sum over t from 0 to Q, we have
         Q                                         ∗
    1 X                            1 Fµ,K (x0 ) − FK
            EUt [∥∇Fµ,K (xt )∥2 ] ≤ (                )
  Q + 1 t=0                        η     Q+1
                                                                      3
                                      1 L0 (f )3 L0 (m0 )d 2 4ν 2   4ν           1
                                   + η                      ( 2 +      L0 (m0 )d 2 + L0 (m0 )2 d)
                                      2           µ           µ     µ
                                                                                              (22)
Since the distance between the input variable should be bounded by R and use Lipschitz-continuous,
we have
                                                      K
                                     ∗      1        X
                     ∥Fµ,K (x0 ) − FK  ∥ ≤ L0 (f )       L0 (mk )R ≤ L0 (F )R                 (23)
                                            K
                                                                k=0
                                         ϵ
Considering bounded µ ≤ µ̂ =          1           to ensure local Lipschitz-continuity, and set γ(m0 , ν) =
                                    d 2 L0 (F )
4ν 2 4ν         1
                           2
µ2 + µ L0 (m0 )d + L0 (m0 ) d
                2


            Q
       1 X                              1 L0 (F )R   1 L0 (f )4 L0 (m0 )2 2
               EUt ,kt [∥∇Fµ (xt )∥2 ] ≤ (         )+ η                  d γ(m0 , ν)                  (24)
     Q + 1 t=0                          η Q+1        2          ϵ
Minimize the right hand size,
                                s                               s
                                          2Rϵ                               1
                          η=                           ·                                              (25)
                                    (Q + 1)L0 (f )3 d2              L0 (m0 )γ(m0 , ν)
And we get
                                                        s
                    Q
               1 X                                          2L0 (f )5 Rd2 p
                       EUt ,kt [∥∇Fµ (xt )∥2 ] ≤                         · γ(m0 , ν)L0 (m0 )3         (26)
             Q + 1 t=0                                       (Q + 1)ϵ
To guarantee the expected squared norm of the gradient of function Fµ of the order δ, the lower
bound for the expected number of queries is
                                       L0 (f )5 Rd2
                                 O(                 γ(m0 , ν)L0 (m0 )3 )                              (27)
                                           ϵδ 2



                                                        17
G.3      P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

Proof.
P (Sign(H(x)) ̸= Sign(HK (x))) ≤ P (|HK (x) − H(x)| ≥ |H(x)|)
                                 E[|HK (x) − H(x)|]
                               ≤
                                        |H(x)|
                                 p
                                    E[(HK (x) − H(x)])2
                               ≤
                                           |H(x)|
                                 p
                                    E[2(f (mk1 (x + µu)) − f (m0 (x + µu)))2 + 2(f (mk2 (x)) − f (m0 (x)))2 ]
                               ≤
                                                                   |H(x)|
                                 2νL0 (f )
                               ≤
                                  |H(x)|
                                                                                     (28)


H     ACCURACY C ONVERTED U SING THE BASE ACCURACY
As we have evaluated the performance of MATT on the correctly classified examples, the resulting
robust accuracy on these examples may seem higher than the test accuracy reported in other works.
To avoid confusion and ease the comparison of our work with other works, we have provided a
table of converted accuracy (original robust accuracy multiplies the base accuracy of the model) in
Table 10.
                        Table 10: The converted accuracy using results from Table 2.

           Datasets          Methods      Acc.   NES(ℓ∞ )     SimBA(ℓ2 )   Square(ℓ∞ )   Boundary(ℓ2 )   HopSkipJump(ℓ∞ )
                              None        94.8   83.4/11.9    49.1/3.0       26.6/0.9      88.4/60.0         72.0/72.6
                               AT         85.5   83.8/78.8    83.0/74.9     77.5/67.3      84.7/84.2         85.3/84.0
         CIFAR-10          Smoothing      76.4   50.7/7.6     42.7/5.2       5.7/0.0       70.7/39.8         64.6/62.7
      (WideResNet-28)      Input Rand.    77.1   74.7/71.1    71.5/66.0     64.1/60.5      74.4/76.4         71.0/74.1
                             DISCO        86.3   83.0/34.7    77.7/15.7      21.0/2.1      84.1/66.0         81.0/81.7
                          MATT (Ours)     84.1   84.2/81.8    81.1/74.4     77.3/67.8      82.9/82.9         82.5/84.8
                         MATT-AT (Ours)   84.6   83.7/81.1    83.3/80.6     81.5/78.7      84.4/84.1         84.3/84.1
                              None        76.5   72.9/61.2    65.5/50.8      37.6/5.2      70.7/64.9         68.3/66.0
                               AT         57.5   52.2/51.1    54.5/50.7     52.9/46.8      57.1/57.0         57.5/57.3
          ImageNet         Smoothing      68.2   71.5/59.4    61.4/28.2      28.8/2.3      66.5/60.4         64.4/64.4
         (ResNet-50)       Input Rand.    64.7   64.0/63.0    61.7/58.3     62.3/60.1      65.3/64.9         64.8/65.5
                             DISCO        67.7   65.9/60.9    61.0/25.7      34.5/5.1      65.9/63.3         67.0/64.6
                          MATT (Ours)     66.7   65.5/62.9    63.1/61.3     65.0/59.1      66.6/65.3         66.2/66.0
                         MATT-AT (Ours)   57.8   56.0/54.7    54.0/53.5     55.4/53.2      56.8/57.1         56.8/56.1


I     I NFLUENCE ON C LEAN ACCURACY
One of the biggest advantage of local implicit purification is that it does not affect the clean accuracy
of the model. While the results for evaluation of our mechanism’s robust accuracy are shown in
Table 2 in section 5, we also provide the results for clean accuracy in figure 10. Moreover, we
have conducted extra experiments on the influence of the numbers of the image patches on the clean
accuracy. The results are shown in figure 11. The results are obtained using the whole test set of
CIFAR-10 and validation set of ImageNet.
Comaprison of Defense Mechanisms. We first test clean accuracy on each purification model
contained in DISCO and our method. The label name refers to the white-box attacks used to generate
adversarial examples for training the purification model. For MATT, a list of the purification model
and their according attack and encoder combination can be found in Table 11. For both datasets, all
the purification models have a better clean accuracy than adding random noise. Moreover, they all
achieve better clean accuracy than adversarially trained models on ImageNet dataset.
Influence of the Number of Patches. We then test the influence of the number of patches on
the clean accuracy. In MATT, we only use image patches for feature encoding and purification.


                                                             18
                            Standard          Adversarial          Random Noise     DISCO           MATT
             1.0
                                                            CIFAR-10                  Std. Acc.: 0.9478
                     0.92
                                       0.89                                           Adv. Acc.: 0.8948
             0.9                                                                             0.88


     Accuracy
                                                  0.86      0.86                    0.86              0.86
                              0.84                                   0.84    0.83                                              MATT             Rand. Acc.         Adv. Acc.
             0.8                                                                      Rand. Acc.: 0.7795                0.80

                                                                                                                                0.7588
             0.7                                                                                                                                         0.7419    0.7427
                     bim     fgsm      pgd        p0        p1      p2       p3     p4       p5     MATT                0.75                  0.7405
                                                            Model Type


                                                                                                                 Accuracy
         0.80                                                                                                                                          Rand. Acc.: 0.7022
                                                            ImageNet                  Std. Acc.: 0.7588                 0.70
         0.75                                     0.74      0.74     0.74    0.74   0.74     0.74     0.74
                     0.72              0.72
  Accuracy


                              0.71                                                    Rand. Acc.: 0.7022
         0.70                                                                                                                                          Adv. Acc.: 0.6402
                                                                                                                        0.65

         0.65                                                                         Adv. Acc.: 0.6402


         0.60                                                                                                           0.60
                     bim     fgsm      pgd        p0        p1      p2       p3     p4       p5     MATT                        W/O           1x1      3x3         5x5
                                                            Model Type                                                                         Patch Split


Figure 10: Comparison of defense mechanisms and models on Figure 11: Influence of the number of
clean accuracy.Upper Figure: CIFAR-10 dataset. Lower Figure: image patches in MATT.
ImageNet dataset.


Therefore, the number of patches is a hyperparameter that can be tuned. We test the influence of the
number of patches on the clean accuracy. The results are shown in figure 11. We can see that the
clean accuracy is not affected by the number of patches.

                                                         Table 11: The purification model used in MATT.
                    Model Type                         p0                   p1                 p2               p3                       p4                   p5
                   Attack Encoder             BIM EDSR               BIM RCAN            FGSM EDSR           FGSM RCAN           PGD EDSR               PGD RCAN


                                                                                             19
