Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


LLM S M EET VLM S : B OOST O PEN VOCABULARY O B -
JECT D ETECTION WITH F INE - GRAINED D ESCRIPTORS

                   Sheng Jin1 , Xueying Jiang1 , Jiaxing Huang1 , Lewei Lu2 , Shijian Lu1∗
                   1                                               2
                     S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University         SenseTimeResearch
                      {Jiaxing.Huang, xueying003, Shijian.Lu}@ntu.edu.sg



                                               A BSTRACT

             Inspired by the outstanding zero-shot capability of vision language models
             (VLMs) in image classification tasks, open-vocabulary object detection has at-
             tracted increasing interest by distilling the broad VLM knowledge into detec-
             tor training. However, most existing open-vocabulary detectors learn by align-
             ing region embeddings with categorical labels (e.g., bicycle) only, disregarding
             the capability of VLMs on aligning visual embeddings with fine-grained text de-
             scription of object parts (e.g., pedals and bells). This paper presents DVDet, a
             Descriptor-Enhanced Open Vocabulary Detector that introduces conditional con-
             text prompts and hierarchical textual descriptors that enable precise region-text
             alignment as well as open-vocabulary detection training in general. Specifically,
             the conditional context prompt transforms regional embeddings into image-like
             representations that can be directly integrated into general open vocabulary detec-
             tion training. In addition, we introduce large language models as an interactive
             and implicit knowledge repository which enables iterative mining and refining vi-
             sually oriented textual descriptors for precise region-text alignment. Extensive
             experiments over multiple large-scale benchmarks show that DVDet outperforms
             the state-of-the-art consistently by large margins.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Vision Language Models (VLMs) (Yu et al., 2022; Yuan et al., 2021; Zhai et al., 2021; Jia et al.,
2021; Radford et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2021a; Rao et al., 2021; Huynh et al., 2021) have demon-
strated unparalleled zero-shot capabilities in various image classification tasks, largely attributed to
the web-scale image-text data they were trained with (Radford et al., 2021; Jia et al., 2021). As
researchers naturally move to tackle the challenge of open vocabulary object detection (OVOD) (Li
et al., 2021; Kamath et al., 2021; Cai et al., 2022), they are facing a grand data challenge as there
does not exist similar web-scale data with box-level annotations. The much less training data in
OVOD inevitably leads to clear degradation in text-image alignment, manifesting in much weaker
zero-shot capabilities in most open-vocabulary object detectors. An intriguing question arises: Can
we leverage the superior image-text alignment abilities of VLMs to enhance OVOD performance?
Recent studies (Du et al., 2022; Feng et al., 2022) indeed resonate with this idea, attempting to distill
the knowledge from VLMs to extend the vocabulary of object detectors. For example, ViLD (Gu
et al., 2021) and its subsequent work (Ma et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2023) enforce
detectors’ embeddings to be aligned with the embeddings from CLIP image encoder or text en-
coder. However, VLMs still clearly outperform open-vocabulary detectors while aligning visual
embeddings with text embeddings of categorical labels (e.g., ‘bicycle’) as illustrated in Fig 1. Upon
deep examination, we found that VLMs are particularly good at aligning fine-grained descriptors
of object attributes or parts (e.g., ‘bell’ and ‘pedal’) with their visual counterparts, an expertise yet
harnessed in existing OVOD models. Specifically, most existing OVOD methods focus on distilling
coarse and category-level alignment knowledge on visual and textual embedding. They largely ne-
glect the fine-grained and descriptor-level alignment knowledge that VLMs possess, leading to the
under-utilization of VLM knowledge in the trained OVOD models.
    ∗
        Corresponding author.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Categorical labels           Most Visual-related Fine-grained Descriptors                                               Cross-modal alignment (in cosine similarity)
                                                                                                    VLMs                      Alignment with Category label:
                                                                                                           Image embedding
                                                                                                                                   bicycle
                                                                                  Crop                                        Alignment with Descriptors of bicycle
                                                                                                                                   saddle
                                                                                                                                   bell
                                                                                                    OVOD
                                                                                                             ROI embedding         chain
                                                                                                                                   reflector
                                                                                                                                   frame
                                                                                                                                   kickstand
                                                                                                            Our embedding          basket
                           VLMs                OVOD                 DVDet        Learnable Prompt                                  pedals

        (a) Visual-textual alignment on the whole COCO dataset                              (b) Illustration with an example label 'bicycle' and related textual descriptors


Figure 1: Differences in image-text alignments by VLMs and OVOD. Over the whole COCO
dataset, the visual and textual embeddings from VLMs are clearly better aligned than those from
OVOD (by the state-of-the-art VLDet (Lin et al., 2023)) for both categorical object labels and fine-
grained descriptors as shown in (a). The proposed DVDet mines and refines fine-grained descriptors
with LLMs which clearly improves region-text alignment as compared with VLDet. This can be
viewed in more detail in (b) with an exemplar label ‘bicycle’ and fine-grained descriptors of bicycle
parts. The alignment is measured by the cosine similarity between visual and textual embeddings.
We design Descriptor-Enhanced Open Vocabulary Detection (DVDet) that exploits VLMs’ prowess
in descriptor-level region-text alignment for open vocabulary object detection. The essential idea is
to exploit VLMs’ alignment ability via customized visual prompt, which mines regional fine-grained
descriptors from large language models (LLMs) iteratively and enables prompt training without
resource-intensive grounding annotations. The key design in DVDet is Conditional Context visual
Prompt (CCP) that transforms region embeddings into image-like counterparts by fusing contextual
background information around region proposals. This allows CCP to be seamlessly integrated into
various open-vocabulary detection training with little extra designs.
To train CCP effectively, we introduce LLMs as communicable and implicit knowledge repositories
for iterative generation of fine-grained descriptors for precise region-text alignment. Specifically, we
design a hierarchical update mechanism that interacts with LLMs by retaining most-related descrip-
tors while actively soliciting new descriptors from LLMs, enabling CCP training without additional
annotation costs. This mechanism enhances descriptor diversity and descriptor availability, lead-
ing to regional fine-grained descriptors that are tailored to the most relevant object categories. In
addition, we design a simple yet effective descriptor merging and selection strategy to tackle two
challenges in CCP training: 1) distinct object categories could share similar fine-grained descriptors
which leads to potential confusion in CCP training; 2) object images may not have all fine-grained
descriptors present due to occlusions, etc., more detail to be described in the ensuing Method.
The contributions of this work can be summarized in three major aspects. First, we introduce a
feature-level visual prompt that transforms object embeddings into image-like representations that
can be seamlessly plugged into existing open vocabulary detectors in general. Second, we design
a novel hierarchical update mechanism that enables effective descriptor merging and selection and
dynamical refinement of region-text alignment via iterative interaction with LLMs. Third, extensive
experiments demonstrate that the proposed technique improves open-vocabulary detection substan-
tially for both base and novel categories.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Open-Vocabulary Object Detection (OVOD): OVOD utilizing the knowledge of pretrained VLMs
(Radford et al., 2021) has attracted increasing attention (Zhong et al., 2022; Minderer et al., 2022)
with the advance in open vocabulary image classification (Yu et al., 2022; Yuan et al., 2021; Zhai
et al., 2021; Jia et al., 2021; Radford et al., 2021). For example, ViLD (Gu et al., 2021) distills
knowledge from VLMs into a two-stage detector, harmonizing the detector’s visual embeddings
with those from the CLIP image encoder. HierKD (Ma et al., 2022) focuses on hierarchical global-
local distillation and RKD (Bangalath et al., 2022) explores region-based knowledge distillation to
improve the alignment between region-level and image-level embeddings. In addition, VLDet (Lin
et al., 2023) and Detic (Zhou et al., 2022) align their detector embeddings with those from CLIP text
encoder. Nevertheless, all these prior studies share similar misalignment between their trained de-
tectors and pretrained VLMs: VLMs capture more comprehensive knowledge including fine-grained
knowledge about object parts, object attributes, and contextual background while open vocabulary


                                                                                          2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


detectors focus on learning precise localization of interested objects. Such misalignment tends to
restrict the efficacy of knowledge distillation from VLMs to OVOD.
Recently, prompt-based methods such as DetPro (Du et al., 2022) and PromptDet (Feng et al., 2022)
have emerged as an alternative for alleviating the misalignment between upstream classification
knowledge in VLMs and downstream knowledge in detection tasks. These methods adjust the
textual embedding space of VLMs to align with regional visual object features by incorporating
continuous prompts within VLMs. Despite their success, the adjustment focuses on cross-modal
alignment between categorical labels and ROI embedding only, which tends to disrupt the inherent
visual-textual alignment properties of VLMs. We design a feature-level prompt learning technique
that formulates the ROI embeddings of detectors to be highly similar to image-level embeddings,
preserving the image-text alignment capabilities of pretrained VLMs effectively.
Visual Prompt Learning The concept of ‘prompting’ originates from the field of Natural Language
Processing (NLP) and has gradually gained increasing attention as a means of guiding language
models via task instructions (Brown et al., 2020). The evolution of continuous prompt vectors in
few-shot scenarios (Li & Liang, 2021; Liu et al., 2021a) demonstrates its cross-domain applicability.
Pertinently, VPT (Jia et al., 2022) and its successors (Bahng et al., 2022a;b) have extended this idea
to the visual domain, achieving precise pixel-level predictions. In addition, the prompting idea
has also been explored in pre-trained video recognition models as well (Ju et al., 2022; Lin et al.,
2022b). However, existing visual prompt algorithms generate a single prompt for each downstream
task, which cannot handle detection tasks well that often involve multiple objects in a single image.
We address this issue by designing CCP which generates a conditional prompt for each object.
Leveraging Language Language Models Linguistic data has been increasingly exploited in open-
vocabulary related research, and the recent LLMs have demonstrated their comprehensive knowl-
edge that can be beneficial in various NLP tasks. This trend has extended to computer vision re-
search, and several studies have been reported to investigate how LLMs can assist in downstream
computer vision tasks. For example, (Menon & Vondrick, 2023; Zhang et al., 2023) have harnessed
linguistic knowledge in pretrained LLMs to generate descriptors for each visual category. Such aug-
mentation enriches VLMs without additional training or labeling efforts. Inspired by CuPL (Menon
& Vondrick, 2023), CaF employs GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) to craft semantically enriched texts,
thereby enhancing the alignment between CLIP’s text and images. However, most existing research
treats LLMs as a static database, acquiring useful information through a one-time interaction. We in-
troduce a simple yet effective hierarchical mechanism that continuously interacts with LLMs during
the model’s training process, obtaining more diverse and visual-oriented textual data.

3     M ETHOD
3.1   OVERVIEW

Problem setup. Open Vocabulary Object Detection (OVOD) (Zareian et al., 2021) leverages a
dataset of image-text pairs to broaden its detection vocabulary from pre-defined categories to novel
categories. Formally, the task is to construct an object detector using a detection dataset defined
as T = ({(Ii , gi , Di )}Ni=1 ), where Ii represents an image, gi = (bi , ci ) denotes the ground truth
annotations consisting of bounding box coordinates bi and associated base categories ci ∈ C base ,
and Di symbolizes fine-grained descriptors that are generated through LLMs. The primary goal is
to facilitate the detection of new classes C novel in the inference stage.
The predominant OVOD framework typically utilizes a two-stage detection architecture as its back-
bone, incorporating text embeddings to reformulate the classification layer. Generally, a popular
two-stage object detector, such as Mask-RCNN, comprises a visual backbone encoder denoted as
ΦENC , a class-agnostic region proposal network (RPN) represented by ΦRPN , and an open vocabulary
classification module labeled as ΦCLS . The overall detection can be formulated by:
                               {ŷ1 , . . . , ŷn } = ΦCLS ◦ ΦRPN ◦ ΦENC (Ii )                            (1)
where Ii denotes the i-th input image and {ŷ1 , . . . , ŷn } represents the set of predicted outputs.
Fig. 2 shows an overview of the proposed DVDet framework including a VLM-guided conditional
context prompting flow and a LLMs-assisted descriptor generation flow. In the prompting flow, the
network takes an input image I0 and extracts the features r0i for the i-th proposal. It then enlarges

                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Conditional Context Regional Prompt                                                                          ROI embedding                Descriptors
                                                                             Box Predictor
                                                                                                                   Text embedding               Similarity
                                                                                                                                                                           Category Prediction
                                                                                                                   Prompt Flow                  Descriptor Flow
                                                                             Class Predictor
                                                                                                                                                                                          Confusion Record
                                                            %&'
                                                                                  #&'   !!" "#$   !!" "%&   …       !!" "#'    …     !!" "#(
                                                                                                                                                                                          Category )
                                        CCP
                    $&
                                                     Meta Net                            "!"       "!%       …      "!#         …     "!$                    VLM
                                                                   '&'
                                              %′'&                                      Selection
                                                                                                                              Frequency Record

      LLMs Meets VLMs: Description Generation and Update
                                                                                                                                                        Descriptors
       Which descriptors to                                                                          (!      !!"       …       !!#      …      !!$
       distinguish {category}             LLM (GPT3)                Descriptors
       with {confusing
       category}                                                                                            Preserve
                                                                                         Update                                                        Discard
       There are {high-                                                                                      !!"       …       !!#
       frequency descriptors}
       to distinguish
       {category}. Please                                                                                    Merging
       give more.
                                                                                                                                                              Update
                                                                                                     (!      !!"        …       …     !!#

                            Hierarchy Descriptors Generation Mechanism                                               Visual-oriented Descriptors Update



Figure 2: Overview of our proposed DVDet framework: DVDet comprises two specific flows
to improve the region-text alignment in open vocabulary detection. In the prompt flow (denoted
by the solid line), the proposed conditional context prompt (CCP) transforms the ROI embeddings
into image-like representation by fusing the contextual background information around the region
proposal, that can be incorporated to facilitate the training of open vocabulary detectors. In the
descriptor flow (denoted by the dashed line), a hierarchy mechanism is designed to generate and
update fine-grained descriptors via iterative interaction with LLMs for precise region-text alignment.
                                                                                                                                                                       ′
the proposal to integrate the contextual background and further extracts features to formulate r0i .
                                             ′
We design a learnable meta-net that takes r0i to create a region prompt πoi and combines the prompt
with r0 to obtain a prompted features v0 . Finally, r0i is fed to a Box Predictor, and v0i to a Class
       i                                   i

Predictor to assimilate the text embeddings of category labels and their fine-grained descriptors
Dc . In the descriptor flow, we design a hierarchy mechanism to generate and update Dc for each
category via iterative interactions with LLMs in training. Specifically, Dc records the frequency of
fine-grained descriptors as well as their probability of being misclassified to other categories. It also
records confusing categories that statistically have high misclassification probability. During the
training process, Dc retains high-frequency fine-grained descriptors while discarding low-frequency
ones. It employs both high-frequency descriptors and confusing categories to prompt LLMs to
generate more diverse and visually relevant descriptors, which are further incorporated into Dc with
a semantic merging process.
3.2    C ONDITIONAL C ONTEXT R EGIONAL P ROMPTS

In this section, we introduce the Conditional Context Regional Prompts method (CCP), a strategy
designed to bridge the gap between pretrained foundational classification models and downstream
detection tasks. This technique uses the surrounding contextual background information to trans-
form ROI features into image-like features. Importantly, since current detectors excel at finding
unfamiliar objects but have difficulty classifying them accurately, the CCP is integrated only into
the classification branch of existing detectors. This improves their accuracy without affecting the
localization branch’s ability to identify as numerous unknown targets as possible.
Given a pre-trained backbone E and a dataset for downstream tasks, we extract features for an image
I0 as R0 = [r01 , r02 , · · · , r0M ] where r0i = E(I0 (bi0 )). Notably, M represents the number of region
proposals and bi0 signifies the i-th proposal. Our objective is to develop a region-conditional visual
prompt π0i for the i-th detected proposal, more details to be elaborated in the ensuing subsection.
Prompt Design. In classification tasks, the visual prompt mechanism (Jia et al., 2022) learns a
dataset-specific prompt for each task. But for detection tasks, we require a mechanism that can create
a contextual conditional prompt π0i for i-th detected proposal. Considering the varying scales and
quantities of proposals across different samples, we adopt convolutional layers to build a lightweight


                                                                            4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   person                person                       person                               person
      glassess              clothing                    mouth                                 two eyes
      clothing              mouth                       two eyes                              hair
      jewelry               a head                      neck                                  face
      mouth
      a head
                            two eyes
                            facial features
                                                        hair
                                                        face
                                                                               …..            two eyes
                                                                                              two arms
      two eyes              neck                        two feet                              two feet
       facial features      a feet                      shoulders                             hips
                            torso                       waists                                fingers
                            hands                       hands                                 chins
                             hair                        two legs                              a hat



Figure 3: The iterative update of fine-grained descriptors. In the training stage, we continuously
generate new fine-grained descriptors (highlighted in blue boxes) via interaction with LLMs. With
the recorded usage frequency, high-frequency descriptors (highlighted in green) are preserved and
low-frequency descriptors (highlighted in red) are discarded. We can observe that certain fine-
grained descriptors such as ‘hair’, ‘two eyes’, and ‘face’ are consistently preserved after generation
while visually irrelevant descriptors such as ‘jewelry’ are only generated at early stage and then
discarded.
meta-network, that is adept at processing a variety of object proposals. For each proposal bi0 =
(x1 , x2 , y1 , y2 ), we merge the surrounding background information where the background region is
                ′
defined by b0i = (x′1 , x′2 , y1′ , y2′ ), calculated as follows:
                                              x′1 = x1 − m, y1′ = y1 − n
                                                                                                         (2)
                                              x′2 = x2 + m, y2′ = y2 + n
                                                                           ′
where m and n are constants. Next, we extract the features r0i from the expanded region, and
                                                                             ′       ′
the meta-network learns the regional visual prompt π0i using the formula π0i = hθ (r0i ), and hθ (.)
represents the Meta-Net parameterized by θ. Finally, the learned prompt is combined with the feature
                                                            ′
r0i to create a more detailed prompted feature v0i = r0i + π0i .

3.3   LLM S M EETS VLM S
In this section, we treat the LLMs as interactive implicit knowledge repositories to generate fine-
grained descriptors for CCP training. Specifically, we design a hierarchical generation mechanism
that interacts with LLMs iteratively to generate more diverse and visually relevant category descrip-
tions throughout the training process, with more detail to be elaborated in the ensuing subsections.
Descriptors Initialization. We adopt a similar input protocol as (Menon & Vondrick, 2023)
to prompt LLMs. For each category denoted as c, we extract its fine-grained descriptors Dc ,
represented as Dc = [dc1 , dc2 , · · · , dcK ], accompanied by the corresponding text embeddings
Tc = [tc1 , tc2 , · · · , tcK ], where K signifies the quantity of fine-grained descriptors. For all cate-
gories, we obtain a fine-grained descriptor dictionary D = [D1 , D2 , ......, DM ].
Descriptors Record. The fine-grained descriptors are used for the category prediction. Since we
cannot guarantee the presence of each descriptor in every sample, we introduce a semantic selection
strategy for each proposal. The selection function s(c, Ioi ) is defined by:
                                             1     X
                                s(c, Ioi ) =                   ϕ(d, Ioi )                       (3)
                                             N
                                                       d∈RankN (Dc )

where, ϕ(d, Ioi ) represents the probability of how the descriptor d is relevant to the i-th proposal of
image I0 , and RankN selects the top N descriptors based on the value of ϕ(d, Ioi ). For the i-th
proposal, we predict its category label via arg maxc∈C s(c, Ioi ). For each category c, we record the
usage frequency of each descriptor and its probability of being misclassified to other categories (i.e.,
the confusing categories with high misclassification probability).
Descriptors Hierarchy Generation and Update. During the training stage, we generate fine-
grained descriptors via a hierarchy mechanism at intervals of every N iterations. The updating of
fine-grained descriptors consists of two core operations. First, we record the usage frequency of the
descriptor according to Eq. 3. The high-frequency descriptors are preserved and the low-frequency
descriptors are discarded. Second, we prompt LLMs with an input template that consists of high-
frequency descriptors to gather descriptors designed as follows:


                                                           5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Q: There are several useful visual features to tell there is a
           {category name} in a photo, including {the first frequency
           descriptors, the second frequency descriptors, ...}.
where {category name} is substituted for a given category label c. The generated list then con-
stitutes the descriptor dictionary D. Subsequently, we further generate fine-grained descriptors for
this category to differentiate it from confusing classes. We prompt LLMs with an input template
that consists of the confusing categories:
       Q: Which visual features could be used to distinguish
           {category name} from some confusing categories including
           {confusing category 1, confusing category 2, confusing
           category 3, ...} in a photo?
The newly generated descriptors further expand the descriptor dictionary D. However, some newly
generated descriptors di may already exist in D already. Further, including it into D may lead to
the presence of the same descriptor in multiple categories, leading to potential semantic confusion
during training. We address this issue by measuring the cosine similarity sij between di and D. If
sij > γ, we merge the descriptor’s text embedding via tj = αti + (1 − α)tj , where γ is a constant
and α is the momentum coefficient.

4     E XPERIMENTS
4.1   DATASETS
We evaluated DVDet over two widely adopted benchmarks, ie, COCO (Lin et al., 2014) and
LVIS (Gupta et al., 2019). For the COCO dataset, we follow OV-RCNN (Zareian et al., 2021)
to split the object categories into 48 base categories and 17 novel categories. As in (Zareian et al.,
2021), we keep 107,761 images with base class annotations as the training set and 4,836 images
with base and novel class annotations as the validation set. Following (Gu et al., 2021; Zareian
et al., 2021), we report mean Average Precision (mAP) at an IoU of 0.5. For the LVIS dataset,
we follow ViLD (Gu et al., 2021) to split the 337 rare categories into novel categories and the rest
common and frequent categories into base categories (866 categories). Following (Lin et al., 2023),
we report the mask AP for all categories. For brevity, we denote the open-vocabulary benchmarks
based on COCO and LVIS as OV-COCO and OV-LVIS.

4.2   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
In our experiments, we employ pre-trained models in prior studies as the base and include our prompt
learning techniques on top of them for evaluations. Specifically, we employ the CLIP text encoder
to encode both categorical labels and their fine-grained descriptors. In the open-vocabulary COCO
experiments, we follow the OVR-CNN setting (Zareian et al., 2021) without any data augmentation
and adopt Faster R-CNN (Ren et al., 2015) with ResNet50-C4 (He et al., 2016) as the backbone.
For the warmup, we increase the learning rate from 0 to 0.002 for the first 1000 iterations. The
model is trained for 5,000 iterations using SGD optimizer with batch size 8 and the learning rate is
scaled down by a factor of 10 at 6000 and 8000 iterations. In open-vocabulary LVIS experiments, we
follow Detic (Zhou et al., 2022) to adopt CenterNet2 (Zhou et al., 2021b) with ResNet50 (He et al.,
2016) as backbone. We use large-scale jittering (Ghiasi et al., 2021) and repeat factor sampling as
data augmentation. For the warmup, we increase the learning rate from 0 to 2e-4 for the first 1000
iterations. The model is trained for 10,000 iterations using Adam optimizer with batch size 8. All
expriments are conducted on 4 NVIDIA V100 GPUs. More details can be found in Appendix.

4.3   O PEN -VOCABULARY D ETECTION ON COCO

Table 1 shows the performance of different methods on the open-vocabulary COCO datasets. It
can be seen that our method, when incorporated into multiple existing open-vocabulary detectors,
achieves stable performance improvements consistently. This indicates that introducing alignment
with fine-grained descriptors can effectively enhance the performance of existing open-vocabulary
detectors. The baseline method utilizes the pretrained RPN (Zhong et al., 2022) to extract propos-
als and directly feed them into CLIP for classification. We can observe that CLIP achieves good
accuracy on novel classes, reaffirming its powerful zero-shot capabilities. As a comparison, state-
of-the-art OVOD methods experience sharp accuracy drops while handling objects of novel classes,


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Open-vocabulary object detection on COCO dataset. Including our DVDet improves
the state-of-the-art consistently for both base and novel classes. ‘Baseline’ utilizes the pretrained
RPN (Zhong et al., 2022) to extract proposals and directly feeds them into CLIP for classification.
‘Novel AP’ indicates the zero-shot performance.
          Method                                 Novel AP       Base AP       Overall AP
          Baseline                                  29.7           24.0            25.5
          ViLD (Gu et al., 2021)                    27.6           59.5            51.3
          +DVDet                                    29.3           60.6            52.4
          Detic (Zhou et al., 2022)                 27.8           51.1            44.9
          +DVDet                                    29.5           53.6            47.3
          RegionCLIP (Zhong et al., 2022)           26.8           54.8            47.5
          +DVDet                                    28.4           56.6            49.2
          VLDet (Lin et al., 2023)                  32.0           50.6            45.8
          +DVDet                                    34.6           52.8            48.0
          BARON (Wu et al., 2023)                   33.1           54.8            49.1
          +DVDet                                    35.8           57.0            51.5

Table 2: Open-vocabulary object detection on LVIS dataset using ResNet50 (RN50) (He et al., 2016)
and Swin-B (Liu et al., 2021b) as backbones. ‘Baseline’ utilizes the pretrained RPN (Zhong et al.,
2022) to extract proposals and directly feeds them into CLIP for classification. mAPmask
                                                                                    N ovel indicates
the zero-shot performance.
  Method                             Backbone mAPmask  N ovel mAPc
                                                                    mask
                                                                           mAPmask
                                                                                 f    mAPmask
                                                                                            all
  Baseline                              RN50         11.6         9.6          7.6        9.2
  ViLD (Gu et al., 2021)                RN50         16.6        24.6         30.3       25.5
  +DVDet                                RN50         18.7        25.8         31.6       27.1
  DetPro (Du et al., 2022)              RN50         19.8        25.6         28.9       25.9
  +DVDet                                RN50         21.3        28.2         31.3       28.1
  RegionCLIP (Zhong et al., 2022)       RN50         17.1        27.4         34.0       28.2
  +DVDet                                RN50         19.1        29.2         35.2       29.6
  VLDet (Lin et al., 2023)              RN50         21.7        29.8         34.3       30.1
  +DVDet                                RN50         23.1        31.2         35.4       31.2
  BARON (Wu et al., 2023)               RN50         19.2        26.8         29.4       26.5
  +DVDet                                RN50         21.3        28.7         31.8       28.3
  Detic (Zhou et al., 2022)            Swin-B        23.9        40.2         42.8       38.4
  +DVDet                               Swin-B        25.2        41.4         44.6       40.4
  VLDet (Lin et al., 2023)             Swin-B        26.3        39.4         41.9       38.1
  +DVDet                               Swin-B        27.5        41.8         43.2       40.2

and this applies to various existing OVOD approaches that seek broader cross-modal alignment with
dataset caption annotations (Lin et al., 2023), introduction of classification datasets (Zhou et al.,
2022) and construction of a concept pool (Zhong et al., 2022). The accuracy drop clearly highlights
the necessity of optimizing the classifier in open vocabulary object detectors. By introducing the
alignment with fine-grained textual descriptions of categories, our method serves as a general plugin
that can complement existing open-vocabulary object detectors consistently and effectively.

4.4   O PEN -VOCABULARY D ETECTION ON LVIS

Table 2 shows open-vocabulary detection on LVIS dataset. Similar to the experiments on COCO
dataset, the “Base-only” still performs better on the novel classes. However, its performance gen-
erally falls below state-of-the-art OVOD methods due to the higher complexity of object detection
tasks. Nevertheless, our proposed method complements existing methods consistently, for both
ViLD-type methods and prompt-based methods such as DetPro (Du et al., 2022). This shows that
compared to the current strategies involving prompts in text encoders, our approach serves as an
effective complement. We further examine the generalization of our method by adopting Swin-B as
the backbone. Experiments show that incorporating our method into Detic and VLDet improves the
accuracy by around 1.3% on novel categories consistently.


                                                 7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Orange                         Person                Suitcase                  Backpack


                             hair                                       a zipper closure

       Truck                          Bus                   Chair                     Couch


                    large front windshield                             upholstered long beach

Figure 4: Introducing our fine-grained text descriptors (shown at the bottom of each sample) im-
proves the open-vocabulary detection consistently especially under challenging scenarios with dis-
tant or occluded objects, small inter-class variations, etc. For each of the four sample images, the
red-color class names at the top-left corner of the first image are predictions without our method,
and the green-color class names in the second image are predictions after including our method. The
red/green boxes within the sample images show related detection. Close-up view for details.
Table 3: Ablation studies of our designs in DVDet on the OV-COCO benchmark with VLDet and
RegionCLIP as two base networks. We use two input ‘Templates’ to interact with LLMs to obtain
fine-grained descriptors. ‘Template H’ includes high-frequency descriptors, and ‘Template C’ in-
cludes confusing categories, ‘Prompt’ denotes the proposed conditional context region prompt.
     Fine-grained Descriptors                                VLDet                     RegionCLIP
                                             Prompt
    Template H     Templete C                         mAPnovel   mAPbase          mAPnovel    mAPbase
                                                        32.0       50.6             26.8        54.8
        ✓                ✓                              29.7       48.7             24.6        51.0
                                               ✓        33.1       51.2             27.3        55.2
                         ✓                     ✓        34.0       52.2             28.0        56.2
        ✓                                      ✓        33.8       52.3             27.6        55.9
        ✓                ✓                     ✓        34.6       52.8             28.4        56.6

Visualization. We show how introducing fine-grained descriptors improves the open-vocabulary
detection qualitatively. As Fig. 4 shows, including our design improves the detection significantly
while facing challenging scenarios with distant or occluded objects, small inter-class variations,
etc. With fine-grained descriptors such as hair, zippers, and large glass front windshield, our model
can better align with the text space and enable more accurate recognition and understanding while
handling novel classes. In Fig. 5, we further show how our model progressively aligns targets with
relevant descriptors (e.g., the word ‘school bus’ on the vehicle) of new categories (along the training
process), thereby reducing ambiguity and misclassifications (airplane → car → bus) effectively.
More visualization results can be found in Appendix.
4.5 A BALTION S TUDIES
In this section, we conduct ablation studies on OV-COCO benchmark using VLDet (Lin et al.,
2022a) and RegionCLIP (Zhong et al., 2022) as two base networks, respectively.
Component Analysis. We examine the effectiveness of different components in DVDet on the OV-
COCO benchmark. As Table 3 shows, the contribution of fine-grained categorical descriptors is
compromised clearly at the absence of prompt learning (i.e., Prompt), and this is well aligned with
the statistical data in Fig. 1. In addition, incorporating the prompting with fine-grained descrip-
tors improves the detection performance significantly, substantiating the benefits of fine-grained
descriptors to visual-textual alignment. Besides, we adopt two templates to interact with LLM to
generate fine-grained descriptors. The template using the confusing categories outperforms that us-
ing high-frequency descriptors slightly, largely due to the synergy of the semantic selection with the
frequency-based filtering mechanism that plays a critical role in filtering out irrelevant descriptors
and partially ensures the reliability of the overall descriptor pool in training. Further, DVDet out-
performs other variants consistently, demonstrating the synergy of merging fine-grained descriptors
generated from different templates with prompt learning which enriches the training with a more
comprehensive understanding of object categories.


                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              Table 5: Ablation study on interaction strategies with Knowledge Base (LLMs).
                                                    VLDet                     RegionCLIP
               Interaction Strategy
                                           mAPnovel        mAPbase      mAPmask
                                                                             novel    mAPmask
                                                                                          base
             Static Knowledge Base            33.2            51.9         27.6         55.1
          Interactive Knowledge Base          34.6            52.8         28.4         56.6

    Only Category label                  Combined with Dynamic Category Descriptors Matching

 Airplane                 Car            Car                           Bus                      Bus                      Bus


                                                                                               the words "school bus"   the words "school bus"
                                bumper     rear windshield           a yellow, large vehicle
                                                                                               written on the vehicle   written on the vehicle


Figure 5: Object detection is improved progressively with iterative extraction of fine-grained de-
scriptors from LLMs and matching them with the detected target. Texts at the top-left corner of each
sample show recognized classes, and texts at the bottom show extracted fine-grained descriptors.

Transfer To Other Datasets. To ascertain the Table 4: Transfer to other datasets. We evaluated
generalization of the proposed DVDet, we ap- COCO-trained model on PASCAL VOC (Ever-
ply our COCO-trained model to the test set ingham et al., 2010) test set and LVIS validation
of PASCAL VOC (Everingham et al., 2010) set without re-training. We report mAP at an IoU
and the validation set of LVIS with little ad- of 0.5.
ditional training. This is achieved by utilizing          Method        PASCAL VOC         LVIS
the context conditional prompts from the OV-              VLDet               61.7         10.0
COCO and modifying the class embeddings of               +DVDet               64.0         12.1
the classifier head accordingly. PASCAL VOC            RegionCLIP             46.9          6.1
contains 20 object categories including 9 absent         +DVDet               48.2          7.8
in COCO, thereby presenting a notable chal-
lenge while transferring models without aids from any supplementary training images, not to men-
tion the inherent domain gap. LVIS dataset boasts a substantial catalogue of 1203 object categories,
vastly exceeding the label space in COCO. Despite these challenges, DVDet demonstrates remark-
able effectiveness across diverse image domains and language vocabularies, as evidenced by 2.3%
and 2.1% improvements on the two new datasets as shown in Table 4. It should be highlighted
that though many LVIS category names are absent in COCO, DVDet succeeds in learning close
descriptors and thereby facilitating a smoother transition while adapting to the LVIS benchmark.
Effectiveness of Interactive Knowledge Base. The successful creation of fine-grained descriptors
depends on iterative interaction with LLMs in training. We validate this by comparing it with a one-
time interaction, where LLMs act like a static knowledge base. Specifically, we employ confident
samples from CAF (Menon & Vondrick, 2023) to obtain visual-related fine-grained descriptors. As
Table 5 shows, the iterative interaction (34.6 AP and 28.4 AP for novel classes) outperforms the
static method (33.2 AP and 27.6 AP) clearly. This reconfirms that the dynamic interaction allows
LLMs to better understand the detector’s requirements, offering more trustworthy descriptors.

5      C ONCLUSIONS
This paper presents DVDet, an innovative open vocabulary detection approach that introduces fine-
grained descriptor for better region-text alignment and open-vocabulary detection. DVDet consists
of two key designs. The first is Conditional Context regional Prompt (CCP), which ingeniously
transforms region embeddings into image-like representations by merging contextual background
information, enabling CCP to be seamlessly integrated into open vocabulary detection with little ex-
tra designs. The second is a hierarchical descriptor generation that iteratively interacts with LLMs to
mine and refine fine-grained descriptors according to their performance in prompt training. Without
any resource-intensive grounding annotations, DVDet coordinates LLMs-assisted descriptor gener-
ation and VLM-guided prompt training effectively. Extensive experiments show that DVDet im-
proves the performance of existing open vocabulary detectors consistently. Moving forwards, we
plan to investigate the synergy between powerful foundational models including LLMs and VLMs,
for various open vocabulary dense prediction tasks.


                                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


6   ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This study is supported under the RIE2020 Industry Alignment Fund – Industry Collaboration
Projects (IAF-ICP) Funding Initiative, as well as cash and in-kind contributions from the industry
partner(s).

R EFERENCES
Hyojin Bahng, Ali Jahanian, Swami Sankaranarayanan, and Phillip Isola. Exploring visual prompts
  for adapting large-scale models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.17274, 2022a.
Hyojin Bahng, Ali Jahanian, Swami Sankaranarayanan, and Phillip Isola. Visual prompting: Modi-
  fying pixel space to adapt pre-trained models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.17274, 3:11–12, 2022b.
Hanoona Bangalath, Muhammad Maaz, Muhammad Uzair Khattak, Salman H Khan, and Fahad
  Shahbaz Khan. Bridging the gap between object and image-level representations for open-
  vocabulary detection. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:33781–33794,
  2022.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Zhaowei Cai, Gukyeong Kwon, Avinash Ravichandran, Erhan Bas, Zhuowen Tu, Rahul Bhotika,
  and Stefano Soatto. X-detr: A versatile architecture for instance-wise vision-language tasks.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05626, 2022.
Yu Du, Fangyun Wei, Zihe Zhang, Miaojing Shi, Yue Gao, and Guoqi Li. Learning to prompt for
  open-vocabulary object detection with vision-language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.14940,
  2022.
Mark Everingham, Luc Van Gool, Christopher KI Williams, John Winn, and Andrew Zisserman.
 The pascal visual object classes (voc) challenge. International journal of computer vision, 88(2):
 303–338, 2010.
Chengjian Feng, Yujie Zhong, Zequn Jie, Xiangxiang Chu, Haibing Ren, Xiaolin Wei, Weidi Xie,
  and Lin Ma. Promptdet: Towards open-vocabulary detection using uncurated images. In Euro-
  pean Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 701–717. Springer, 2022.
Golnaz Ghiasi, Yin Cui, Aravind Srinivas, Rui Qian, Tsung-Yi Lin, Ekin D Cubuk, Quoc V Le, and
  Barret Zoph. Simple copy-paste is a strong data augmentation method for instance segmentation.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  2918–2928, 2021.
Xiuye Gu, Tsung-Yi Lin, Weicheng Kuo, and Yin Cui. Open-vocabulary object detection via vision
  and language knowledge distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.13921, 2021.
Agrim Gupta, Piotr Dollar, and Ross Girshick. Lvis: A dataset for large vocabulary instance segmen-
  tation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 5356–5364, 2019.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.
Dat Huynh, Jason Kuen, Zhe Lin, Jiuxiang Gu, and Ehsan Elhamifar. Open-vocabulary instance
  segmentation via robust cross-modal pseudo-labeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.12698, 2021.
Chao Jia, Yinfei Yang, Ye Xia, Yi-Ting Chen, Zarana Parekh, Hieu Pham, Quoc Le, Yun-Hsuan
  Sung, Zhen Li, and Tom Duerig. Scaling up visual and vision-language representation learning
  with noisy text supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4904–4916.
  PMLR, 2021.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Menglin Jia, Luming Tang, Bor-Chun Chen, Claire Cardie, Serge Belongie, Bharath Hariharan, and
 Ser-Nam Lim. Visual prompt tuning. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 709–727.
 Springer, 2022.
Chen Ju, Tengda Han, Kunhao Zheng, Ya Zhang, and Weidi Xie. Prompting visual-language models
  for efficient video understanding. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 105–124.
  Springer, 2022.
Aishwarya Kamath, Mannat Singh, Yann LeCun, Gabriel Synnaeve, Ishan Misra, and Nicolas Car-
  ion. Mdetr-modulated detection for end-to-end multi-modal understanding. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 1780–1790, 2021.
Liunian Harold Li, Pengchuan Zhang, Haotian Zhang, Jianwei Yang, Chunyuan Li, Yiwu Zhong,
  Lijuan Wang, Lu Yuan, Lei Zhang, Jenq-Neng Hwang, et al. Grounded language-image pre-
  training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.03857, 2021.
Xiang Lisa Li and Percy Liang. Prefix-tuning: Optimizing continuous prompts for generation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2101.00190, 2021.
Chuang Lin, Peize Sun, Yi Jiang, Ping Luo, Lizhen Qu, Gholamreza Haffari, Zehuan Yuan, and
  Jianfei Cai. Learning object-language alignments for open-vocabulary object detection. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2211.14843, 2022a.
Chuang Lin, Peize Sun, Yi Jiang, Ping Luo, Lizhen Qu, Gholamreza Haffari, Zehuan Yuan, and
  Jianfei Cai. Learning object-language alignments for open-vocabulary object detection. ICLR,
  2023.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. 2014.
Ziyi Lin, Shijie Geng, Renrui Zhang, Peng Gao, Gerard de Melo, Xiaogang Wang, Jifeng Dai,
  Yu Qiao, and Hongsheng Li. Frozen clip models are efficient video learners. In European Con-
  ference on Computer Vision, pp. 388–404. Springer, 2022b.
Xiao Liu, Kaixuan Ji, Yicheng Fu, Weng Lam Tam, Zhengxiao Du, Zhilin Yang, and Jie Tang. P-
  tuning v2: Prompt tuning can be comparable to fine-tuning universally across scales and tasks.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.07602, 2021a.
Ze Liu, Yutong Lin, Yue Cao, Han Hu, Yixuan Wei, Zheng Zhang, Stephen Lin, and Baining Guo.
  Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 10012–10022, 2021b.
Zongyang Ma, Guan Luo, Jin Gao, Liang Li, Yuxin Chen, Shaoru Wang, Congxuan Zhang, and
  Weiming Hu. Open-vocabulary one-stage detection with hierarchical visual-language knowledge
  distillation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
  nition, pp. 14074–14083, 2022.
Sachit Menon and Carl Vondrick. Visual classification via description from large language models.
  ICLR, 2023.
Matthias Minderer, Alexey Gritsenko, Austin Stone, Maxim Neumann, Dirk Weissenborn, Alexey
 Dosovitskiy, Aravindh Mahendran, Anurag Arnab, Mostafa Dehghani, Zhuoran Shen, et al. Sim-
 ple open-vocabulary object detection with vision transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.06230,
 2022.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Yongming Rao, Wenliang Zhao, Guangyi Chen, Yansong Tang, Zheng Zhu, Guan Huang, Jie Zhou,
  and Jiwen Lu. Denseclip: Language-guided dense prediction with context-aware prompting.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.01518, 2021.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Shaoqing Ren, Kaiming He, Ross Girshick, and Jian Sun. Faster r-cnn: Towards real-time object
  detection with region proposal networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  pp. 91–99, 2015.
Size Wu, Wenwei Zhang, Sheng Jin, Wentao Liu, and Chen Change Loy. Aligning bag of regions
  for open-vocabulary object detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 15254–15264, 2023.
Jiahui Yu, Zirui Wang, Vijay Vasudevan, Legg Yeung, Mojtaba Seyedhosseini, and Yonghui
   Wu.    Coca: Contrastive captioners are image-text foundation models. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2205.01917, 2022.
Lu Yuan, Dongdong Chen, Yi-Ling Chen, Noel Codella, Xiyang Dai, Jianfeng Gao, Houdong Hu,
  Xuedong Huang, Boxin Li, Chunyuan Li, et al. Florence: A new foundation model for computer
  vision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.11432, 2021.
Alireza Zareian, Kevin Dela Rosa, Derek Hao Hu, and Shih-Fu Chang. Open-vocabulary object
  detection using captions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 14393–14402, 2021.
Xiaohua Zhai, Xiao Wang, Basil Mustafa, Andreas Steiner, Daniel Keysers, Alexander Kolesnikov,
  and Lucas Beyer. Lit: Zero-shot transfer with locked-image text tuning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2111.07991, 2021.
Renrui Zhang, Xiangfei Hu, Bohao Li, Siyuan Huang, Hanqiu Deng, Yu Qiao, Peng Gao, and
  Hongsheng Li. Prompt, generate, then cache: Cascade of foundation models makes strong few-
  shot learners. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 15211–15222, 2023.
Yiwu Zhong, Jianwei Yang, Pengchuan Zhang, Chunyuan Li, Noel Codella, Liunian Harold Li,
  Luowei Zhou, Xiyang Dai, Lu Yuan, Yin Li, et al. Regionclip: Region-based language-image
  pretraining. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
  nition, pp. 16793–16803, 2022.
Chong Zhou, Chen Change Loy, and Bo Dai. Denseclip: Extract free dense labels from clip. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2112.01071, 2021a.
Xingyi Zhou, Vladlen Koltun, and Philipp Krähenbühl. Probabilistic two-stage detection. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2103.07461, 2021b.
Xingyi Zhou, Rohit Girdhar, Armand Joulin, Phillip Krähenbühl, and Ishan Misra. Detecting
  twenty-thousand classes using image-level supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.02605, 2022.


                                               12
