Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         S CALING S AFE L EARNING - BASED C ONTROL
            TO L ONG -H ORIZON T EMPORAL TASKS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         This paper introduces a model-based approach for training parameterized policies
         for an autonomous agent operating in a highly nonlinear (albeit deterministic)
         environment. We desire the trained policy to ensure that the agent satisfies specific
         task objectives and safety constraints, both expressed in Signal Temporal Logic.
         We assert that this learning problem is similar to training recurrent neural networks
         (RNNs), where the number of recurrent units is proportional to the temporal horizon
         of the agent’s task objectives. This poses a challenge: RNNs are susceptible to
         vanishing and exploding gradients, and naïve gradient descent-based strategies
         to solve long-horizon task objectives thus suffer from the same problems. To
         tackle this challenge, we introduce a novel gradient approximation algorithm
         based on the idea of gradient sampling, and a smooth computation graph that
         provides a neurosymblic encoding of STL formulas. We show that these two
         methods combined improve the quality of the stochastic gradient, enabling scalable
         backpropagation over long time horizon trajectories. We demonstrate the efficacy
         of our approach on various motion planning applications requiring complex spatio-
         temporal and sequential tasks ranging over thousands of time steps.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Learning-based approaches to synthesize control policies for highly nonlinear dynamical systems
are prevalent across diverse domains, from autonomous vehicles to robots. Popular ways to train
NN-based controllers include deep reinforcement learning (RL)(Berducci et al., 2021; Li et al., 2017;
Chua et al., 2018; Srinivasan et al., 2020; Velasquez et al., 2021) and deep imitation learning (Fang
et al., 2019). Techniques to synthesize neural controllers (including deep RL methods) largely focus
on optimizing user-defined rewards or costs, but do not directly address specific spatio-temporal
task objectives. For example, consider the objective that the system must reach region R1 before
reaching region R2 , while avoiding an obstacle region. Such spatio-temporal task objectives can be
expressed in the formalism of Signal Temporal Logic (STL) (Maler & Nickovic, 2004). Furthermore,
for any STL specification and a system trajectory, we can efficiently compute the robustness degree,
or the approximate signed distance of the trajectory from the set of trajectories satisfying/violating
the specification (Donzé & Maler, 2010; Fainekos et al., 2009).
The use of STL-based objectives has seen considerable recent interest in data-driven methods
for training controllers for dynamical systems that can be described by (stochastic) difference
equations. This literature brings together two separate threads: (1) smooth approximations to the
robustness degree of STL specifications (Gilpin et al., 2020; Pant et al., 2017) enabling the use of
STL robustness in gradient-based learning of control policies, and (2) efficient representation of
the robustness computation allowing its use in training neural controllers using backpropagation
(Yaghoubi & Fainekos, 2019; Leung et al., 2019; 2021; Hashemi et al., 2023; Hashemi et al.). We are
inspired by the work in (Hashemi et al., 2023) that proposes a ReLU-based neural network encoding
(called STL2NN) to exactly encode the STL robustness degree computation. We show how we can
extend this computation graph to obtain smooth underapproximations of the STL robustness degree.
Backpropagation-based methods typically treat the one-step environment dynamics and the neural
controller as a recurrent unit that is then unrolled as many times as required by the temporal horizon
of the specification φ. For instance, if enforcing φ requires reasoning over several hundred time-steps,
then it involves training a recurrent structure that resembles RNN with hundreds of recurrent units. It
is well-known that training of RNNs over long sequences faces problems of exploding and vanishing


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


gradients (Goodfellow et al., 2016; Ba et al., 2016). To address this, we propose a sampling-based
approximation of the gradient of the objective function (i.e. the STL property), that is particularly
effective when dealing with behaviors over large time-horizons. Our method can improve training of
NN controllers by at least an order of magnitude, i.e., in some cases, we reduce training times from
hours to minutes. Several planning problems require finding optimal paths over long time-horizons.
For example, consider the problem of planning the trajectory of a UAV in a complex, GPS-denied
urban environment; here, it is essential that the planned trajectory span several minutes while avoiding
obstacles and reaching several sequential goals (Windhorst et al., 2021).
Contributions. To summarize, we make the following contributions:
1. We propose smooth versions of computation graphs representing the robustness degree computa-
   tion of an STL specification over the trajectory of a dynamical system. Our computation graph
   guarantees that it lower bounds the robustness degree with a tunable degree of approximation.
2. We develop a backpropagation framework which leverages the new differentiable structure, and
   we show how we can handle STL specifications.
3. We develop a sampling-based approach to approximate the gradient of STL robustness w.r.t. the
   NN controller parameters. Emphasizing the time steps that contribute the most to the gradient,
   our method randomly samples time points over the trajectory. We utilize the structure of the
   STL formula and the current system trajectory to decide which time-points represent critical
   information for the gradient.
4. We demonstrate the efficacy of our approach on high dimensional nonlinear dynamical systems
   involving long-horizon and dynamic temporal specifications.

Related Work. The use of temporal logic specifications for controller synthesis is a well-studied
problem. Early work focuses on the model-based setting, where the environment dynamics are
described either as Markov decision processes (Sadigh & Kapoor, 2016; Haesaert et al., 2018)
or as differential equations (Gilpin et al., 2020; Pant et al., 2018; Raman et al., 2014; Farahani
et al., 2015; Lindemann & Dimarogonas, 2018; Raman et al., 2015; Kalagarla et al., 2020; Lacerda
et al., 2015; Guo & Zavlanos, 2018)). Recent years have also seen growing interest in data-driven
techniques (Balakrishnan et al., 2022; Li et al., 2018) for control synthesis. In addition, automata-
based approaches (Sadigh et al., 2014; Hasanbeig et al., 2018; Hahn et al., 2020; Lavaei et al.,
2020) are also proposed in the field to address temporal logic based objectives. In (Liu et al.,
2021), the authors propose an imitation learning framework where a Model-Predictive Controller
(MPC) guaranteed to satisfy an STL specification is used as a teacher to train a recurrent neural
network (RNN). In (Wang et al., 2023; Balakrishnan & Deshmukh, 2019), the authors replace
handcrafted reward functions with the STL robustness within single-agent or multi-agent deep RL
frameworks. The overall approach of this paper is the closest to the work in (Yaghoubi & Fainekos,
2019; Leung et al., 2019; 2021; Hashemi et al., 2023; Hashemi et al.), where STL robustness is used
in conjunction with backpropagation to train controllers. The work in this paper makes significant
strides in extending previous approaches to handle very long horizon temporal tasks, crucially enabled
by the novel sampling-based gradient approximations. Due to the structure of our NN-controlled
system, we can seamlessly handle time-varying dynamics and complex temporal dependencies.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Sec. 2, we introduce the notation and the problem
definition. We propose our learning-based control synthesis algorithms in Sec. 3, present experimental
evaluation in Sec. 4, and conclude in Sec. 5



2    P RELIMINARIES

We use bold letters to indicate vectors and vector-valued functions, and calligraphic letters to denote
sets. We denote the set, {1, 2, · · · , n} with [n]. A feed forward neural network (NN) with ℓ hidden
layers is denoted by the array [n0 , n1 , · · · nℓ+1 ], where n0 denotes the number of inputs, nℓ+1 is the
number of outputs and for all i ∈ [ℓ], ni denotes the width of ith hidden layer.
Neural Network Controlled Dynamical Systems (NNCS). Let s ∈ Rn and a ∈ Rm denote the
state and action variables that take values from compact sets S ⊆ Rn and C ⊆ Rm , respectively. We
use sk (resp. ak ) to denote the value of the state (resp. action) at time k. We define a neural network


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


controlled system (NNCS) as a recurrent difference equation.
                                                 sk+1 = f (sk , ak ).                                         (1)
We assume that the control policy is a parameterized function πθ , where θ is a vector of parameters
that takes values in Θ. Later in the paper, we instantiate the specific parametric form using a neural
network for the controller. Given a fixed vector of parameters θ, the parametric control policy πθ
returns an action ak as a function of the current state sk ∈ S and time k ∈ Z≥0 , or ak = πθ (sk , k).
Closed-loop Model Trajectory. For a discrete-time NNCS as shown in equation 1, and a set of
designated initial states I ⊆ S, under a pre-defined feedback policy πθ , equation 1 represents an
autonomous discrete-time dynamical system. For a given initial state s0 ∈ I, a system trajectory σsθ0
is a function mapping time instants in [0, K] to S, where σsθ0 (0) = s0 , and for all k ∈ [0, K − 1],
σsθ0 (k + 1) = f (sk , πθ (sk , k))1 . The computation graph for this trajectory is a recurrent structure.
Appendix K shows an illustration of this structure and its similarity to RNN. In this paper, we provide
algorithms to learn a policy πθ⋆ that maximizes the degree to which certain task objectives and safety
constraints are satisfied. To that end, we formulate policy learning as an optimization problem.

Task Objectives and Safety Constraints. We assume that task objectives or safety constraints of the
system are specified in a temporal logic known as Signal Temporal Logic (STL)(Maler & Nickovic,
2004). Our STL formulas are defined using the following syntax:
                        φ = h(s) ▷◁ 0 | φ1 ∧ φ2 | φ1 ∨ φ2 | FI φ | GI φ | φ1 UI φ2                            (2)
that are limited to positive normal form logical expressions. Here, ▷◁∈ {≤, <, >, ≥}, h is a function
from S to R, and I is a closed interval [a, b] ⊆ [0, K]. The formal semantics of STL over discrete-
time trajectories have been previously discussed in (Fainekos & Pappas, 2006), we briefly recall them
here.

Boolean Semantics and Formula Horizon. We denote the formula φ being true at time k in trajectory
σsθ0 by σsθ0 , k |= φ. We say that σsθ0 , k |= h(s) ▷◁ 0 iff h(σsθ0 (k)) ▷◁ 0. The semantics of the Boolean
operations (∧, ∨) follow standard logical semantics of conjunctions and disjunctions, respectively.
For temporal operators, we say σsθ0 , k |= FI φ is true if there is a time k ′ that k ′ − k ∈ I where
φ is true. Similarly, σsθ0 , k |= GI φ is true iff φ is true for all k ′ where k ′ − k ∈ I. In addition,
σsθ0 , k |= φ1 UI φ2 if there is a time, k ′ , k ′−k ∈ I where φ2 is true and for all times k ′′ ∈ [k, k ′ ) φ1 is
true. The temporal scope or horizon of an STL formula defines the number of time-steps required in a
trajectory to evaluate the formula, σsθ0 , 0 |= φ (Maler & Nickovic, 2004). For example, the temporal
scope of the formula F[0,3] (x > 0) is 3, and that of the formula F[0,3] G[0,9] (x > 0) is 3 + 9 = 12.

Quantitative Semantics (Robustness value) of STL. Quantitative semantics of STL roughly define
a signed distance of a given trajectory from the set of trajectories satisfying or violating the given
STL formula. There are many alternative semantics proposed in the literature (Donzé & Maler,
2010; Fainekos & Pappas, 2006; Rodionova et al., 2022; Akazaki & Hasuo, 2015); in this paper, we
focus on the semantics from (Donzé & Maler, 2010) that are shown below. The robustness value
ρ(φ, σsθ0 , k) of an STL formula φ over a trajectory σsθ0 at time k is defined recursively as follows2 .

   φ                ρ(φ, k)                           φ                 ρ(φ, k)
   h(sk ) ≥ 0       h(sk )                            F[a,b] ψ          maxk′ ∈[k+a,k+b]
                                                                                  ρ(ψ, k)
   φ1 ∧ φ2          min(ρ(φ1 , k), ρ(φ2 , k))                                         ρ(φ2 , k ′ ),
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                              (3)
   φ1 ∨ φ2          max(ρ(φ1 , k), ρ(φ2 , k))                                                       ′′
                                                      φ1 U[a,b] φ2       max    minmin ′′
                                                                                            ρ(φ1 , k )
   G[a,b] ψ            min      ρ(ψ, k)                                    ′
                                                                           k ∈           k ∈
                     ′
                    k ∈[k+a,k+b]                                        [k+a,k+b]       [k,k′ )


We note that if ρ(φ, k) > 0 the STL formula φ is satisfied at time k, and we say that the formula φ is
satisfied by a trajectory if ρ(φ, 0) > 0.

STL Robustness as a ReLU NN. The quantitative semantics in equation 3 contains min/max operators;
this makes the robustness of an STL formula difficult to be used in gradient-based methods for learning.
   1
       If the policy πθ is obvious from the context, we drop the θ in the notation σsθ0 .
   2
       For brevity, we omit the trajectory from the notation, as it is obvious from the context.


                                                          3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


However, min / max operators in equation 3 can be expressed using ReLU functions as follows:
            min(a1 , a2 ) = a1 − ReLU(a1 − a2 ),              max(a1 , a2 ) = a2 + ReLU(a1 − a2 ).                (4)
This allows the computation graph representing the robustness of an STL formula w.r.t. a given
trajectory to be expressed using repeated application of the ReLU function (with due diligence
in balancing min, max computations over several arguments into a tree of at most logarithmic
height in the number of operands). We call this ReLU-based computation graph as STL2NN. The
STL2NN, despite being reformulated with ReLU, is essentially equivalent to non-smooth robustness
in equation 3, making it unsuitable for back-propagation. To address this, smooth activations are
introduced to create a differentiable computation graph.

3     T RAINING N EURAL N ETWORK C ONTROL P OLICIES

Problem Definition.: We wish to learn a neural network (NN) control policy πθ (or equivalently
the parameter values θ), s.t. for any initial state s0 ∈ I 3 , using the control policy πθ , the trajectory
obtained, i.e., σsθ0 satisfies a given STL formula φ.
Our solution strategy is to treat each time-step of the given dynamical equation in equation 1 as a
recurrent unit. We then sequentially compose or unroll as many units as required by the horizon of
the STL specification. For instance, if the specification is F[0,10] (x > 0), then, we use 10 instances
of f (sk , πθ (sk )) by setting the output of the k th unit to be the input of the (k + 1)th unit. This
unrolled structure implicitly contains the system trajectory, σsθ0 starting from some initial state s0 of
the system. The unrolled structure essentially represents the symbolic trajectory, where each recurrent
unit shares the NN parameters of the controller (see Appendix K for more detail). By composing
this structure with the neural network representing the given STL specification φ; for instance, the
STL2NN computation graph introduced in the previous section, we have a NN that maps the initial
state of the system in equation 1 to the robustness degree of φ. Thus, training the parameters of this
resulting NN to guarantee that its output is positive (for all initial states) guarantees that each system
trajectory satisfies φ. However, we face two main challenges in training such a NN.
Challenge 1: The cost function to be optimized is the output of the STL2NN computation graph.
As mentioned earlier, as this is identical to the non-smooth robustness proposed in equation 3, we
cannot use it effectively with stochastic optimization frameworks. An obvious step is to approximate
STL2NN by a smooth function. We represent this function as STL2LB and leverage it for computing
the gradients of the robustness function. It is important for STL2LB to lower bound STL2NN; if we
find NN parameters that guarantee a positive output of STL2LB for all possible system trajectories,
then it guarantees that the system satisfies the given STL objective.
Challenge 2: As our model can be thought of as a recurrent structure with number of repeated units
proportional to the horizon of the formula, naïve gradient-based training algorithms are applicable to
only short time horizons. As our structure is recurrent, the gradient computation faces the same issues
of vanishing and exploding gradients when dealing with long trajectories that RNNs may face in
training (Pascanu et al., 2013). We introduce an efficient technique to approximate gradients for long
trajectories that is inspired by the idea of Drop-out (Srivastava et al., 2014). This popular technique
also suggests us calling this approximate gradient as robust gradient.

3.1    S MOOTH , GUARANTEED LOWER BOUND FOR STL2NN

To guarantee a smooth lower bound for STL2NN, we replace ReLU activations in the min operation
with the softplus activation function defined as:
                                              1
                         softplus(a1 − a2 ) = log 1 + eb(a1 −a2 ) , b > 0.
                                              b
Similarly we replace the ReLU activation functions contributing in max operation with the swish
activation function:
                                                    a1 − a2
                              swish(a1 − a2 ) =                   , b > 0.
                                                 1 + e−b(a1 −a2 )
    3
      In the context of neural network training we satisfy this condition considering a set of sampled initial states,
but we verify our trained NN for all the initial states through formal verification techniques.


                                                          4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We denote this smooth NN with STL2LB and we claim: (see Appendix J for more detail)
                    ∀(σs0 , b) ∈ RnK × R : STL2LB(σs0 ; b) ≤ STL2NN(σs0 )
We note that replacing the min and max operators with smooth versions is, by itself, not novel.
Several prior studies have explored smooth semantics for STL (Gilpin et al., 2020; Pant et al., 2017).
For example, consider the smooth max and min introduced in (Gilpin et al., 2020; Pant et al., 2017;
Liu et al., 2021; Leung et al., 2019; Lindemann & Dimarogonas, 2018):
                                        ℓ
                                                 !                           ℓ
                               1       X
                                             bai
                                                                           X      ai ebai
          g 1 , · · · , aℓ ) = log
         max(a                             e          g 1 , · · · , aℓ ) =
                                                   or max(a                     Pℓ          .      (5)
                               b       i=1                                 i=1    i=1 e
                                                                                        bai
                               |      {z         }                         |     {z       }
                                              Logexpsum                                  Boltzmann
    g 1 , · · · , aℓ ) = −max(−a
and min(a                 g     1 , · · · , −aℓ ).

An issue with using any kind of smooth approximation is that numerical issues can be caused by the
presence of large positive exponents. Here, we explain this with an example.
Example 1. Let a1 = 0, and a2 = 80, and suppose we wish to perform a smooth approximation of
max(a1 , a2 ) with Logexpsum, Boltzmann and swish operators. Let the parameter b = 10. Then we
can see that computing exp(ba2 ) and exp(−b(a1 − a2 )) causes numerical issues. On the other hand,
for a1 = 80, a2 = 0 the softplus operator may also fail.                                        □
Hence, to resolve the computation problem, we can define a threshold τ > 0 large enough and
approximate swish and softplus activation functions as:

     ]              swish(ζ) if ζ > −τ /b               ^             ζ              if ζ > τ /b
    swish(ζ) =                                  ,     softplus(ζ) =
                    0              if ζ < −τ /b                       softplus(ζ) if ζ < τ /b,
where ζ = a1 − a2 . It is important to note that such a technique cannot be performed for smoothing
using Logexpsum or Boltzmann-style operators and is exclusively applicable on STL2LB. By
selecting τ large enough, we can maintain the differentiability of operators, at least to the accuracy
level of existing computation tools. To avoid the shortcomings of Logexpsum and Boltzmann-style
approximations, we use softplus (with the above modifications) and the swish function as activations.
Lemma 1. For any formula φ belonging to STL in positive normal form, and b > 0, for a given
trajectory σs0 = s0 , s1 , . . . , sK , if STL2LB(σs0 ; b) > 0, then σs0 |= φ, where STL2LB is a
computation graph for STL robustness degree but with the modified softplus activation instead of
min and the modified swish activation instead of max.
See Appendix J for proof. The main contributions of STL2LB comparing to the existing smooth
robustness formula (Gilpin et al., 2020; Pant et al., 2017) can be summarized as follows:
 • Example 1 shows that STL2LB provides convenience for computation.
 • Lemma 1 indicates that, like (Gilpin et al., 2020), it is also a guaranteed smooth lower-bound for
   robustness function, thus, can be considered as a control barrier function.

3.2     T RAINING WITH STL2LB
                                                            Algorithm 1: Neurosymbolic policy learning
In order to train the controller for all ini-                       b θ0 , b, φ, ρ̄
                                                          1 Input: I,
tial states, s0 ∈ I we solve the following                2 j ← 0
optimization problem:
                                                                                θj
                                                          3 while   min ρ(φ, σs0 , 0) < ρ̄ do
  θ∗ = arg max Es0 ∼I     ρ(φ, σsθ0 , 0) ,

                      u                                              s0 ∈I
                                                                         b
             θ
                                                          4       s0 ← Sample from Ib
      s.t. σsθ0 (k + 1) =                                 5
                                                                     j
                                                                  σsθ0 ← Simulate using policy πθj
        f σsθ0 (k), πθ σsθ0 (k), k
                                                                                    j           j
                                          .               6       d ← ∇θ STL2LB(σsθo ) using σsθo
that aims to increase the expectation of the 7                    θj+1 ← θj + Adam(d)
robustness for initial states uniformly sam- 8                    j ←j+1
pled from the set of initial states. Solving
this optimization problem is equivalent to training the NN controller using a gradient-based algorithm
(shown in Alg. 1). However we terminate the algorithm once the robustness is above a pre-specified
lower threshold ρ̄. We also generate a population of samples from the set of initial states of the
system, i.e. I, for training purposes and denote this set by I.
                                                             b


                                                              5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.3   E XTENSION TO L ONG H ORIZON T EMPORAL TASKS & H IGHER D IMENSIONAL S YSTEMS

When dealing with long time-horizon trajectories or high dimensional models, considering the
                                                j
entire trajectory to compute ∇θ STL2LB(σsθ0 ) in Alg. 1, becomes computationally impractical as
it either approaches zero (vanishes) or diverges (explodes) due to the high number of steps in the
trajectory σs0 . To alleviate this, inspired by the well-known idea of Drop-out (Srivastava et al.,
2014) for backpropagation, we propose a sampling-based gradient approximation technique that
prevents the gradient to explode/vanish and is also known to provide a robust training process. The
basic idea in sampling-based technique is to only select certain time-points in the trajectory for
gradient computation, while using a fixed older control policy at the non-selected points. In order to
select time points, a naïve strategy is to choose time-points randomly. However, in our preliminary
results, exploiting the structure of the given STL formula – specifically identifying and using critical
predicates – gives superior results compared to random sampling.
Definition 1 (Critical Predicate). As the robustness degree of STL is an expression consisting of min
and max of robustness values of predicates at different times, the robustness degree is consistently
equivalent to the robustness of one of the predicates h(·) at a specific time. This specific predicate h∗
is called the critical predicate, and this specific time k ∗ is called the critical time.

A difficulty in using critical predicates is that a change in controller parameter values may change
the system trajectory, which may in turn change the predicate that is critical for its robustness value.
Specifically, if the critical predicate in one gradient step is different from the critical predicate in the
subsequent gradient step, our gradient ascent strategy fails to augment the robustness value, since it
only results in the elevation of that specific critical predicate’s value. The incorrect gradient generated
in this gradient step can lead to failure in the training process, as it may abruptly reduce the robustness
value drastically.
Given a predefined specification φ, Fig. 1 shows
the non-differentiable points in robustness as
a function of control parameters, with each
smooth segment corresponding to a distinct crit-
ical predicate. In order to optimize robustness
within these smooth partitions, stochastic opti-
mizers like Adam can be employed effectively.           Figure 1: Shows a demonstration for the func-
However, it is essential to note that the Adam          tionality of non-differentiable robustness function
optimizer’s applicability is confined to differen-     with respect to the control parameters. Assuming a
tiable points. To overcome this challenge, we           fixed initial state, every control parameter is corre-
employ a technique which utilizes STL2LB to             sponding to a simulated trajectory, and that trajec-
re-smooth the problem at the non-differentiable         tory represents a robustness value. This robustness
local maxima. However, it is practically impos-         value is equal to the quantitative semantics for
sible to accurately detect the non-differentiable       the critical predicate. In every single smooth part
local maxima, thus we take a more conservative          of this plot, the control parameters are offering a
                                                        unique critical predicate.
approach and shift the training approach to uti-
lize STL2LB at every gradient step where the critical predicate technique is unable to improve the
robustness. The rest of this section presents a detailed explanation for each module in our training
algorithm, and Alg. 2 encapsulates these modules within a unified training process. In this algorithm,
we use ρφ (σsθ0 ) as shorthand for the robustness degree of σsθ0 w.r.t. φ at time 0. A detailed explanation
for Alg. 2 is also provided in Appendix A.

Sampling-based gradient approximation technique. This technique is based on sampling across
recurrent units and is originally inspired by the popular idea of Drop-out proposed in (Srivastava et al.,
2014). Considering the NN controllers rolled out over the trajectory, the idea of Drop-out suggests
removing the randomly selected nodes from a randomly selected NN controller over the trajectory.
This requires the node to be absent in both forward-pass and backward-pass in backpropagation
algorithm. However, our primary goal is to alleviate the problem of vanishing and exploding gradients.
Thus, we propose to sample random time steps and select all of its controller nodes to apply Drop-
out. However, for long trajectories we need to drop out a large portion of time steps that result in
inaccurate approximation, thus we compensate for this by repeating this process and computing for
accumulative gradients (See parameters N1 , N2 in Alg. 2). Restriction of Drop-out to sample time
steps results in less number of self multiplication of weights and therefore alleviates the problem of


                                                      6
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     vanishing/exploding gradient. However, this may result in disconnection between the trajectory states
     and thus we need to apply modifications to this strategy. To that end, we drop out the selected nodes
     but we also replace that group of selected nodes ( controller unit) with its evaluation in forward pass.
     This strategy motivates us to define the sampled trajectory as proposed in definition 2.
     Definition 2 (Sampled Trajectory). Consider the set of time steps T = {0, t1 , t2 , · · · , tN } sampled
     from the horizon K = {0, 1, 2, · · · , K}, and the control parameters θj in the gradient step j. The
                            j                                        j             j
     sampled trajectory σ̃sθ0 ,T is a subset of trajectory states σsθ0 , where σ̃sθ0 ,T (0) = s0 and,
                                                        j                                           j
                     ∀i ∈ {0, 1, · · · , N } :       σ̃sθ0 ,T (i + 1) = fij (σ̃sθ0 ,T (i), πθj (σ̃sθ0 ,T (i), ti )).

     Given the pre-computed constants a1+ti , a2+ti , · · · ati+1 −1 using θj in the gradient step j, the
     dynamics model fij is defined as: fij (s, a) = f (f (· · · (f (s, a), a1+ti ), a2+ti ), · · · , ati+1 −1 ).
     Algorithm 2: Gradient-direction approximation algo-                        Figure 2 in Appendix A makes this def-
     rithm for training the controller for long horizon tasks.                  inition more clear through visualization.
1    Input: ϵ, M, N, N1 , N2 , θ0 , φ, ρ̄, I,
                                           b j=0                                This definition applies the idea of Drop-
2
                 j
  while ρφ (σsθ0 ) ≤ ρ̄ do                                                      out that is also equipped with our modifi-
3     s0 ← Sample from I         b                                              cation to replace the set of selected nodes
4     use_STL2LB ← False; j ← j + 1                                             on a randomly selected time step with its
5     if use_STL2LB = False then                                                pre-computed output in the forward pass
6          θ1 , θ 2 ← θ j                                                       for original trajectory. This set of nodes
7          for i ← 1, · · · , N1 do                                             are indeed a controller unit on the sam-
                    j
8                σsθ0 , k∗ , h∗ (sk∗ ) ← Simulate trajectory,                   pled time step. However our contribution
                    obtain critical predicate                                   from the idea of sampled trajectory are
 9
                              j
                  T q , X q , σ̃sθ0 ,T q , q ∈ [M ] ←                           listed as follows:
                   Generate sampled time steps
                   & sampled trajectories                                   1. to apply the idea of Drop-out on con-
                                                       wp       j              trol synthesis over extended trajectories
10                d1 ← robust gradient ∇θ J                 (σsθ0 )
11                d2 ← robust gradient ∇θ h∗ (sk∗ )                            which alleviates for the problem of van-
12                θ1 ← θ1 + Adam(d1 /N1 )                                      ishing/exploding gradients.
13                θ2 ← θ2 + Adam(d2 /N1 )                                   2. to restrict the sampling process to time-
14
                                   j
             if ρφ (σsθ01 ) ≥ ρφ (σsθ0 ) then θj+1 ← θ1                        steps instead of a random node selection
                                        j                                      on trajectory.
15           else if ρφ (σsθ02 ) ≥ ρφ (σsθ0 ) then θj+1 ← θ2
16           else                                                           3. to assure that the critical time is included
17                ℓ ← 1, update ← True                                         in the set of sampled time steps.
18                while update & (use_STL2LB = False) do
19                    ℓ ← ℓ/2; θ̂ ← θj + ℓ(θ2 − θj )          In this work we denote the gradient of
20
                                                 j
                      if ρ(φ, σsθ̂0 , 0) ≥ ρφ (σsθ0 ) then    original trajectory with ’original gradi-
 21                        θj+1 ← θ̂, update ← False          ent’ and the approximate gradient from
                                                              our sampling technique as ’robust gra-
22                     else if ℓ < ϵ then use_STL2LB ← True   dient’ 4 . In the backpropagation algo-
                                                              rithm at a given gradient step j with
23     if use_STL2LB = True then                              control parameter, θj we wish to com-
                     j
24          θ3 ← θ                                            pute the robust gradient ∂J /∂θj . To
25          for i ← 1, · · · , N2 do
                                 j                            that end, we utilize θj to simulate the
26               T q , X q , σ̃sθ0 ,T q , q ∈ [M ] ←          trajectory {s0 , s1 , ..., sK } and control se-
                  Generate sampled time steps
                                                              quence {a0 , a1 , ..., aK−1 }. We then gen-
                  & sampled trajectories
                                                       j      erate a set of random selections for the
27               d3 ← robust gradient∇θ STL2LB(σsθ0 , b)      sampled times T q , q ∈ [M ] and define
28               θ3 ← θ3 + Adam(d3 /N2 )                                                       j

              j+1
                                                              the sampled trajectories, σ̃sθ0 ,T q with the
29          θ     ← θ3                                        specified interrelation proposed in the
                                                              definition 2. In the next gradient step,
    j + 1 we again generate a new set of sampled times and repeat the process. 5 .
        4
          We call this gradient robust since the Drop-out technique claims this gradient results in robust training.
        5
          In this work, we evaluate the applicability of our sampling based technique through different case studies.
     This is a common approach to replace the mathematical proofs with validation through experimental results. See
     the famous works like (Srivastava et al., 2014).


                                                                      7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Way Point Function. The way point function, J wp (σsθ0 ), is established as a reward-based function
designed to offer incentives to the optimizer to guide the trajectory toward a pre-defined path.

Safe re-smoothing. As discussed before, in the event that the optimization process steers the
control parameters towards non-differentiable local maxima, there may be a drastic reduction in
                                                                                                 j
the value of the robustness function. In this case, we replace the objective function with J (σsθ0 ) =
             j
STL2LB(σsθ0 ; b). This is because, STL2LB is a smooth version of robustness over the trajectory,
in addition, it is a guaranteed lower bound for robustness and its distance to robustness can also be
controlled with b. Thus, its inclusion makes the re-smoothing process safe against a potential drastic
drop in robustness value.
In case the objective function J is the value of critical predicate, it is only a function of the trajectory
state sk∗ and we sample the time steps as, T = {0, t1 , t2 , · · · , tN } , tN = k ∗ . The original gradient
is ∂J /∂θ = (∂J /∂sk∗ ) (∂sk∗ /∂θ) but based on our sampling technique inspired          with Drop-out, the
robust gradient will be defined as, ∂J /∂θ = (∂J /∂sk∗ ) ∂ σ̃sθ0 ,T (N )/∂θ where unlike ∂sk∗ /∂θ
that is prone to vanish/explode problem, the new term ∂ σ̃sθ0 ,T (N )/∂θ can be computed efficiently6 .
In case the objective function is way-point or STL2LB, that is a function of all the trajectory states,
we consequently segment the trajectory into M different partitions, by random time sampling as,
                                                                                                   M
                                                                                                   [
    T q = {0, tq1 , tq2 , · · · , tqN } , q ∈ [M ], (∀q1 , q2 ∈ [M ] : T q1 ∩ T q2 = {0}) ∧ (K =         T q ), (6)
                                                                                                   q=1
                                                                         n                 o
with sub-trajectories generated by T q , q ∈ [M ] denoted as X q = s0 , stq1 , · · · , stqN . We know the
                                                  PM
original gradient in this case is ∂J /∂θ = q=1 (∂J /∂X q ) (∂X q /∂θ). However in our training
process to compute the robust gradient, the gradient matrix ∂X q /∂θ is supposed to be replaced with
∂ σ̃sθ0 ,T q /∂θ. Unlike the inefficient gradient matrix ∂X q /∂θ that is prone to vanish/explode problem,
the gradient matrix ∂ σ̃sθ0 ,T q /∂θ can be computed efficiently.

4       E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION
In this section, we evaluate the performance of our proposed method. We implemented all experiments
in MATLAB7 . We give the details of our experimental setup in the Appendix. We evaluate on 5
environments (details given in the Appendix) (a) a 3 dimensional simple car, (b) a 6 dimensional
drone, (c) a 6 dimensional drone combined with a moving frame with a task requiring a long path
plan, (d) a multi-agent system of 10 connected Dubins car, and (e) a 12 dimensional quad-rotor.
Evaluation metric. To evaluate the performance of our method, we first compare the results of
Alg. 1 with the examples proposed in (Yaghoubi & Fainekos, 2019) for environments (a) and (b),
and compare the runtimes. As the dimension of system increases, it becomes more challenging to
avoid the training procedure from converging to local optima. Increasing the horizon of temporal task
causes the gradients to become non-informative, as they potentially vanish or explode. Therefore,
environments (c), (d) and (e) are solved with Alg. 2. We also show that Alg. 1 is unable to finish the
computation for long horizon experiments within a reasonable number of iterations or runtime.

Comparison. Application of Alg. 1 on the environments (a) and (b), shows noticeable improvement,
w.r.t. the previous work in (Yaghoubi & Fainekos, 2019). In these examples, we started from a
random initial guess for NN parameters and computed the solution within ≈ 6 minutes. However the
reported runtime in (Yaghoubi & Fainekos, 2019) is noticeably higher than ours. Appendix L shows
a comparison between the performance of STL2LB and the previous works (Pant et al., 2017; Gilpin
et al., 2020). This comparison emphasizes on the computational problem proposed in Example 1.

Main results. We test the performance of our proposed sampling-based algorithm in highly nonlinear
and high dimensional environments over long and also complex temporal tasks (details in the
appendix). Table 2 reports the results of these experiments.
    6
        The efficiency results from the control parameters θ repeating in fewer steps as most of them are fixed.
    7
        All experiments were run on a laptop PC with a Core i9 CPU, and we did not utilize GPUs for computation.


                                                         8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To evaluate the contribution of Alg. 2 we perform an ablation study on a simple Dubin’s car envi-
ronment. We assume an 1m × 1m area for execution, and specify that the car moves in this area
within K = 10 time steps (δt = 0.1) while avoiding an obstacle presented in this area (Figure 11 is a
scaled (×100) version of this area). We evaluate the same case study, but with task horizons ranging
from 10 to 1000 time steps. With increasing number of time-steps, we also need to magnify the size
of the environment to maintain task difficulty. The ablation study involves solving each of these
problems: (1) with the vanilla version of Alg. 1 with no sampling-based robust gradient computation
(2) Alg. 1 where sampling-based robust gradient approch is performed using random times within
the trajectory, and (3) Alg. 2 that combines gradient-based sampling based on critical predicates,
safe re-smoothing, and waypoint functions. We summarize the results in Table 1. We can see that
the inclusion of time sampling decreases the runtime for training process. We also observe that for
relatively small horizons K = 10, 50, Alg. 1 performs slightly better than Alg. 2 in terms of runtime
but for K = 100, 500, 1000 Alg. 2 is much more efficient. In the table, an entry “NF” indicates when
the algorithm is unable to solve the problem within 8000 gradient steps. In Alg. 1, as the dimension
of STL2LB grows with the length of the horizon and dimension of the system, we see it struggle with
the more complex case studies.
Table 2 highlights the versatility of our technique to handle various case studies with number of
dimensions as high as 20, and time horizons in thousands of steps. We also use a diverse set of
temporal task objectives that include nested temporal operators, and those involving trajectories from
two independently moving objects (Drone & Moving Frame case study). The results were produced
using Alg. 2.

                               Algorithm 1                          Algorithm 1                      Algorithm 2
             Horizon        (No time Sampling)                  (With time Sampling)             (With time Sampling)
                            Num. of           Runtime             Num.             Runtime       Num. of           Runtime
                           Iterations        (seconds)          Iterations        (seconds)     Iterations        (seconds)
                 10            34                2.39              11               1.39            4                5.61
                 50            73                2.46              53              14.01            25               6.09
                100            152               8.65              105             112.6           157              90.55
                500       NF[−1.59]              4986             3237              8566           624              890.24
               1000      NF[−11.49]              8008          NF[−88.42]          28825           829               3728

Table 1: Ablation study. We mark the experiment with NF[.] if it is unable to provide a positive
robustness within 8000 iterations, and the value inside brackets is the maximum value of robustness
it finds. We magnify the environment proportional to the horizon (see Appendix H for details). All
experiments use a unique guess for initial parameter values.

          Case Study    Temporal      System        Time        NN Controller     Number of    Runtime        Optimization Setting
                          Task       Dimension     Horizon       Structure        Iterations   (second)       [M, N, N1 , N2 , ϵ, b]

          Simple Car      φ1            3          40 steps        [4,10,2]          750       403.19          Algorithm 1, b=10

            Drone         φ2            6          35 steps        [7,10,3]         16950      354.36          Algorithm 1, b=20

          Quad-rotor      φ3            12         45 steps     [13,20,20,10,4]      1120      6413.3        [9, 5, 30, 40, 10−5 , 5]

          Multi-agent     φ4            20         60 steps       [21,40,20]         2532      6298.2        [12, 5, 30, 1, 10−5 , 15]

        Drone & Frame     φ5            7         1500 steps    [8,20,20,10,4]        84       443.45     [100, 15, 30, 3, 10−5 , 15]

          Dubins car      φ6            2         1000 steps       [3,20,2]          829        3728      [200, 5, 60, 3, 10−5 , 15]



                    Table 2: Results on different case studies (details in the appendix)

5 C ONCLUSION
We introduce STL2LB, a smooth computation graph that lower bounds the robustness degree of an
STL specification. We present a neurosymbolic algorithm that uses informative gradients for the
design of NN controllers to satisfy STL specifications. We also propose a sampling-based technique
to compute robust gradient that does not vanish/explode for long-horizon STL formulas, and provide
some strategies to overcome challenges posed by non-differentiable local maxima. We show the
efficacy of our training algorithm on a variety of different case studies and present an ablation study
that validates the significance of our proposed heuristics.


                                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


6   R EPRODUCIBILITY
The environments used in this paper are standard in the domain of STL controller synthesis. We
have provided environment parameters and the hyperparameters used in each of these models. The
Appendix sections include sufficient details of our implementation, and our code will be publicly
available upon publication.

R EFERENCES
Takumi Akazaki and Ichiro Hasuo. Time robustness in mtl and expressivity in hybrid system
  falsification. In International Conference on Computer Aided Verification, pp. 356–374. Springer,
  2015.
Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Layer normalization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1607.06450, 2016.
Anand Balakrishnan and Jyotirmoy V Deshmukh. Structured reward shaping using signal temporal
  logic specifications. In 2019 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
 (IROS), pp. 3481–3486. IEEE, 2019.
Anand Balakrishnan, Stefan Jaksic, Edgar Aguilar, Dejan Nickovic, and Jyotirmoy Deshmukh.
  Model-free reinforcement learning for symbolic automata-encoded objectives. In Proceedings of
  the 25th ACM International Conference on Hybrid Systems: Computation and Control, pp. 1–2,
  2022.
Randal Beard. Quadrotor dynamics and control rev 0.1. 2008.
Luigi Berducci, Edgar A Aguilar, Dejan Ničković, and Radu Grosu. Hierarchical potential-based
  reward shaping from task specifications. arXiv e-prints, pp. arXiv–2110, 2021.
Kurtland Chua, Roberto Calandra, Rowan McAllister, and Sergey Levine. Deep reinforcement
  learning in a handful of trials using probabilistic dynamics models. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 31, 2018.
Alexandre Donzé and Oded Maler. Robust satisfaction of temporal logic over real-valued signals.
  In International Conference on Formal Modeling and Analysis of Timed Systems, pp. 92–106.
  Springer, 2010.
Georgios Fainekos and George J. Pappas. Robustness of temporal logic specifications. In Formal
 Approaches to Testing and Runtime Verification, volume 4262 of LNCS, pp. 178–192. Springer,
  2006.
Georgios E Fainekos, Antoine Girard, Hadas Kress-Gazit, and George J Pappas. Temporal logic
  motion planning for dynamic robots. Automatica, 45(2):343–352, 2009.
Bin Fang, Shidong Jia, Di Guo, Muhua Xu, Shuhuan Wen, and Fuchun Sun. Survey of imitation
  learning for robotic manipulation. International Journal of Intelligent Robotics and Applications,
  3:362–369, 2019.
Samira S Farahani, Vasumathi Raman, and Richard M Murray. Robust model predictive control for
  signal temporal logic synthesis. IFAC-PapersOnLine, 48(27):323–328, 2015.
Yann Gilpin, Vince Kurtz, and Hai Lin. A smooth robustness measure of signal temporal logic for
  symbolic control. IEEE Control Systems Letters, 5(1):241–246, 2020.
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep learning. MIT press, 2016.
Meng Guo and Michael M Zavlanos. Probabilistic motion planning under temporal tasks and soft
 constraints. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 63(12):4051–4066, 2018.
Sofie Haesaert, Sadegh Soudjani, and Alessandro Abate. Temporal logic control of general markov
  decision processes by approximate policy refinement. IFAC-PapersOnLine, 51(16):73–78, 2018.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ernst M Hahn, Mateo Perez, Sven Schewe, Fabio Somenzi, Ashutosh Trivedi, and Dominik Wo-
  jtczak. Reward shaping for reinforcement learning with omega-regular objectives. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2001.05977, 2020.
Mohammadhosein Hasanbeig, Alessandro Abate, and Daniel Kroening. Logically-constrained
 reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.08099, 2018.
Navid Hashemi, Xin Qin, Jyotirmoy V. Deshmukh, Georgios Fainekos, Bardh Hoxha, Danil
  Prokhorov, and Tomoya Yamaguchi. Risk-awareness in learning neural controllers for temporal
  logic objectives. In (ACC), pp. 4096–4103.
Navid Hashemi, Bardh Hoxha, Tomoya Yamaguchi, Danil Prokhorov, Georgios Fainekos, and
  Jyotirmoy Deshmukh. A neurosymbolic approach to the verification of temporal logic properties
  of learning-enabled control systems. In ICCPS, pp. 98–109, 2023.
Krishna C Kalagarla, Rahul Jain, and Pierluigi Nuzzo. Synthesis of discounted-reward optimal
  policies for markov decision processes under linear temporal logic specifications. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2011.00632, 2020.
Bruno Lacerda, David Parker, and Nick Hawes. Optimal policy generation for partially satisfiable
  co-safe ltl specifications. In IJCAI, volume 15, pp. 1587–1593. Citeseer, 2015.
Abolfazl Lavaei, Fabio Somenzi, Sadegh Soudjani, Ashutosh Trivedi, and Majid Zamani. Formal
  controller synthesis for continuous-space mdps via model-free reinforcement learning. In 2020
 ACM/IEEE 11th International Conference on Cyber-Physical Systems (ICCPS), pp. 98–107. IEEE,
  2020.
Karen Leung, Nikos Aréchiga, and Marco Pavone. Backpropagation for parametric stl. In 2019 IEEE
  Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV), pp. 185–192. IEEE, 2019.
Karen Leung, Nikos Arechiga, and Marco Pavone. Back-propagation through signal temporal logic
  specifications: Infusing logical structure into gradient-based methods. In Steven M. LaValle, Ming
  Lin, Timo Ojala, Dylan Shell, and Jingjin Yu (eds.), Algorithmic Foundations of Robotics XIV, pp.
  432–449. Springer, 2021.
Xiao Li, Cristian-Ioan Vasile, and Calin Belta. Reinforcement learning with temporal logic rewards.
  In Proc. of IROS, pp. 3834–3839. IEEE, 2017.
Xiao Li, Yao Ma, and Calin Belta. A policy search method for temporal logic specified reinforcement
  learning tasks. In 2018 Annual American Control Conference (ACC), pp. 240–245. IEEE, 2018.
Lars Lindemann and Dimos V Dimarogonas. Control barrier functions for signal temporal logic
  tasks. IEEE control systems letters, 3(1):96–101, 2018.
Lars Lindemann, Lejun Jiang, Nikolai Matni, and George J. Pappas. Risk of stochastic systems for
  temporal logic specifications, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.14523.
Wenliang Liu, Noushin Mehdipour, and Calin Belta. Recurrent neural network controllers for signal
 temporal logic specifications subject to safety constraints. IEEE Control Systems Letters, 6:91–96,
 2021.
Oded Maler and Dejan Nickovic. Monitoring temporal properties of continuous signals. In Formal
 Techniques, Modelling and Analysis of Timed and Fault-Tolerant Systems, pp. 152–166. Springer,
  2004.
Yash Vardhan Pant, Houssam Abbas, and Rahul Mangharam. Smooth operator: Control using
  the smooth robustness of temporal logic. In 2017 IEEE Conference on Control Technology and
  Applications (CCTA), pp. 1235–1240. IEEE, 2017.
Yash Vardhan Pant, Houssam Abbas, Rhudii A. Quaye, and Rahul Mangharam. Fly-by-logic: control
  of multi-drone fleets with temporal logic objectives. In Proc. of ICCPS, pp. 186–197, 2018.
Razvan Pascanu, Tomas Mikolov, and Yoshua Bengio. On the difficulty of training recurrent neural
  networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1310–1318. Pmlr, 2013.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Vasumathi Raman, Alexandre Donzé, Mehdi Maasoumy, Richard M Murray, Alberto Sangiovanni-
  Vincentelli, and Sanjit A Seshia. Model predictive control with signal temporal logic specifications.
  In Proc. of CDC, pp. 81–87. IEEE, 2014.
Vasumathi Raman, Alexandre Donzé, Dorsa Sadigh, Richard M Murray, and Sanjit A Seshia. Reactive
  synthesis from signal temporal logic specifications. In Proc. of HSCC, pp. 239–248, 2015.
Alëna Rodionova, Lars Lindemann, Manfred Morari, and George J Pappas. Combined left and right
  temporal robustness for control under stl specifications. IEEE Control Systems Letters, 2022.
Dorsa Sadigh and Ashish Kapoor. Safe control under uncertainty with probabilistic signal temporal
  logic. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems XII, 2016.
Dorsa Sadigh, Eric S Kim, Samuel Coogan, S Shankar Sastry, and Sanjit A Seshia. A learning based
  approach to control synthesis of markov decision processes for linear temporal logic specifications.
  In 53rd IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, pp. 1091–1096. IEEE, 2014.
Krishnan Srinivasan, Benjamin Eysenbach, Sehoon Ha, Jie Tan, and Chelsea Finn. Learning to be
  safe: Deep rl with a safety critic. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.14603, 2020.
Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov.
  Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural networks from overfitting. The journal of machine
  learning research, 15(1):1929–1958, 2014.
Alvaro Velasquez, Brett Bissey, Lior Barak, Andre Beckus, Ismail Alkhouri, Daniel Melcer, and
  George Atia. Dynamic automaton-guided reward shaping for monte carlo tree search. In Proceed-
  ings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 12015–12023, 2021.
Jiangwei Wang, Shuo Yang, Ziyan An, Songyang Han, Zhili Zhang, Rahul Mangharam, Meiyi Ma,
   and Fei Miao. Multi-agent reinforcement learning guided by signal temporal logic specifications.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.06808, 2023.
Robert D Windhorst, Todd A Lauderdale, Alexander V Sadovsky, James Phillips, and Yung-Cheng
  Chu. Strategic and tactical functions in an autonomous air traffic management system. In AIAA
  AVIATION 2021 FORUM, pp. 2355, 2021.
Shakiba Yaghoubi and Georgios Fainekos. Worst-case satisfaction of stl specifications using feed-
  forward neural network controllers: A lagrange multipliers approach. ACM Transactions on
  Embedded Computing Systems, 18(5S), 2019.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    A D ETAILED D ISCUSSION ON T RAINING A LGORITHM

In this section, we propose the details of
the Alg. 2. Although this algorithm is uti-
lized for the case where the gradient may
require to be approximated, here we base
our reasoning on the assumption that the
computed gradient direction increases the
objective function in the points of differen-
tiability. However, we evaluate the perfor-
mance of the algorithm in the presence of Figure 2: This figure illustrates the trajectory sampling pro-
gradient approximation, through different cess for gradient step j in detail. Following the calculation
challenging case studies.                     of actions during the forward pass, we maintain dependence
                                                between the actions and the state for the sampled time steps.
In this algorithm, we initially sample an Meanwhile, the remaining actions are set to be independent
initial state from the sampled set of initial and fixed. The actions that are fixed are highlighted in red,
states s0 ∼ I.b This sampling process can whereas the dependent actions are denoted in black. The black
be wise or random. For instance, at every and red circles represent the sampled and un-sampled time
iteration, we may compute the robustness steps.
value for all the initial states and select the candidate with the lowest robustness value, or we may
sample s0 uniformly at random.
Here, the initial states are the input data in the training process and the robustness is the objective
function. We need to make it certain the objective function is differentiable for a given input data,
and this algorithm is designed to do this task. Control synthesis with critical predicate is more
efficient than STL2LB but it may result in non-differentiability, and we should re-smooth the function
in the point of non-differentiability. This is a challenging task to accurately detect the point of
non-differentiability. Thus, we adopt a more conservative approach, and the training algorithm shifts
to the smooth version of the robustness function once it is unable to increase the robustness with
a critical predicate. To do so, we initialize the parameter use_STL2LB to be False and update it to
True in case the robustness is not increased.
Lines [17-22] are proposed to have a more accurate detection for non-differntiable local maxima,
where given a small threshold ϵ, keeps the direction of gradient for critical predicate and decreases the
learning rate exponentially. In case the gradient of critical predicate is not increasing the robustness
for an infinitesimal learning rate, then the chance is high to be in a non-differentiable local maxima.
At the start of the training process, we don’t have access to the desired control parameters, but we can
envision a desired path for the model to track. This path may not satisfy the temporal specification,
but its availability is still valuable information, which its inclusion to the training process can make
the problem easier for the Adam optimizer. Therefore, we utilize a desired path and provide a convex
and efficient waypoint function and benefit from its gradient in our control synthesis to expedite the
training process. We also prioritize the gradient of the waypoint function over the critical predicate.
Hence, the lines [14-16] in the algorithm dictates, in case the gradient of this convex function is
unable to provide an increment to the robustness value, we should shift to utilize the gradient of
critical predicate to increase the robustness function.
In this algorithm, we approximate the gradient for long trajectories through the idea of sampled
trajectories visualized in Fig. 2. The idea of sampled trajectories is motivated with the popular idea of
(Srivastava et al., 2014) known as drop-out. This approximation may not be precise in some gradient
steps of training process. In order to decrease the potential risk, we included a for-loop to repeat
sampling for time steps and utilize the accumulative gradient to update the parameters. This for-loop
for computing θ1 and θ2 is proposed in lines [7,13] and another for-loop for θ3 is presented in lines
[23-29].


B    S IMPLE C AR : V EHICLE NAVIGATION (S EQUENCE F ORMULA )

We assume a 3 dimensional model for the simple car dynamics with pre-specified control inputs, i.e.
velocity, vk ∈ [0, 5] and steering wheel angle, γk ∈ [−π/4, π/4]. Assuming the ZOH discretization
with time-step δt = 0.05 sec. This dynamics can be presented as follows:


                                                    13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                              8


                                                              7


                                                              6


                                                              5


                                                              4


                                                              3


                                                              2


                                                              1


                                                                  0    2            4            6            8

                                                       Figure 4: This figure presents the simulated trajecto-
Figure 3: This figure shows the simulated trajectories ries from the trained control parameters, on the simple
for trained controller in comparison to the trajectories car dynamics, comparing in contrast to the trajectories
for naive initial random guess for control parameters. from initial naive random guess for control parameters.
The trajectories are initiated from the set of sampled The trajectories are initiated from the set of sampled
                                                                                             −3π −5π −π
initial conditions that is the corners of I with its center. initial conditions, which is θ = 4 , 8 , 2 .



                                                           v
                   ẋ = v cos(θ),     ẏ = v sin(θ),    θ̇ = tan(γ),
                                                           L                                                (7)
                   v ← 2.5 tanh(0.5a1 ) + 2.5,         γ ← π/4 tanh(0.5a2 ),      a1 , a2 ∈ R

We plan to train a NN controller with tanh() activation function and structure [4, 10, 2] for this
problem That maps the vector, [s⊤   k , k]
                                           ⊤
                                             to the unbounded control inputs [a1 (k), a2 (k)]⊤ . We
assume that initially the car is at (x0 , y0 ) = (6, 8), but the heading angle can vary in the set
θ0 ∈ [−3π/4, −π/2].
Figure 4 shows the simulation of car’s trajectories with our trained controller parameters.
The car is planned to firstly visit Goal1 and once it is there then it should visit Gaol2 and this
ordered task should be successfully finished in 40 time steps. However, the car should always
avoid the unsafe set according to its assigned task. Unsafe, Goal1 and Goal2 sets are 2D sets:
[1, 4] × [2, 5], [3, 4] × [0, 1] and [5, 6] × [3, 4], respectively. This temporal task can be formalized in
STL framework as follows:
                          φ1 := F[1,40] [Goal1 ∧ F[Goal2 ]] ∧ G[1,40] [¬ Unsafe set]
The black trajectories are the simulation of the initial guess for the controller, which are generated
completely at random and are obviously violating the specification. We sampled I with 3 points
(θ = −3π/4, −5π/8, −π/2). We also generated STL2LB with b = 10 in 1.31 sec and starting from
mentioned initial guess for control parameters we followed Alg. 1 and trained the parameters within
403.19 seconds and 750 gradient steps on CPU with no parallel computing.

C        D RONE : D RONE MOTION PLANNING ( REACH - AVOID FORMULA )

We assume a 6 dimensional model for the quadcopter with pre-specified bounds on the control inputs,
u1 ∈ [−0.1, 0.1], u2 ∈ [−0.1, 0.1], u3 ∈ [7.81, 11.81]. Assuming the ZOH8 discretization with
time-step δt = 0.05 sec. This dynamics can be presented as follows:
    8
        Zero Order Hold, fixed control signal over the time step.


                                                         14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ẋ = vx , ẏ = vy , ż = vz , v̇x = g tan(u1 ), v̇y = −g tan(u2 ), v̇z = g − u3 ,
u1 ← 0.1 tanh(0.1a1 ), u2 ← 0.1 tanh(0.1a2 ), u3 ← g − 2 tanh(0.1a3 ), a1 , a2 , a3 ∈ R.
                                                                                      (8)
We plan to train a NN controller with tanh() activation function and structure [7, 10, 3] for this
problem That maps the vector, [s⊤           ⊤                                                        ⊤
                                      k , k] to the unbounded control inputs [a1 (k), a2 (k), a3 (k)] .
Here the parameter g = 9.81 is the gravity. We assume that initially the quadcopter is still,
[vx (0), vy (0), vz (0)] = [0, 0, 0], and at zero altitude z0 = 0. The initial x − y position of the
quadcopter can vary in [x(0), y(0)] ∈ [0.02, 0.05] × [0, 0.05].
Figure 3 shows the simulation of quadcopter’s trajectories with our trained controller parameters.
The quadcopter launches at one point in the set I and is planned to visit the goal set while avoiding
the obstacle. The projection of the obstacle and goal sets into the quadcopter’s position states are
[−∞, 0.17]×[0.2, 0.35]×[0, 1.2] and [0.05, 0.1]×[0.5, 0.58]×[0.5, 0.7], respectively. This temporal
task can be formalized in STL framework as,
                               φ2 = G[1,35] [¬ Obstacle] ∧ F[32,35] [Goal]
The black trajectories are the simulation of the initial guess for the controller which are generated
completely at random and are obviously violating the specification. We sampled I with 5 points
on the corners and center. We also generated STL2LB with b = 20 in 0.13 sec and starting from
mentioned initial guess for control parameters we followed Alg. 1 and trained the parameters within
354.36 seconds and 16950 gradient steps on CPU with no parallel computing. In this example, we
started from a random initial guess and solved for a control parameter within 6 minutes. However, the
authors in (Yaghoubi & Fainekos, 2019) report that they spent 8 hours to find a good initial control
parameters. This emphasizes on that fact that our gradients are more informative.

D    Q UAD - ROTOR : 12- DIMENSIONAL Q UAD - ROTOR (N ESTED 3-F UTURE
     F ORMULA )
We assume a 12-dimensional model for the quad-
rotor of mass, m = 1.4 kg. The distance of
rotors from the quad-rotor’s center is also ℓ =
0.3273 meter and the inertia of vehicle is Jx =
Jy = 0.054 and Jz = 0.104 (see (Beard, 2008)
for the detail of quad-rotor’s dynamics). The con-
troller sends bounded signals δr , δl , δb , δf ∈ [0, 1]
to the right, left, back and front rotors respectively
to drive the vehicle. Each rotor is designed such that
given the control signal δ it generates the propeller
force of k1 δ and also exerts the yawing torque k2 δ
into the body of the quad-rotor. We set k1 = 3mg/4
such the net force from all the rotors can not ex-
ceed 3 times of its weight, (g = 9.81). We also
set k2 = 1.5ℓk1 to make it certain that the maxi-
mum angular velocity in the yaw axis is approxi-
mately equivalent to the maximum angular velocity
in the pitch and roll axis. We use the sampling time Figure 5: shows the simulation of trained control
δt = 0.1 sec in our control process. The dynamics parameters to satisfy the specified temporal task
for this vehicle is proposed in equation 9, where in companion with the simulation result for initial
F, τϕ , τθ , τψ are the net propeller force, pitch torque, guess for control parameters.
roll torque and yaw torque respectively. We plan to train a NN controller with tanh() activation func-
tion and structure [13, 20, 20, 10, 4] for this problem that maps the vector, [s⊤         ⊤
                                                                                    k , k] to the unbounded
                                                ⊤
control inputs [a1 (k), a2 (k), a3 (k), a4 (k)] . In addition to this, the trained controller should be valid
for all initial states proposed in equation 9.
Figure 5 shows the simulation of quad-rotor’s trajectories with our trained controller parameters.The
quad rotor is planned to pass through the green hoop in the next no later than the next 15 time steps
and no sooner than the next 10th step and once it passed the green hoop it should pass the blue hoop


                                                    15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                            
    ẋ1 = cos(x8 ) cos(x9 )x4 + (sin(x7 ) sin(x8 ) cos(x9 ) − cos(x7 ) sin(x9 ))x5                             −0.1     x1 (0)     0.1 
                                                                                               



     +(cos(x7 ) sin(x8 ) cos(x9 ) + sin(x7 ) sin(x9 ))x6                               I=          s0        −0.1 ≤ x2 (0) ≤ 0.1
    ẋ2 = cos(x8 ) sin(x9 )x4 + (sin(x7 ) sin(x8 ) sin(x9 ) + cos(x7 ) cos(x9 ))x5                             −0.1     x3 (0)     0.1 

                                                                                               


      +(cos(x7 ) sin(x8 ) sin(x9 ) − sin(x7 ) cos(x9 ))x6






   ẋ3 = sin(x8 )x4 − sin(x7 ) cos(x8 )x5 − cos(x7 ) cos(x8 )x6                        
                                                                                          F
                                                                                              
                                                                                                   k1               k1     k1    k1
                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                         δf
    ẋ4 = x12 x5 − x11 x6 − 9.81 sin(x8 )


                                                                                        τϕ   0                 −ℓk1    0     ℓk1   δr 
                                                                                         τ  =  ℓk

    ẋ5 = x10 x6 − x12 x4 + 9.81 cos(x8 ) sin(x7 )                                                                        −ℓk1

                                                                                            θ                  1    0             0    δb 

   ẋ6 = x11 x4 − x10 x5 + 9.81 cos(x8 ) cos(x7 ) − F/m                                 τψ               −k2       k2    −k2    k2      δl


   ẋ7 = x10 + (sin(x7 )(sin(x8 )/ cos(x8 )))x11 + (cos(x7 )(sin(x8 )/ cos(x8 )))x12
    ẋ8 = cos(x7 )x11 − sin(x7 )x12



                                                                                       δf = 0.5(tanh(0.5 a1 ) + 1),
    ẋ9 = (sin(x7 )/ cos(x8 ))x11 + (cos(x7 )/ cos(x8 ))x12                             δr = 0.5(tanh(0.5 a2 ) + 1),






   ẋ10 = −((Jy − Jz )/Jx )x11 x12 + (1/Jx )τϕ                                         δb = 0.5(tanh(0.5 a3 ) + 1),
    ẋ11 = ((Jz − Jx )/Jy )x10 x12 + (1/Jy ))τθ



                                                                                       δl = 0.5(tanh(0.5 a4 ) + 1),
    ẋ12 = (1/Jz )τψ                                                                    a1 , a2 , a3 , a4 ∈ R.
                                                                                                                                            (9)


in the future 10th to 15th time steps and again once it has passed the blue hoop it should pass the red
hoop again in the future next 10 to 15 time steps. This is called a nested future formula, in which
we design the controller such that the drone satisfies this specification. This temporal task can be
formalized in STL framework as follows:

           φ3 = F[10,15] green_hoop ∧ F[10,15] blue_hoop ∧ F[10,15] [ red_hoop ]

The black trajectories are the simulation of the initial guess for the controller, which are generated
completely at random and are obviously violating the specification. We sampled I with 9 points, that
are the corners of, I including its center. The setting for gradient approximation is M = 9, N = 5
that implies that for every iteration of backpropagation, we generate a new 9 different set of 5
random time steps T q , q ∈ [9] to sample the trajectory in a way that these sets should satisfy the rule
provided in equation 6. We trained the controller with ρ̄ = 0, in Alg. 2 with optimization setting
(N1 = 30, N2 = 40, ϵ = 10−5 ) over 1120 gradient steps (runtime of 6413.3 sec). The runtime to
generate STL2LB is also 0.495 sec and we set b = 5. The Alg. 2, utilizes gradients from waypoint
function, critical predicate, and STL2LB , 515, 544, and 61 times respectively.


E       M ULTI -AGENT: N ETWORK OF D UBINS C ARS (N ESTED F ORMULA )
                                                                                                         12

In this example we assume a network of 10 different dubins car
                                                                                                         10
that are all under the control of a neural network controller, The
dynamics of the system is,                                                                                8

                            i                i       i
              v cos(θi ) v ← tanh(0.5a1 ) + 1, a1 ∈ R
     i    i
     ẋ                                                                                                   6
          =                ,                                   (10)
     ẏ i     v i sin(θi ) θi ← ai2 ∈ R, i ∈ [10].                                                        4


which is a 20 dimensional multi-agent system with 20 controllers,       2

v i ∈ [0, 1], θi ∈ R, i ∈ [10]. Figure 6 shows the initial position
                                                                        0
of each dubins car in R2 in companion with their corresponding            0   2   4    6    8   10  12

Goal sets. The cars should be driven to their goal sets, and they
should also keep a minimum distance of d = 0.5 meters from each Figure 6: Shows the agents vs
other while they are moving toward their goal sets. We assume a goal sets
sampling time of δt = 0.26 for this model, and we plan to train a
NN controller with tanh() activation function and structure [21, 40, 20] via Alg. 2, for this problem
                                                                                 10
that maps the vector, [s⊤      ⊤
                                                                     i      i
                         k , k] to the unbounded control inputs a1 (k), a2 (k) i=1 . This temporal
task can be formalized in STL framework as follows:

                                    10
                                                                                                  !
                                    ^            h           h                                  ii ^
                                                                   i        i               i
                       φ4 :=              F[20,48] G[0,12]        x (k), y (k) ∈ Goal
                                    i=1
                                                                                                                         
                         ^        h                                                  i
                        
                           G[0,60] | xi (k) − xj (k) |> d ∨ | y i (k) − y j (k) |> d 
                             i̸=j
                          i,j∈[10]


                                                                       16
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


13                                                                             Figure 8: Shows the simu-
                                                                               lation of trained controller
12                                                                             on the multi-agent system
                                                                               of 10 connected Dubins
11                                                                             cars. The cars start from
                                                                               an assigned initial position
10                                                                             and follow the command
                                                                               of a central NN controller,
9                                                                              which we have trained with
                                                                               Alg. 2. This controller
8                                                                              makes it certain that cars ar-
                                                                               rive to and stay in their Goal
                                                                               sets based on the specifica-
7                                                                              tion and will always keep a
                                                                               pre-specified distance from
6                                                                              each other over the course
                                                                               of traveling. The trajecto-
5                                                                              ries are intentionally plot-
                                                                               ted with astric points to spot
4                                                                              the position of cars at ev-
                                                                               ery single time step. The
3                                                                              identity of each agent and
                                                                               its assigned Goal sets is also
2                                                                              available in Figure 6. Our
                                                                               observation shows that the
1                                                                              agents finish their personal
                                                                               tasks (First component of
0                                                                              φ4 ) in different times.
                                                    10
                                                             11
                                                                   12
                                                                         13
  0
       1
             2
                  3
                        4
                             5
                                   6
                                        7
                                              8
                                                     9


Figure 8 shows the simulation of the trajectories for the trained controller, and Figure 7 presents
the simulation of trajectories for the initial guess for control parameters. We observe that
our controller manages the agents to satisfy the task in different times. We present the time
steps with astric to make a more clear presentation of the task. Due to the high dimen-
sion and complexity of the task in this example, we were unable to solve it with Alg. 1,
but we were able to solve this with Alg. 2 within a 6298 seconds and 2532 gradient steps.
We also set the optimization setting as, M = 12, N = 5, N1 = 15
30, N2 = 1, ϵ = 10−5 , b = 15. The runtime to generate STL2LB
is also 6.2 seconds. Over the course of the training process we uti- 10
lized 187, 1647 and 698 gradients from way point function, critical
                                                                       5
predicate and STL2LB respectively.
                                                                           0

 F    D RONE & F RAME : L ANDING A D RONE                                 -5


We again use the 6 dimensional dynamics for the drone presented -10-10 -5              0   5     10   15
in equation 8. The horizon of the temporal task is 1500 time steps
with δt = 0.05 sec. The drone launches at a helipad located at Figure 7: Shows the simulation
(x(0), y(0), z(0)) = (−40, 0, 0). We also accept a deviation of 0.1 of trajectories for the initial guess
for (x(0) and y(0) and we train the controller to be valid for all the of the control parameters.
states sampled from this region. The helipad is also 40 meters far
from a building located at (0, 0, 0). The building is 30 meters high, where the building’s footprint
is 10 × 10 meters. We have also a moving platform with dimension 2 × 2 × 0.1 that is starting to
move from (10, 0, 0) with a variable velocity, modeled as, ẋf = u4 .. We also accept a deviation 0.1
for, xf (0) and our trained controller is also robust with respect to this deviation. We define Ib with 9
samples that are located on corners of, I including its center.
The frame is also required to keep always a minimum distance of 4.5 meters from the building. We
train a NN controller that controls the drone and the platform together such that the drone will land on


                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the platform with relative velocity of at most 1 m/s on x, y and z directions and its relative distance
is also at most 1 meter in x, y direction and 0.4 meter in z direction. This temporal task can be
formulated as a reach-avoid formula in STL as follows:
                                                                                              
                                                   x(k)                        f
                                                                                         
                                               
                                               
                                                 y(k)       −1      x(k)  −  x   (k)      1   
                                                                                                 
                                                            −1  
                                                                                                
    φ5 = G[0,1500] [¬obstacle]                                             y(k)         1 
                                                z(k)  
                                               
                                                                                                
                                                                                         
                                                              0.11          z(k)            0.6
                                                                                               
          ∧ F[1100,1500] [Goal]     , Goal=  vx (k)  | 
                                                                
                                                                    ≤
                                                                                      
                                                                                        ≤ 
                                                                                              
                                                v (k)   0            vx (k)        2 
                                                                                      
                                                                                                 
          ∧ G[0,1500] [xf (k) > 9.5]              y   −1  
                                                                                        1 
                                               
                                               
                                                 vz (k)                 v y (k)               
                                                                                                 
                                                               −1          vz (k)            1 
                                               
                                                                                                
                                                f
                                                  x (k)
                                                                                                 

We plot the simulated trajectory for the center of
set of initial states I, in Figure 9. The NN con-
troller’s structure is specified as [8, 20, 20, 10, 4]
and uses the tanh activation function. We ini-
tialize it with a random guess for its parameters.
The simulated trajectory for initial guess of pa-
rameters is also depicted in black. The setting
for gradient approximation is M = 100, N =
15 that implies that for every iteration of back-
propagation, we generate a new 100 different set
of 15 random time steps T q , q ∈ [100] to sam-        Figure 9: This figure shows the simulated tra-
ple the trajectory, such that these sets satisfy the   jectory for trained controller in comparison to the
specified requirements in equation 6. We trained       trajectories for naive initial random guess. The
                                                       frame is moving with a velocity determined with
the controller with ρ̄ = 0, over 84 gradient steps
                                                       the controller that also controls the drone.
(runtime of 443 sec). The runtime to generate
STL2LB is also 7.74 sec and we set b = 15. In total, the Alg. 2, utilizes gradients from waypoint
function, critical predicate, and STL2LB , 5, 71, and 8 times respectively.

G    A NALYSIS FOR DIFFERENT MODULES INCLUDED IN A LGORITHM 2
In this section, we perform an analysis over the three modules proposed in Alg. 2. We focus on the
landing drone mission and compare the results once a module is disabled from the algorithm. In the
first step, we remove the way point function from Alg. 2 and show the performance of algorithm with
critical predicate based sampling process and safe-resmoothing. In the next step, we also dis-regard
the presence of critical time in time sampling and train the controller with completely at random time
sampling. This implies we solve the problem relying only on safe-resmoothing module. Table 3
shows the efficiency of training process in each case and Fig. 10 compare the learning curves. Our
experimental result shows, the control synthesis for drone landing mission faces a small reduction
in efficiency when the way point function is disregarded and fails when the critical predicate is also
removed from time sampling.

H    D UBINS C AR : G ROWING TASK H ORIZON FOR D UBINS C AR
In this example, we utilize the dubins car to provide an experiment that shows us, (a) the advantage
for reformulating the Alg. 1 to the Alg. 2 and (b) the advantage for inclusion of sampling based
gradient approximation. To that end, given a scale factor a > 0 and a time horizon K. We plan
to train a neural network controller with structure [3, 20, 2] with tanh() activation function and a
pre-defined initial guess for control parameters to drive a dubins car, with dynamics,
                                  v cos(θ) v ← tanh(0.5a1 ) + 1, a1 ∈ R

                           ẋ
                              =             ,
                           ẏ     v sin(θ) θ ← a2 ∈ R
to satisfy the following temporal task,
                            φ6 := F[0.9K,K] [Goal] ∧ G[0,K] [¬Obstacle] .
The dubins car starts from (x(0), y(0)) = (0, 0). The obstacle is also a square centered on a/2 with
the side length, 2a/5 and the Goal region is again a square centered at 9a/10 with the side length


                                                   18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


10
                                                           Way-point    Critical      Safe       Number of     Runtime
    0                                                       function   Predicate   Resmoothing   Iterations   (seconds)
                                                              ✓           ✓            ✓             84          443
-10                                                           ×           ✓            ✓            107          607
                                                              ✓           ×            ✓         NF[−0.74]      6971
-20
                                                              ×           ×            ✓         NF[−1.32]      4822
-30

-40
                                                         Table 3: Shows the numerical results for the train-
                                                           ing algorithms. In case the training process does not
-50                                                        provide positive robustness within 300 gradient step
   0        50      100       150     200      250     300
                                                           we report it with NF[.] which indicates the value of
Figure 10: Shows the learning curve for training pro- robustness in iteration 300. In this table we disable the
cesses. This figure shows the Alg. 2 concludes success- main modules in Alg. 2 step by step and report the ex-
fully in 84 iterations while removing the way point it tent of reduction in efficiency. The symbol ✓ indicates
concludes in 107 iterations. The algorithm also fails if the module is included and × indicates the module is
the critical predicate is not considered in time sampling. neglected.

                                    Figure 11: Show the simulation of the results for Dubins car. One of
                                    the main issues of using NN controller for this problem is that the tanh()
                                    activations functions gets saturated over long horizon and the straight lines
                                    confirm this. However, Alg. 2 has successfully solved for this long horizon
                                    task in the presence of this source of difficulty. Consider a) the vehicle
                                    should visit the Goal set after k = 900, b) the controller gets saturated at
                                    some time steps before that, and c) the Goal set may not be reachable before
                                    k = 900. Therefore, the algorithm is required to firstly locate the car in a
                                    specific zone before controller’s activation functions are saturated and then
                                    drive it toward the Goal set with a saturated controller, or in another word,
                                    constant velocity and fixed heading angle.



a/20. We solve this problem for K = 10, 50, 100, 500, 1000 and we also utilize a = K/10 for
each case study. We solve each case study with both Algorithms 1 and 2 and for each algorithm we
consider two different conditions, where the former is to utilize the real gradient and the latter is to
employ the approximated gradient using the time sampling technique. Consider we keep the initial
guess and the controller’s structure fixed for all the training processes, and we also manually stop
the process once the number of iterations exceeds 8000 gradient steps. We also assume a singleton
as the set of initial states (0, 0) to present a more clear comparison. The runtime and the number of
iterations for each training process is presented in table 1. Figure 11 shows the simulation trajectories
trained from Alg. 2 with gradient approximation for K = 1000 time steps in companion with the
simulation of trajectories for the initial guess of controller parameters.

I       V ERIFICATION OF R ESULTS
In order to verify the results, we adopt the approach presented in (Lindemann et al., 2022). To that
end, we set the probabilities δ = %0.1, ε = %99.9 and prove:
                              Pr Pr[−ρ(φ, σsθ0 , 0) ≤ −ρ̄] ≥ ε ≥ 1 − δ

                                                                                                (11)
Based on the methodology proposed in (Lindemann et al., 2022) we are required to generate a
minimum of 3.8005 × 106 random trajectories to formalize the statement equation 11. Accordingly,
we sampled 4 × 106 initial states s0 ∈ I uniformly at random and simulated the corresponding
trajectories for all the examples, and we faced no counter example with negative robustness value.

J       P ROOF OF L EMMA 1
Assume a STL specification φ which defines a set of predicates on the trajectory states in σs0 and
establishes a positive normal form relation over these predicates (see equation 3). Let’s denote the set
of quantitative semantics for these predicates with A,
                                          A = {a1 , a2 , · · · , aN } .


                                                      19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         Figure 12: Shows an illustration of the recurrent structure for the control feedback system.


The non-smooth robustness function ρ(σs0 , φ, 0) can be considered a recursive combination of
min()/ max() operators over the quantitative semantics ai ∈ A, i ∈ [N ]. This implies, in case we
replace the min()/ max() operators with their guaranteed lower-bounds, the robustness value will
likewise be under-approximated, provided that the formula φ is in positive normal form.
Let’s use the notation max2() and min2() to refer to the specific case of max() and min() applied to
two quantities. Then the maximum or minimum for a multitude of quantities is also computable recur-
sively over the functions max2()/min2(). As an example for a case of 5 quantities, x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 , x5 ,
we can write:
         max(x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 , x5 ) = max2 ( max2 ( max2 (x1 , x2 ) , max2 (x3 , x4 )) , x5 )
This implies in case we replace the functions max2()/min2() with a guaranteed lower-bound, the
functions min()/ max() will be under approximated and thus the robustness function is also under-
approximated.
We know for all x, y ∈ R, max2(x, y) = y + ReLU(x − y) and min2(x, y) = x − ReLU(x − y). We
also know, for all z ∈ R, swish(z) < ReLU(z) and softplus(z) > ReLU(z) where,
                                 1                                     z
                                   log 1 + ebz ,

                softplus(z) =                          swish(z) =            ,        b > 0.
                                 b                                  1 + e−bz
This motivates us to define the smooth functions max2s()/min2s() as follows:
              max2s(x, y) = y + swish(x − y),          min2s(x, y) = x − softplus(x − y)
and claim for all x, y ∈ R, max2s(x, y) < max2(x, y) and min2s(x, y) < min2(x, y). Therefore,
considering robustness function ρ(σs0 , φ, 0), replacement of max2() with max2s() and min2() with
min2s() results in a smooth lower-bound for robustness function that is a recursive combination
of max2s()/min2s() over the elements of set A. Since STL2NN(σs0 ) is exactly equivalent to
ρ(σs0 , φ, 0), we denote the proposed smooth robustness with STL2LB(σs0 ; b) and conclude,
                     ∀(σs0 , b) ∈ RnK × R : STL2LB(σs0 ; b) ≤ STL2NN(σs0 )

K    A N ILLUSTRATION FOR THE R ECURRENT STRUCTURE
Figure 12 shows an illustration for computation graph of trajectory states in our control feedback
system. The controller is a feed forward neural network that receives the time and state and returns a
decision. The parameters of this controller will be trained to satisfy a temporal property, formulated
in STL framework. As the control parameters are repeated over the computation graph, this recurrent
structure is similar to RNN structure and also suffers from vanishing/exploding gradient for a long
horizon trajectory.

L    COMPARISON BETWEEN THE PERFORMANCE OF STL2LB AND OTHER
     SMOOTH SEMANTICS IN TRAINING .

Considering the Boltzmann operator and log-exp-sum operators provided in equation 5 and the STL
robustness proposed in equation 3, the methodology proposed in (Pant et al., 2017) suggests to replace


                                                     20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          (a) STL2LB vs Pant et al. (2017)                        (b) STL2LB vs Gilpin et al. (2020)
Figure 14: Shows the comparison of learning curve between STL2LB with the smooth semantics proposed
by Pant et al. (2017) and Gilpin et al. (2020). This figure shows STL2LB trains the controller in 2700 gradient
steps and provide positive robustness. This is, while the smooth semantics from Pant et al. (2017) and Gilpin
et al. (2020) are unable to provide positive robustness within up to 40000 gradient steps. Since the operational
zone is wide, the proposed techniques in Pant et al. (2017) and Gilpin et al. (2020), do not accept b ≥ 8 due
to computational errors proposed in Example 1. Although STL2LB have no limit for handling large values of
hyper-paramter b, here we also restrict STL2LB for b = 4 to have more clear comparison.

max()/ min() operators in equation 3 with log-exp-sum smooth operator. On the other hand, the
methodology proposed in (Gilpin et al., 2020) suggests to replace max() operator with Boltzmann
operator and min() operator with log-exp-sum. However, both of these techniques suffer from the
computational issues proposed in Example 1. This problem manifest when the quantitative semantics
for predicates is sufficiently large. Therefore, we intentionally assume a wide operational zone for a
Dubin’s car and show including smooth semantics from Pant et al. (2017) and Gilpin et al. (2020)
into training process results in failure, while incorporation of STL2LB results in an efficient training
process. In this training process, we assume the sampling time is δt = 2 sec, the velocity of car,
is constrained with v ∈ [0, 2] and the set of initial states in I = [0, 2] × [0, 2]. Dubin’s car is also
planned to satisfy the STL specification:
                                              ^                   ^
                     φ7 = G[0,35] [¬Unsafe] F[12,17] [Goal1 ] F[30,35] [Goal2 ]

where the sets Unsafe, Goal1 , Goal2 are shown in Fig. 13.
The controller is also feedforward neural network with
structure [3, 10, 2]. Since the operational zone is wide,
the quantitative semantics of predicates are large to the
extent that smooth semantics from Pant et al. (2017) and
Gilpin et al. (2020) can not handle b ≥ 8 and thus we are
restricted to utilize b < 8. On the other hand, STL2LB
does not face numerical problems mentioned in Example 1.
Therefore, we plan to show in this condition, unlike Pant
et al. (2017) and Gilpin et al. (2020), STL2LB do not face
this issue. To validate this issue, we train for controller
with STL2LB and the other two techniques. Fig. 14 shows
the results of these training processes, and clearly shows
STL2LB is the only smooth semantics that can be utilized           Figure 13: shows the simulation of trained
to solve this problem. In this case study, b = 4 provides          control parameters to satisfy the specified
the best solution for Pant et al. (2017) and Gilpin et al.         temporal task in companion with the simu-
(2020) thus we also generate STL2LB with b = 4 to have             lation result for initial guess for control pa-
a more clear comparison 9 . We also compare the simulated          rameters. The black, blue, magenta and red
                                                                   trajectories are for the initial guess, Pant et al.
trajectories for this case with the result of STL2LB in            (2017), STL2LB and Gilpin et al. (2020), re-
Fig. 13.                                                           spectively. The only trajectory that satisfies
All the three training algorithms are identical except the         the specification is for STL2LB.
smooth semantics that is utilized. They are also started from a unique guess for initial control
parameters. We utilized the MATLAB function adamupdate(), that automatically tunes the learning
rate and momentum in SGD.
    9
      The low value for b is the main reason behind the sudden drop in the learning curve for STL2LB. We can
effectively compensate for this issue by increasing the value of b. Here, increasing to b = 15 is sufficient.


                                                      21
