Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


N ONLINEAR I NFERENCE L EARNING FOR D IFFEREN -
TIALLY P RIVATE M ASSIVE DATA

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         The Bag of Little Bootstraps (BLB) method is widely utilized as a robust and
         computationally efficient approach in statistical inference studies involving large-
         scale data. However, this sampling technique overlooks the privacy protection of
         the original data. To address this limitation, we enhance the existing differential
         privacy algorithm and integrate it with the BLB method. This integration gives
         rise to a novel differential privacy mechanism, enabling a comprehensive statis-
         tical analysis of aggregated parameters while safeguarding the confidentiality of
         individual private data. Additionally, to address both the variability in noise vari-
         ance under the differential privacy mechanism and the uncertainty surrounding
         estimate distributions, we employ the central limit theorem within the context of
         nonlinear expectation theory. This facilitates the derivation of the corresponding
         test statistic and the introduction of a hypothesis testing methodology. Further-
         more, we validate the commendable performance of our proposed inference pro-
         cedure through data simulation studies. The big data-oriented differential privacy-
         preserving mechanism proposed in this study effectively fulfills the requirements
         for privacy preservation without compromising subsequent statistical inference.
         This contribution holds significant reference value for the sharing of pertinent data
         and endeavors related to statistical analysis.


1   I NTRODUCTION
In the era of massive data, the expansion of dataset sizes is surging, and large-scale datasets are
becoming more prevalent. Simultaneously, as technology for processing massive data matures and
computer hardware performance improves, using massive data becomes more efficient. However,
significant sample sizes, inherent variability in sampled data, and uncertainty around model selection
collectively pose new challenges to statistical modeling. Additionally, ensuring user privacy remains
crucial. Hence, our research focuses on preserving data privacy while conducting effective statistical
analyses.
Bootstrap methods introduced by Efron (1992) and subsequent advancements, like subsampling
Politis et al. (1999) and out-of-bootstrap methods Bickel & Sakov (2008), have enhanced statistical
inference for large-scale data sampling. Despite optimal resample size strategies Bickel et al. (2012),
substantial computation remains necessary. The Bag of Little Bootstraps (BLB) method by Kleiner
et al. (2012) combines outcomes from small bootstrapped subsets of a larger dataset, benefiting
statistical inference in extensive datasets. Merging bootstrap statistics with computation through
simulation yields robust results and enhanced efficiency.
However, prior studies concentrating on properties of estimators from extensive data methods over-
look sampled data privacy. If data providers distrust collectors or analysts, obtaining accurate data
is challenging, hindering inference. Differential Privacy (DP), proposed by Dwork et al. (2006),
is a privacy definition based on noise injection. Noise can be added to data, model parameters,
or outputs, preventing privacy attacks. Noise-based privacy methods are efficient but can reduce
accuracy.
There is extensive literature on massive data with differential privacy (Sarwate & Chaudhuri, 2013;
Joseph et al., 2018; Li et al., 2021). Xiong et al. (2018) developed an efficient, differential private
frequent itemsets mining algorithm over large-scale data. Vasa & Thakkar (2022) presented different
methods for protecting privacy for deep learning in massive data analysis. The methods reviewed in


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Vasa & Thakkar (2022) are classified based on anonymization, optimization-based approaches, and
cryptographic methods. Recent work attempt to link differential privacy to statistical problems of
streaming data by developing privacy-preserving algorithms. For example, Duchi et al. (2014) pro-
posed a common local Differential Privacy (LDP) for streaming data with SGD algorithm to obtain
a valid point estimation. Cummings et al. (2018) constructed a novel dynamic setting to provide an
accurate analysis of empirical risk minimization under the DP mechanism for a steaming database.
Hasidim et al. (2020) established a connection between the adversarial robustness of streaming al-
gorithms and the DP mechanism. Although there have been many advances in differential privacy
since the pioneering work of Dwork et al. (2006), one could argue that due to the lack of extensive
statistical inference guidelines, their practical utility in massive data area is minimal. In particular,
there is no general procedure for performing statistical hypothesis testing in the context of massive
data, which our paper plans to overcome.
This paper introduces an algorithm for implementing a differential privacy mechanism for sample
statistics, utilizing the Bag of Little Bootstraps sampling method. The overall estimate is derived
through an average-based aggregation technique applied to privacy-treated sample statistics. How-
ever, the variance of the noise introduced by the differential privacy algorithm exhibits heterogeneity
due to varying sensitivities among the bag-specific samples. This variance disparity results in uncer-
tainty regarding the distribution of the analyzed statistics, consequently impeding effective statistical
inference. To address this, we employ the sublinear expectation theory advanced by Peng (2010),
enabling an exploration of asymptotic statistical outcomes. Specifically, we establish the asymptotic
G-normal distribution of terminal DP estimates, enabling valid statistical inferences about overall
parameters and assessment of statistic performance via numerical simulations.
The primary contributions of this paper are outlined below:

       • Pioneering differential privacy in static massive data using a novel algorithm.
       • Providing a general, scalable differentially private algorithm adaptable to various methods.
       • Analyzing asymptotic distribution of statistics using Nonlinear expectation theory, con-
         structing parameter statistics and hypothesis testing.

The paper’s structure is outlined as follows. We commence by introducing our approach for formu-
lating differentially private estimators within the scope of massive data. Subsequently, we delve into
an exploration of their asymptotic characteristics, elucidating the methodology for creating corre-
sponding hypothesis tests and confidence intervals. Due to the length of the article, please refer to
the appendix for more details on this section. We substantiate the effectiveness of inference using
our differential privacy mechanism through the examination of synthetic data. The final section en-
capsulates our article by offering conclusions, a comprehensive discussion of outcomes, and insights
into potential future research avenues.


2     M ETHODOLOGY

2.1   BLB METHOD

The original dataset is represented as X = [X1 , X2 , · · · , XN ], encompassing a substantial number
of N data points. We subsequently engage in K non-replacement sampling iterations on the initial
                                                                           ∗        ∗    ∗        ∗
dataset to procure K mutually independent sub-samples, denoted     h as X = {X1 , X2 ,i· · · , XK }.
Within this context, for 1 ≤ k ≤ K, each sub-sample Xk∗ = Xk,1
                                                           ∗      ∗
                                                               , Xk,2            ∗
                                                                      , · · · , Xk,r k
                                                                                       contains a
total of rk data points.
From each sampled dataset, we conduct bootstrap sampling with replacement, yielding B
bootstrap
  ∗1       samples. For instance, with the subsample Xk∗ , we form bootstrapped samples
  Xk , Xk , · · · , Xk∗B . For 1 ≤ b ≤ B, each bootstrapped sample Xk∗b comprises rk data points,
          ∗2
                                                                   n oB
allowing us to derive an estimate θbk∗b using Xk∗b . The collection θbk∗b is then aggregated to de-
                                                                          b=1
rive a corresponding estimate θb (Xk∗ ) = θbk ∈ Θ for the unknown population parameter θ associated
with F . In this manner, we obtain K estimates of the parameter θ. Moreover, we designate QN (F )


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Figure 1: Flowchart of BLB and Bag-specific DP method


as the authentic underlying distribution of θ, a determination influenced jointly by the form of F and
the parameter θ.
The classical goal of the BLB is to compute an estimator quality assessment ψ (QN (F ), F ), where
ψ can denote quantile, confidence interval, standard error, or deviation.
                                                                        √ For example, if ψ computes
a confidence interval, it might derive the distribution of the statistic N (θb− θ). In practice, since F
or QN (F ) is unknown, we must estimate ψ (QN (F ), F ) based on the subsample-based estimators.

2.2   BAG - SPECIFIC D IFFERENTIAL P RIVACY

Considering privacy protection, this approach becomes inadequate for the diverse range of applica-
tions involving continuous subsampling over time without privacy safeguards. This limitation arises
from the tendency of subsampled data sets to contain bag-specific sensitive information, where each
bag corresponds to only one subsampled data set. Despite the trust data providers place in data
collectors or managers, doubt may arise concerning data learners employing machine learning tech-
niques, especially when their statistical algorithms identify sensitive observations or outliers. To
address privacy concerns, we propose the incorporation of a differential privacy mechanism into the
bag-specific estimator θbk . Firstly, we introduce the notions of bag-specific sensitivity and (ε, δ)-
differential privacy for this purpose.

Definition 1 (Bag-specific sensitivity) The ℓ1 -sensitivity of bag-specific estimate θbk is defined by

                        Λk =         sup           θb (Xk∗ ) − θb (Xk∗′ ) < ∞
                               {δ(Xk∗ ,Xk∗′ )=1}

where δ (Xk∗ , Xk∗′ ) represent the Hamming distance between two neighboring dataset Xk∗ and Xk∗′ .
That is, we can use Λb to calculate the sensitivity of θbk uniquely determined by the bag-specific
sample Xk∗ .

Definition 2 ((ε, δ)-differential privacy) For an estimator θbk , satisfying (ε, δ)-differential privacy,
if for any two adjacent data sets Xk∗ , Xk∗′ , for F ⊆ Range(θ),
                                                               b the estimator obeys the following
inequality
                          h             i            h              i
                      Pr θb (Xk∗ ) ∈ F ≤ eεk · Pr θb (Xk∗′ ) ∈ F + δk


                                                      3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where the values of εb and δk are dictated by the bag-specific privacy requisites pertaining to the
b-th bag’s samples. When the privacy stipulations are uniform across distinct subsamples, we can
employ a unified set of values, denoted as εk = ε and δk = δ. For the sake of generality, this article
assumes uniform privacy requirements across all bags.
In this study, we incorporate the (ε, δ)-Gaussian differential privacy mechanism
                                                                               into
                                                                                   the estimator
θk by introducing random noise uk drawn from a Gaussian distribution N 0, σk2 . This article’s
approach ensures the same privacy standards for all bags. The subsequent lemma asserts that the
Gaussian mechanism applied to each sample bag guarantees (ε, δ)-differential privacy.

Lemma 1 Dwork et al. (2014) Let ε ∈ (0, 1) be arbitrary constant. For c2 > 2 ln(1.25/δ), the
Gaussian Mechanism with parameter σk ≥ cΛk /ε is (ε, δ)-differentially private, where Λk is the
sensitivity of θb (Xk∗ ), for 1 ≤ k ≤ K.

From this lemma, the standard deviation of the added noise is calculated as
                                                p
                                            Λk 2 ln(1.25/δ)
                                     σk =
                                                    ε
consequently,
              after privacy processing, the estimator is obtained by θbknaive,dp = θbk + uk , and uk ∼
       2
N 0, σk .
The outlined procedure is illustrated in Fig 1. We performed parameter estimation based on the
BLB method and added the bag-specific DP. Our approach entails parameter estimation grounded
in the BLB method, augmented with bag-specific differential privacy (DP). Subsequent sections
will delve into the statistical inference challenges arising from the introduction of bag-specific
DP. However, for 1 ≤ k ≤ K, since sub-sampling        n     produces duplication
                                                                         o         of samples among
  ∗1      ∗2         ∗B                                  ∗1 b∗2       ∗B
  Xk , Xk , · · · , Xk , the individual estimators θk , θk , · · · , θk
                                                        b            b     aren’t independent of each
other. Additionally, the variance of the distinct estimates’ introduced random noise showcases het-
erogeneity due to varying sensitivities, thereby complicating access to subsequent statistical infer-
ence.

2.3   D IFFERENTIALLY P RIVATE A LGORITHM

Therefore, we introduce an innovative privacy-preserving algorithm aimed at minimizing the vari-
ance fluctuations in random noise. This novel approach facilitates the establishment of hypothe-
sis tests and confidence intervals through the G-Normal theory proposed by Peng & Zhou (2020),
thereby enhancing our capacity to address subsequent statistical inference challenges. The frame-
work for generating the novel differentially private online estimator unfolds as follows: Initially, we
represent the range of standard deviation fluctuations in random noise as
                       ∆ = max {σ1 , σ2 , · · · , σK } − min {σ1 , σ2 , · · · , σK }
where σ1 , σ2 , · · · , σK are calculated from the above mentioned Gaussian differential privacy for-
mula.
Next, we specify its upper and lower standard deviation bounds as
                        γ̄              √                       √
                  σ̄ = √ + ∆, γ̄ = max { rk σk } , k̄ = argmax { rk σk }
                         nk̄      1≤k≤K                  1≤k≤K
                        γ               √                      √
                  σ = √ + ∆, γ = min { rk σk } , k = argmin { rk σk }
                         rk       1≤k≤K                 1≤k≤K


Thus our newly constructed differentially private estimator is θbkdp = θbk + ωk = θbk + ξk ϵk , where
ϵk is a random variable that obeys a normal distribution N [0, 1], {ξk }1≤k≤K ∈ Σ(σ, σ̄) denotes the
                                               ∞
collection of all measurable sequences {Fk }k=1 , which bounded to [σ, σ̄]. On the other hand, the
natural filtration is generated by ωk and the value of ξk is taken as
                                                    √
                                       σ̄, |Sk−1 | /√K ≤ λ2k−1 c1−α/2

                               ξk =
                                       σ, |Sk−1 | / K > λ2k−1 c1−α/2

                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where Sk equals to
                                           k
                                                   !                                         k
                                                                                                     !
                      √                 1 Xb                         √                    1 Xb
                          r1    θb1dp −       θk       + ··· +           rk       θbkdp −       θk
                                        k i=1                                             k i=1
                                                                                            −1
c1−α/2 is critical value of t distribution with
                                            h√properifreedom and it can be approximated by Φ (1−
α/2) when K tends to infinity, λ2 = var rk θbdp is calculated as
                                     k                      k

                                         k
                                                                     (        k
                                                                                           )2
                                     1   X   √               2           1 X √ bdp
                               λ2k =             rk θbkdp        −             rk θk
                                    k i=1                                k i=1

therefore, we end up this section with a new differentially private estimator θbkdp . Moreover, it can be
verified that this new estimator still satisfies Gaussian differential privacy requirement, i.e., Theorem
1.

Theorem 1 The bag-specific estimator θbk satisfies (ε, δ)-Gaussian differential privacy if the stan-
dard deviation is produced by above policy for k = 1, · · · , K.

Theorem 1 holds, because the standard deviation of the noise we defined satisfies the following
                                                       p
                                 γ̄                 Λk 2 ln(1.25/δ)
                          σ̄ = √ + ∆ > σk =
                                  nk̄                        ε
                                                                         p
                                     γ           Λk                          2 ln(1.25/δ)
                                σ = √ + ∆ > σk =
                                     rk                                         ε

Algorithm 1 Differentially Private Algorithm
Input: K, θbk , Λk , ϵk
Function: Differential Privacy Estimator
  for k = 1 to K do
    Compute standard deviation of Gaussian DP noise σk
    Compute statistics Sk
    Compute asymptotic variance λ2k
    Generate standard normal distribution variable ϵk
  end for
  Compute fluctuation range ∆
  Compute upper and lower bounds σ̄, σ
  for k = 1 to K√ do
    if |Sk−1 | / K > λ2k−1 c1−α/2 then
        ξk = σ̄
    else
        ξk = σ
    end if
  end for
  return θbkdp = θbk + ξk ϵk
  End Function
                                                         n oK
We delve into the asymptotic properties of the estimators θbkdp     . For details, please refer to the
                                                                k=1
Appendix.

3     H YPOTHESIS T EST AND C ONFIDENCE I NTERVAL
3.1   TAIL C APACITY

The parameter p, referred to as the tail capacity of the G-Normal distribution, is a term in which
”capacity” serves as a broader concept akin to probability. The determination of p holds essential


                                                            5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


significance for comprehending the G-Normal distribution, and it is imperative to pinpoint the value
of p corresponding to a conventional significance level such as α = 0.05. Initially, we delve into the
examination of the right tail capacity as follows
                   p1 λ̄Φ−1 (1 − α); λ, λ̄

                                           (K √                                   )
                                             X rk   dp
                  = lim        sup     Pr        √    θbk − θ > λ̄Φ−1 (1 − α)
                    K→∞ {λ }∈Σ(λ,λ̄)
                             k               k=1
                                                   K
besides, we can obtain the following Theorem

Theorem 2 for any α ≤ 0.05 and λ < λ̄, the right tail capacity is
                                                               2α
                         p1 = p1 λ̄Φ−1 (1 − α); λ, λ̄ =

                                                            1 + λ/λ̄
                                                  n oK
It’s important to note that when the estimators θbkdp         are independently generated within each
                                                         k=1
bag, indicating the absence of duplicate samples across subsamples and the application of a com-
mon Gaussian mechanism for perturbation (i.e., λ = λ̄), the right tail capacity maintains asymp-
totic equivalence to the classical significance level α as K → ∞. However, due to non-identity
                                                                   ∞
originating from the sequence of heterogeneous variances {λk }k=1 , the assumption of identical be-
havior may be compromised. This leads to an increment in the right tail capacity by a minimum
of 2λ̄/(λ + λ̄). The definition of the right tail capacity in Theorem 3 suggests that selecting the
critical value of the classical standard normal distribution Φ−1 (1 − α) results in a right tail capacity
      α
of 1+λ/  λ̄
            . Thus, we can approximate the two-tailed capacity using the original critical value


                      p2 λ̄Φ−1 (1 − α/2); λ, λ̄ ≈ 2p1 λ̄Φ−1 (1 − α/2); λ, λ̄


                                                     2α
                                                =
                                                  1 + λ/λ̄

3.2   T EST S TATISTIC

Next, we proceed to construct classical test statistics and delve into research concerning statistical
inference and hypothesis testing
                                                     √   bdp
                                            1   XK      rk θ k  − θ
                                TK (θ) = √                                                         (1)
                                            K k=1           λ
                                                            b
where                                                      (                  )2
                                       K                          K
                           b2  1 X  √ bdp  2                   1 X √ bdp
                           λ =       rk θk   −                      rk θk
                               K                               K
                                      k=1                        k=1
The null and alternative assumptions are
                                        H0 : θ = θ0 ; H1 : θ ̸= θ0 .
                                                                     n√                    √        o
Given that the variances of the released sequential DP estimators        r1 θb1dp , · · · , rK θbK
                                                                                                 dp
                                                                                                      are less
                      2                  2                                 2
than or equal to λ̄ , it follows that λ b is also less than or equal to λ̄ with probability one. As a
result, if θ 0 represents the true parameter value, we proceed with a test involving the rejection region
  |TK (θ0 )| > Φ−1 (1− α/2)}. The probability of  rejecting the null hypothesis H0 is then bounded


from below by Pr (|SK (θ0 )| > λ̄Φ−1 (1 − α/2) . However, in cases where the learner has the
freedom to select any {λk } ∈ Σ(λ, λ), then


                                                  Pr |SK (θ0 )| > λ̄Φ−1 (1 − α/2)

                            lim       sup
                           K→∞
                                  {λk }∈Σ(λ,λ̄)

                        = p2 λ̄Φ−1 (1 − α/2); λ, λ̄


                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


By Theorem 3, the left and right tail capacities are not symmetric in this G-Normal distribution. We
can approximate the two tailed capacity by
                                                                2α
                               p2 λ̄Φ−1 (1 − α/2); λ, λ̄ ≈

                                                                      >α
                                                             1 + λ/λ̄

Given the non-independence and non-identical nature of the sequential DP estimator sequences
n oK
 θbdp
    k     , the type I error rate in this test deviates from α. The learner has the capacity to am-
         k=1
plify the probability of erroneously rejecting the null hypothesis by a minimum of 2λ̄/(λ + λ̄). As a
consequence, if our intention is to uphold the null hypothesis rejection standard at a significant level
of α = 0.05, the corresponding critical value must be adjusted to

                                           −1          λ + λ̄
                                         Φ      1−α
                                                         4λ̄
Meanwhile, the 1 − α = 95% confidence interval for θ till K can be constructed by [Z1 , Z2 ]
                                  √
                                    rk
                                                 √        −1

                                                                     λ+λ̄

                           K
                           X                        KΦ         1 − α  4λ̄
                                   λ       dp
                      Z1 =    PK √rk θbk −
                                   b
                                                         PK √rk
                                 k=1
                                  k=1 λ b            k=1 λ b
                                   √
                                     rk
                                              √    −1

                                                              λ+λ̄

                             XK                 KΦ      1 − α  4λ̄
                                    λ     dp
                        Z2 =     PK √rk θbk +
                                    b
                                                  PK √rk
                             k=1  k=1 λ b            k=1 λ b

This indicates that the primary cost associated with constructing confidence intervals due to se-
quential
       DP under    heterogeneous noise is the augmented length of the confidence interval, as
  −1
Φ     1 − α 4λ̄ is larger than Φ−1 (1 − α/2). In reality, λ̄ and λ are unknown. We can esti-
            λ+λ̄

mate λ̄2 and λ2 consistently by
                                                                         2
                           2   1  X  √ dp  2  1 X √ dp 
                         λ
                         b̄ =
                               ¯          rk θbk     −     ¯       rk θbk
                              |I|                       |I|              
                                  k∈I¯                       k∈I¯
                                                                         2
                         b2 = 1
                                  X      √ bdp     2      1 X    √ bdp 
                         λ                rk θk      −             rk θk
                              |I|                       |I|              
                                       k∈I                    k∈I

Let I be the corresponding index multisets where I¯ = {b : ξk = σ̄} , I = {k : ξk = σ}.

4       S IMULATION S TUDY
This section scrutinizes the performance of the proposed DP procedure within the context of the
mean model. Our assumptions are rooted in the normal distribution N [2, 1] characterizing the orig-
inal data, with the population parameter of interest denoted as θ = 2. Utilizing bag bootstrap
sampling, we generate K subsample sets {X1∗ , X2∗ , · · · , XK
                                                             ∗
                                                               }, stipulating that the number of sam-
ples contained in each subsample set ranges from 50 to 100, i.e., 50 ≤ rk ≤ 100, ∀k ∈ [1, K]. The
mean statistic within the k-th bag is expressed as follows
                                                Prk      ∗
                                                   i=1 Xk,i
                                          θk =
                                          b
                                                     rk
                                                                      ∗
as per the aforementioned equation, when there’s a unit change in Xk,i  , θbk experiences a change of
1/rk units. Hence, the corresponding sensitivity within the k-th bag amounts to 1/rk . Our approach
employs the Gaussian mechanism and the perturbed standard deviation for the naive differential
privacy (DP) is given by                     p
                                                2 ln(1.25/δ)
                                      σk =
                                                    rk ε

                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Since rk fluctuates within the range [50, 100], it corresponds to the maximum value of σk when
rk = 50 and the minimum value of σk when rk = 100. The upper and lower bounds of the standard
deviation are thus substituted into the formula
                                                p                p
                                                 22 ln(1.25/δ)     2 ln(1.25/δ)
                                          σ̄ =                 −
                                               p     50ε              100ε
                                                 2 ln(1.25/δ)
                                          σ=
                                                     50ε

Further we can obtain the estimators θbkdp after the differential privacy algorithm processing.
To commence, we analyze the distinction between the asymptotic distribution of TK (θ) and the
conventional t distribution for the parameters 50 ≤ rk ≤ 100, K = 1000, δ = 0.01, ε = 0.1. In this
investigation, we generate a total of 1000 subsamples. Figure 3 illustrates the histogram portraying
the empirical distribution of the test statistics TK (θ) centered around the veritable value of θ. Upon
juxtaposing the histogram against the black density line depicting the classical t distribution with
(K-1) degrees of freedom, a noticeable augmentation in the two-tailed capacity becomes evident.
This aligns precisely with the theoretical outcomes outlined in Theorem 3.


                                    0.4


                                    0.3
                          Density


                                    0.2


                                    0.1


                                    0.0

                                          −5.0       −2.5       0.0   2.5         5.0


Figure 2: Histogram of the empirical distribution of the test statistics TK (θ) under the true value θ.
The black line represents the density function of the t-distribution with K − 1 degrees of freedom.


Subsequently, we delve into the examination of our estimators’ confidence intervals. These inter-
vals constitute estimations derived from sample statistics and encase the overall parameters. The
evaluation criteria for the adequacy of a confidence interval rest on two principles: firstly, a higher
confidence level signifies superior performance; secondly, a narrower interval width implies a more
favorable outcome.
Broadly speaking, three primary factors govern the width of a confidence interval. The foremost
element is the dispersion exhibited by the complete dataset, typically assessed through variance
measurement. Subsequent is the sample size; larger samples yield richer information content, which
generally translates into narrower confidence intervals. Moreover, the confidence level itself also
influences the interval width.
We purposefully chose δ values of 0.001, 0.005, and 0.01 to facilitate a comparative analysis of
confidence interval widths between estimates processed through the differential privacy mechanism
and the original estimates. Figures 3, 4, and 5 offer insights into the 1 − α = 95% confidence
intervals of θ, derived from the average-aggregated DP estimators within each bag. Notably, these
visualizations demonstrate the congruence between the confidence bands of the estimators based
on the original datasets and those produced through larger bag sizes. Concurrently, a diminutive
privacy budget combined with a substantial δ value yields a markedly narrower confidence band,
progressively approximating the outcomes obtained through accumulated statistics devoid of DP
processing.


                                                            8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      1.00                                                                                                                1.00


                      0.75                                                                                                                0.75



    Confidence Band


                                                                                                                        Confidence Band
                                                                                                Method                                                                                                Method
                      0.50                                                                         DP                                     0.50                                                           DP
                                                                                                   no DP                                                                                                 no DP



                      0.25                                                                                                                0.25


                      0.00                                                                                                                0.00

                             0   500   1000      1500                       2000       2500                                                        0      500       1000         1500   2000   2500
                                         Batch Size                                                                                                                      Batch Size


                                       (a) δ = 0.001                                                                                                               (b) δ = 0.005
                                                                          1.00


                                                                          0.75
                                                        Confidence Band


                                                                                                                                                                Method
                                                                          0.50                                                                                     DP
                                                                                                                                                                   no DP



                                                                          0.25


                                                                          0.00

                                                                                   0      500       1000         1500                       2000       2500
                                                                                                         Batch Size


                                                                                                    (c) δ = 0.01

Figure 3: Confidence band of two methods including sequential DP estimation (red) and estimators
under original data (green) across three cases δ = 0.005, 0.01, 0.01.


5    D ISCUSSION

This paper contributes in the following ways: Firstly, we introduce a novel differential privacy esti-
mation method by adapting an existing differential privacy mechanism. This approach enables us to
derive estimates for overall parameters of interest through bag bootstrap sampling while safeguard-
ing data privacy by adjusting the (ε, δ) parameter within differential privacy. Secondly, we elucidate
the process of generating specific estimates for diverse sampled datasets and subsequently obtain-
ing overall parameter estimates. Addressing the intricate realm of statistical inference, we confront
challenges arising from the variance uncertainty introduced by privacy protection. To tackle this,
we employ the central limit theorem within nonlinear expectation theory. This allows us to es-
tablish that the statistics we construct exhibit an asymptotic G-normal distribution as the sample
size approaches infinity, yielding favorable statistical properties. In particular, our investigation re-
veals that the proposed bag-specific sensitivity introduces heterogeneous noisy perturbations with
uncertain variances, leading to an enlarged tail capacity for hypothesis and lengthened confidence
intervals. Furthermore, potential avenues for improvement and future research are identified. These
include extending the sequential ℓ1 -sensitivity to ℓp -sensitivity and considering statistical inference
with local differential privacy, accounting for user-specific privacy settings. Additionally, we pro-
pose exploring distributed learning, online learning, or federated learning scenarios, building upon
the foundational work of Wasserman & Zhou (2010) and Duchi et al. (2014).


R EFERENCES
Peter J Bickel and Anat Sakov. On the choice of m in the m out of n bootstrap and confidence bounds
  for extrema. Statistica Sinica, pp. 967–985, 2008.

Peter J Bickel, Friedrich Götze, and Willem R van Zwet. Resampling fewer than n observations:
  gains, losses, and remedies for losses. In Selected works of Willem van Zwet, pp. 267–297.
  Springer, 2012.


                                                                                                               9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Rachel Cummings, Sara Krehbiel, Kevin A Lai, and Uthaipon Tantipongpipat. Differential privacy
  for growing databases. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.

John C Duchi, Michael I Jordan, and Martin J Wainwright. Privacy aware learning. Journal of the
  ACM (JACM), 61(6):1–57, 2014.

Cynthia Dwork, Frank McSherry, Kobbi Nissim, and Adam Smith. Calibrating noise to sensitivity
  in private data analysis. In Theory of cryptography conference, pp. 265–284. Springer, 2006.

Cynthia Dwork, Aaron Roth, et al. The algorithmic foundations of differential privacy. Foundations
  and Trends® in Theoretical Computer Science, 9(3–4):211–407, 2014.

Bradley Efron. Bootstrap methods: another look at the jackknife. In Breakthroughs in statistics, pp.
  569–593. Springer, 1992.

Xiao Fang, Shige Peng, Qi-Man Shao, and Yongsheng Song. Limit theorems with rate of conver-
  gence under sublinear expectations. Bernoulli, 25(4A):2564–2596, 2019.

Avinatan Hasidim, Haim Kaplan, Yishay Mansour, Yossi Matias, and Uri Stemmer. Adversarially
  robust streaming algorithms via differential privacy. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 33:147–158, 2020.

Matthew Joseph, Aaron Roth, Jonathan Ullman, and Bo Waggoner. Local differential privacy for
 evolving data. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.

Ariel Kleiner, Ameet Talwalkar, Purnamrita Sarkar, and Michael Jordan. The big data bootstrap.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1206.6415, 2012.

Weiting Li, Liyao Xiang, Zhou Zhou, and Feng Peng. Privacy budgeting for growing machine
 learning datasets. In IEEE INFOCOM 2021-IEEE Conference on Computer Communications,
 pp. 1–10. IEEE, 2021.

Shige Peng. Nonlinear expectations and stochastic calculus under uncertainty. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1002.4546, 24, 2010.

Shige Peng. Law of large numbers and central limit theorem under nonlinear expectations. Proba-
  bility, Uncertainty and Quantitative Risk, 4(1):1–8, 2019.

Shige Peng and Quan Zhou. A hypothesis-testing perspective on the g-normal distribution theory.
  Statistics & Probability Letters, 156:108623, 2020.

Dimitris N Politis, Joseph P Romano, and Michael Wolf. Subsampling for nonstationary time series.
  In Subsampling, pp. 101–119. Springer, 1999.

Dmitry B Rokhlin. Central limit theorem under uncertain linear transformations. Statistics & Prob-
 ability Letters, 107:191–198, 2015.

Anand D Sarwate and Kamalika Chaudhuri. Signal processing and machine learning with differen-
  tial privacy: Algorithms and challenges for continuous data. IEEE signal processing magazine,
  30(5):86–94, 2013.

Jalpesh Vasa and Amit Thakkar. Deep learning: Differential privacy preservation in the era of big
   data. Journal of Computer Information Systems, pp. 1–24, 2022.

Larry Wasserman and Shuheng Zhou. A statistical framework for differential privacy. Journal of
  the American Statistical Association, 105(489):375–389, 2010.

Xinyu Xiong, Fei Chen, Peizhi Huang, Miaomiao Tian, Xiaofang Hu, Badong Chen, and Jing Qin.
  Frequent itemsets mining with differential privacy over large-scale data. IEEE access, 6:28877–
  28889, 2018.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    A PPENDIX

B    A SYMPTOTICALLY T HEORETICAL R ESULTS
                                                                          n oK
In this section, we delve into the asymptotic properties of the estimators θbkdp . Our primary
                                                                                       k=1
concern revolves around assessing whether θbkdp approaches the true value in a meaningful manner as
the sample size expands substantially. Specifically, our analysis centers on its asymptotic normality,
                                                                      √        dp

scrutinizing whether the distribution of the random variable Zn = rk θk − θ adheres to the
                                                                              b
normal distribution. If θbkdp functions as an asymptotic normal estimator of θ, it inherently qualifies
as a consistent estimator for θ. This coherence arises from the concept of collinearity, pondering
whether θbkdp → θ holds as K → ∞, here → signifies the convergence of the random variable within
a probability context.
As stipulated by Slutsky’s theorem, when an estimator exhibits asymptotic normality, it necessitates
convergence in probability, thus ensuring consistent estimation. Within the framework of this paper,
our objective entails scrutinizing whether the distribution of the estimator approaches normality as
the sampling   number    K approaches infinity. The mean value of the random variable Zn equates to
√   bdp
  rk θk − θ /K. Employing the central limit theorem as our foundation, we devise the subse-
quent test statistic to explore the estimator’s asymptotic normality
                                                    K
                                           1 X √   bdp
                                 SK (θ) = √       rk θk − θ
                                            K k=1

given the presence of variance heterogeneity in the estimates θbkdp , coupled with their interdepen-
dence, our approach necessitates turning to the central limit theorem as posited by Peng (2010)
within the framework of nonlinear expectations.
                                                                                      √
We assume that E θbkdp        = E θbk       = θ       or = θ+ Op √1rk , var               rk θbk   =

               3
σf2 , E θbkdp      < ∞, and denote the bag-specific variance λ2k with

                                    n     √                         √           o
                       λ̄2   =   max var    r1 θb1dp , · · · , var    rk θbkdp
                             =   σf2 + γ̄ 2
                                      n      √                         √           o
                       λ2    =   min var       r1 θb1dp , · · · , var    rk θbkdp
                             =   σf2 + γ 2
It can be verified that SK (θ) obeys G-Normal distribution Peng (2010) which is defined in Definition
3.

Definition 3 (G - Normal distribution). Let PY be a set of probability measures defined on the
space (Ω, F).A measurable function Y : Ω 7→ R is said to follow a Normal distribution with lower
variance λ2 and upper variance λ̄2 (0 ≤ λ ≤ λ̄), if, for every Lipschitz function φ,
                                                  Z
                        sup EP [φ(Y )] = sup          φ(Y )dP = u(1, 0; φ)
                         P∈PY                 P∈PY       Ω


where {u(t, y; φ) : (t, y) ∈ [0, ∞) × R} is the unique viscosity solution to the Cauchy Problem
                               1  2        +            −

                         ut =     λ̄ (uyy ) − λ2 (uyy ) , u(0, y) = φ(y)
                               2

In the above expression ut = ∂u            2      2
                               ∂t , uyy = ∂ u/∂y and the superscripts + and − denote the positive
and negative parts respectively and the sublinear partial differential equation is referred to a G-heat
equation.


                                                    11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


It should be emphasized that G-Normal distribution is unable to inherit the sense of traditional distri-
bution, because G-Normal distribution of one random variable actually has distributional uncertainty
and PY in this theorem denotes the collection of all possible probability measures of random vari-
able Y , which is caused by the heterogeneous standard deviations from [λ, λ̄] u(1, 0; φ) represents
the sublinear expectation of φ(Y ). This definition
                                                   also implies when λ = λ̄ = λ the G-Normal dis-
tribution reduces to normal distribution N 0, λ2 and G− heat equation reduces to the heat equation
with                                        Z ∞               √
                               u(t, y; φ) =       ϕ(z)φ(y + κ tz)dz
                                                 −∞
where ϕ(y) is the density function of standard normal distribution.
In the following, we use the central limit theorem under nonlinear expectation theory to study the
asymptotic sampling distribution of the statistic.
         K
Let {λk }k=1 ∈ Σ(λ, λ̄) be the collection of sequences that bounded to [λ, λ̄], where λ, λ̄ are given
constants (0 ≤ λ ≤ λ̄ < ∞).
                                                     n oK
                                   K
Theorem 3 For given constents {λk }k=1 ∈ Σ(λ, λ̄) and θbkdp     , and for any Lipschitz function
                                                            k=1
φ,
                             u(1, 0; φ)
                                                   K √
                                                       "           !#
                                                  X    rk n bdp   o
                        =     lim    sup      E φ     √    θk − θ
                             K→∞ {λ }∈Σ(λ,λ̄)
                                   k              k=1
                                                        K

where u(1, 0; φ) is given in Definition 3.

Essentially, this theorem can be regarded as an immediate corollary of Peng’s original central limit
theorem Peng (2019) in terms of the language of classical probability. We can refer to the similar
theoretical conclusion in the studies of Rokhlin (2015) and Fang et al. (2019), which can be seen as a
generalization of the classical central limit theorem to controlled stochastic processes
                                                                                    n Pengo∞ (2019).
                                                                                       dp
The theorem can be further generalized to non-identically distributed sequence θ      b
                                                                                        k      . Fang
                                                                                            k=1
et al. (2019) introduced the detailed proof procedures and the convergence rate of Theorem 2. The
function φ can also be any Borel measurable indicator function Peng & Zhou (2020).

                                          Sequential DP and statistical inference



                                             Based on subsample Xk∗ generate
                                                     dp
                                                   θbk  = θbk + ξk ϵk
                                                       ξk ∈ (σ, σ̄)


                                         ( The value of ξk is
                                                           √
                                                              determined by
                                          σ̄, if |Sk−1 | / K ≤ λ2k−1 c1−α/2
                                    ξk =                   √
                                          σ, if |Sk−1 | / K > λ2k−1 c1−α/2


                                          Statistical inference under test statistics
                                                    PK √   bdp
                                              √1               rk θ k − θ
                                                 K      k=1
                                              Select an adjusted critical value
                                                     Φ−1 (1 − α λ+ 4λ̄
                                                                      λ̄
                                                                         )


                     Figure 4: Flowchart of estimation and statistical inference.



                                                       12
