Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C OMPOSING R ECURRENT S PIKING N EURAL N ET-
WORKS USING L OCALLY-R ECURRENT M OTIFS AND
R ISK -M ITIGATING A RCHITECTURAL O PTIMIZATION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         In neural circuits, recurrent connectivity plays a crucial role in network function
         and stability. However, existing recurrent spiking neural networks (RSNNs) are
         often constructed by random connections without optimization. While RSNNs
         can produce rich dynamics that are critical for memory formation and learning,
         systemic architectural optimization of RSNNs is still an open challenge. We aim
         to enable systematic design of large RSNNs via a new scalable RSNN architec-
         ture and automated architectural optimization. We compose RSNNs based on a
         layer architecture called Sparsely-Connected Recurrent Motif Layer (SC-ML) that
         consists of multiple small recurrent motifs wired together by sparse lateral connec-
         tions. The small size of the motifs and sparse inter-motif connectivity leads to an
         RSNN architecture scalable to large network sizes. We further propose a method
         called Hybrid Risk-Mitigating Architectural Search (HRMAS) to systematically
         optimize the topology of the proposed recurrent motifs and SC-ML layer archi-
         tecture. HRMAS is an alternating two-step optimization process by which we
         mitigate the risk of network instability and performance degradation caused by
         architectural change by introducing a novel biologically-inspired “self-repairing”
         mechanism through intrinsic plasticity. The intrinsic plasticity is introduced to the
         second step of each HRMAS iteration and acts as unsupervised fast self-adaptation
         to structural and synaptic weight modifications introduced by the first step during
         the RSNN architectural “evolution”. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, this
         is the first work that performs systematic architectural optimization of RSNNs.
         Using one speech and three neuromorphic datasets, we demonstrate the signifi-
         cant performance improvement brought by the proposed automated architecture
         optimization over existing manually-designed RSNNs.


1   I NTRODUCTION
In the brain, recurrent connectivity is indispensable for maintaining dynamics, functions, and os-
cillations of the network (Buzsaki, 2006). As a brain-inspired computational model, spiking neural
networks (SNNs) are well suited for processing spatiotemporal information (Maass, 1997). In par-
ticular, recurrent spiking neural networks (RSNNs) can mimic microcircuits in the biological brain
and induce rich behaviors that are critical for memory formation and learning. Recurrence has been
explored in conventional non-spiking artificial neural networks (ANNs) in terms of Long Short Term
Memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997), Echo State Networks (ESN) (Jaeger, 2001),
Deep RNNs (Graves et al., 2013), Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) (Cho et al., 2014), and Legen-
dre Memory Units (LMU) (Voelker et al., 2019). While recurrence presents unique challenges and
opportunities in the context of spiking neural networks, RSNNs are yet to be well explored.
Most existing works on RSNNs adopt recurrent layers or reservoirs with randomly generated con-
nections. The Liquid State Machine (LSM) (Maass et al., 2002) is one of the most widely adopted
RSNN architectures with one or multiple recurrent reservoirs and an output readout layer wired up
using feedforward synapses (Zhang et al., 2015; Wang & Li, 2016; Srinivasan et al., 2018). However,
there is a lack of principled approaches for setting up the recurrent connections in reservoirs. In-
stead, ad-hoc randomly generated wiring patterns are often adopted. Bellec et al. (2018) proposed an
architecture called long short-term memory SNNs (LSNNs). The recurrent layer contains a regular


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


spiking portion with both inhibitory and excitatory spiking neurons and an adaptive neural popula-
tion. Zhang & Li (2019b) proposed to train deep RSNNs by a spike-train level backpropagation (BP)
method. Maes et al. (2020) demonstrated a new reservoir with multiple groups of excitatory neurons
and a central group of inhibitory neurons. Furthermore, Zhang & Li (2020a) presented a recurrent
structure named ScSr-SNNs in which recurrence is simply formed by a self-recurrent connection to
each neuron. However, the recurrent connections in all of these works are either randomly generated
with certain probabilities or simply constructed by self-recurrent connections. Randomly generated
or simple recurrent connections may not effectively optimize RSNNs’ performance. Recently, Pan
et al. (2023) introduced a multi-objective Evolutionary Liquid State Machine (ELSM) inspired by
neuroevolution process. Chakraborty & Mukhopadhyay (2023) proposed Heterogeneous recurrent
spiking neural network (HRSNN), in which recurrent layers are composed of heterogeneous neurons
with different dynamics. Chen et al. (2023) introduced an intralayer-connected SNN and a hybrid
training method combining probabilistic spike-timing dependent plasticity (STDP) with BP. But
their performance still has significant gaps. Systemic RSNN architecture design and optimization
remain as an open problem.
Neural architectural search (NAS), the process of automating the construction of non-spiking ANNs,
has become prevalent recently after achieving state-of-the-art performance on various tasks (Elsken
et al., 2019; Wistuba et al., 2019). Different types of strategies such as reinforcement learning (Zoph
& Le, 2017), gradient-based optimization (Liu et al., 2018), and evolutionary algorithms (Real et al.,
2019) have been proposed to find optimal architectures of traditional CNNs and RNNs. In contrast,
the architectural optimization of SNNs has received little attention. Only recently, Tian et al. (2021)
adopted a simulated annealing algorithm to learn the optimal architecture hyperparameters of liquid
state machine (LSM) models through a three-step search. Similarly, a surrogate-assisted evolu-
tionary search method was applied in Zhou et al. (2020) to optimize the hyperparameters of LSM
such as density, probability and distribution of connections. However, both studies focused only on
LSM for which hyperparameters indirectly affecting recurrent connections as opposed to specific
connectivity patterns were optimized. Even after selecting the hyperparameters, the recurrence in
the network remained randomly determined without any optimization. Recently, Kim et al. (2022)
explored a cell-based neural architecture search method on SNNs, but did not involve large-scale
recurrent connections. Na et al. (2022) introduced a spike-aware NAS framework called AutoSNN
to investigate the impact of architectural components on SNNs’ performance and energy efficiency.
Overall, NAS for RSNNs is still rarely explored.
This paper aims to enable systematic design of large recurrent spiking neural networks (RSNNs)
via a new scalable RSNN architecture and automated architectural optimization. RSNNs can create
complex network dynamics both in time and space, which manifests itself as an opportunity for
achieving great learning capabilities and a challenge in practical realization. It is important to strike
a balance between theoretical computational power and architectural complexity. Firstly, we argue
that composing RSNNs based on well-optimized building blocks small in size, or recurrent motifs,
can lead to an architectural solution scalable to large networks while achieving high performance.
We assemble multiple recurrent motifs into a layer architecture called Sparsely-Connected Recurrent
Motif Layer (SC-ML). The motifs in each SC-ML share the same topology, defined by the size of the
motif, i.e., the number of neurons, and the recurrent connectivity pattern between the neurons. The
motif topology is determined by the proposed architectural optimization while the weights within
each motif may be tuned by standard backpropagation training algorithms. Motifs in a recurrent
SC-ML layer are wired together using sparse lateral connections determined by imposing spatial
connectivity constraints. As such, there exist two levels of structured recurrence: recurrence within
each motif and recurrence between the motifs at the SC-ML level. The fact that the motifs are small
in size and that inter-motif connectivity is sparse alleviates the difficulty in architectural optimization
and training of these motifs and SC-ML. Furthermore, multiple SC-ML layers can be stacked and
wired using additional feedforward weights to construct even larger recurrent networks.
Secondly, we demonstrate a method called Hybrid Risk-Mitigating Architectural Search (HRMAS)
to optimize the proposed recurrent motifs and SC-ML layer architecture. HRMAS is an alternating
two-step optimization process hybridizing bio-inspired intrinsic plasticity for mitigating the risk in
architectural optimization. Facilitated by gradient-based methods (Liu et al., 2018; Zhang & Li,
2020b), the first step of optimization is formulated to optimize network architecture defined by the
size of the motif, intra and inter-motif connectivity patterns, types of these connections, and the
corresponding synaptic weight values, respectively.


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


While structural changes induced by the architectural-level optimization are essential for finding
high-performance RSNNs, they may be misguided due to discontinuity in architectural search, and
limited training data, hence leading to over-fitting. We mitigate the risk of network instability
and performance degradation caused by architectural change by introducing a novel biologically-
inspired “self-repairing” mechanism through intrinsic plasticity, which has the same spirit of home-
ostasis during neural development (Tien & Kerschensteiner, 2018). The intrinsic plasticity is in-
troduced in the second step of each HRMAS iteration and acts as unsupervised self-adaptation to
mitigate the risks imposed by structural and synaptic weight modifications introduced by the first
step during the RSNN architectural “evolution”.
We evaluate the proposed techniques on speech dataset TI46-Alpha (Liberman et al., 1991), neu-
romorphic speech dataset N-TIDIGITS (Anumula et al., 2018), neuromorphic video dataset DVS-
Gesture (Amir et al., 2017), and neuromorphic image dataset N-MNIST (Orchard et al., 2015).
The SC-ML-based RSNNs optimized by HRMAS achieve state-of-the-art performance on all four
datasets. With the same network size, automated network design via HRMAS outperforms existing
RSNNs by up to 3.38% performance improvement.


2   S PARSELY-C ONNECTED R ECURRENT M OTIF L AYER (SC-ML)

Unlike the traditional non-spiking RNNs that are typically constructed with units like LSTM or
GRU, the structure of existing RSNNs is random without specific optimization, which hinders
RSNNs’ performance and prevents scaling to large networks. However, due to the complexity of
recurrent connections and dynamics of spiking neurons, the optimization of RSNNs weights is still
an open problem. As shown in Table 2, recurrent connections that are not carefully set up may
hinder network performance. To solve this problem, we first designed the SC-ML layer, which is
composed of multiple sparsely-connected recurrent motifs, where each motif consists of a group of
recurrently connected spiking neurons, as shown in Figure 1. The motifs in each SC-ML share the
same topology, which is defined as the size of the motif, i.e., the number of neurons, and the re-
current connectivity pattern between the neurons (excitatory, inhibitory or non-existent). Within the
motif, synaptic connections can be constructed between any two neurons including self-recurrent
connections. Thus the problem of the recurrent layer optimization can be simplified to that of learn-
ing the optimal motif and sparse inter-motif connectivity, alleviating the difficulty in architectural
optimization and allowing scalability to large networks.
This motif-based structure is motivated by both
a biological and a computational perspective.
First, from a biological point of view, there is
evidence that the neocortex is not only orga-
nized in layered minicolumn structures but also
into synaptically connected clusters of neurons
within such structures (Perin et al., 2011; Ko
et al., 2011). For example, the networks of
pyramidal cells cluster into multiple groups of a
few dozen neurons each. Second, from a com-
putational perspective, optimizing the connec- Figure 1: Sparsely-Connected Recurrent Motif
tivity of the basic building block, i.e., the motif, Layer.
simplifies the problem of optimizing the con-
nectivity of the whole recurrent layer. Third, by constraining most recurrent connections inside the
motifs and allowing a few lateral connections between neighboring motifs to exchange information
across the SC-ML, the total number of recurrent connections is limited. This leads to a great deal of
sparsity as observed in biological networks (Seeman et al., 2018).
Figure 1 presents an example of SC-ML with 12-neuron motifs. The lateral inter-motif connections
can be introduced as the mutual connections between two corresponding neurons in neighboring
motifs to ensure sparsity and reduce complexity. With the proposed SC-ML, one can easily stack
multiple SC-MLs to form a multi-layer large RSNN using feedforward weights. Within a multi-
layered network, information processing is facilitated through local processing of different motifs,
communication of motif-level responses via inter-motif connections, and extraction and processing
of higher-level features layer by layer.


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3     H YBRID R ISK -M ITIGATING A RCHITECTURAL S EARCH (HRMAS)
To enhance the performance of RSNNs, we introduce the Hybrid Risk-Mitigating Architectural
Search (HRMAS). This framework systematically optimizes the motif topology and lateral connec-
tions of SC-ML. Each optimization iteration consists of two alternating steps.

3.1     H YBRID R ISK -M ITIGATING A RCHITECTURAL S EARCH F RAMEWORK

In HRMAS, all recurrent connections are categorized into three types: inhibitory, excitatory, and
non-existence. An inhibitory connection has a negative weight and is fixed without training in our
current implementation, similar to the approach described in (Zhang & Li, 2020a; 2021). The weight
of an excitatory connection is positive and trained by a backpropagation (BP) method. HRMAS is
an alternating two-step optimization process, hybridizing architectural optimization with intrinsic
plasticity (IP). The first step of each HRMAS optimization iteration optimizes the topology of the
motif and inter-motif connectivity in SC-ML and the corresponding synaptic weights hierarchically.
Specifically, the optimal number of neurons in the motif is optimized over a finite set of motif sizes.
All possible intra-motif connections are considered and the type of each connection is optimized,
which may lead to a sparser connectivity if the connection types of certain synapses are determined
to be “non-existence”. At the inter-motif level, a sparse motif-to-motif connectivity constraint is
imposed: neurons in one motif are only allowed to be wired up with the corresponding neurons
in the neighboring motifs. Inter-motif connections also fall under one of the three types. Hence,
a greater level of sparsity is produced with the emergence of connections of type “non-existence”.
The second step in each HRMAS iteration executes an unsupervised IP rule to stabilize the network
function and mitigate potential risks caused by architectural changes.
Figure 2 illustrates the incremental optimization strategy we adopt for the architectural parameters.
Using the two-step optimization, initially all architectural parameters including motif size and con-
nectivity are optimized. After several training iterations, we choose the optimal motif size from a
set of discrete options. As the most critical architectural parameter is set, we continue to optimize
the remaining architectural parameters defining connectivity, allowing fine-tuning of performance
based on the chosen motif size.


                          Figure 2: Architectural optimization in HRMAS.


3.1.1    C OMPARISON WITH PRIOR NEURAL ARCHITECTURAL SEARCH WORK OF NON - SPIKING
         RNN S
Neural architecture search (NAS) has been applied for architectural optimization of traditional non-
spiking RNNs, where a substructure called cell is optimized by a search algorithm (Zoph & Le,
2017). Nevertheless, this NAS approach may not be the best fit for RSNNs. First, recurrence in the
cell is only created by feeding previous hidden state back to the cell while connectivity inside the cell
is feedforward. Second, the overall operations and connectivity found by the above NAS procedure
do not go beyond an LSTM-like architecture. Finally, the considered combination operations and
activation functions like addition and elementwise multiplication are not biologically plausible.
In comparison, in RSNNs based on the proposed SC-ML architecture, we add onto the memory
effects resulting from temporal integration of individual spiking neurons by introducing sparse intra


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


or inter-motif connections. This corresponds to a scalable and biologically plausible RSNN archi-
tectural design space that closely mimics the microcircuits in the nervous system. Furthermore, we
develop the novel alternating two-step HRMAS framework hybridizing gradient-based optimization
and biologically-inspired intrinsic plasticity for robust NAS of RSNNs.


   Figure 3: Evolution in neural development.                  Figure 4: Proposed HRMAS.


3.2     A LTERNATING T WO -S TEP O PTIMIZATION IN HRMAS

The alternating two-step optimization in HRMAS is inspired by the evolution in neural development.
As shown in Figure 3, neural circuits may experience weight changes through synaptic plasticity.
Over a longer time scale, circuit architecture, i.e., connectivity, may evolve through learning and
environmental changes. In addition, spontaneous firing behaviors of individual neurons may be
adapted by intrinsic plasticity (IP). We are motivated by the important role of local IP mechanisms
in stabilizing neuronal activity and coordinating structural changes to maintain proper circuit func-
tions (Tien & Kerschensteiner, 2018). We view IP as a “fast-paced” self-adapting mechanism of
individual neurons to react to and minimize the risks of weight and architectural modifications. As
shown in Figure 4, we define the architectural parameters (motif size and intra/inter-motif connec-
tion types weights), synaptic weights, and intrinsic neuronal parameters as α, w, and β, respectively.
Each HRMAS optimization iteration consists of two alternating steps. In the first step, we optimize
α and w hierarchically based on gradient-based optimization using backpropagation (BP). In Fig-
ure 4, δ is the backpropagated error obtained via the employed BP method. In the second step, we
use an unsupervised IP rule to adapt the intrinsic neuronal parameters of each neuron over a time
window (“IP window”) during which training examples are presented to the network. IP allows the
neurons to respond to the weight and architectural changes introduced in the first step and mitigate
possible risks caused by such changes. In Step 1 of the subsequent iteration, the error gradients w.r.t
the synaptic weights and architectural parameters are computed based on the most recent values
of β updated in the preceding iteration. In summary, the k-th HRMAS iteration solves a bi-level
optimization problem:
                                 α∗ = arg min Lvalid (α, w∗ (α), β ∗ )                              (1)
                                              α
                                 s.t.   β ∗ = arg min Lip (α, w∗ (α), β−
                                                                       ∗
                                                                         ),                         (2)
                                                   β
                                 s.t.   w∗ (α) = arg min Ltrain (α, w, β−
                                                                        ∗
                                                                          ),                        (3)
                                                       w

where Lvalid and Ltrain are the loss functions defined based on the validation and training sets used
to train α and w respectively; Lip is the local loss to be minimized by the IP rule as further discussed
                   ∗
in Section 3.2.2; β− are the intrinsic parameter values updated in the preceding (k − 1)-th iteration;
  ∗
w (α) denotes the optimal synaptic weights under the architecture specified by α. The complete
derivation of the proposed optimization techniques can be found in the Supplemental Material.

3.2.1    G RADIENT- BASED O PTIMIZATION IN HRMAS
Optimizing the weight and architectural parameters by solving the bi-level optimization problem of
(1, 2, 3) can be computationally expensive. We adapt the recent method proposed in Liu et al. (2018)
to reduce computational complexity by relaxing the discrete architectural parameters to continuous
ones for efficient gradient-based optimization. Without loss of generality, we consider a multi-
layered RSNN consisting of one or more SC-ML layers, where connections between layers are


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


assumed to be feedforward. We focus on one SC-ML layer, as shown in Figure 5, to discuss the
proposed gradient-based optimization.
The number of neurons in the SC-ML
layer is fixed. The motif size is optimized
such that each neuron is partitioned into a
specific motif based on the chosen motif
size. The largest white square in Figure 5
shows the layer-connectivity matrix of all
intra-layer connections of the whole layer,
where the dimension of the matrix corre-
sponds to the neuron count of the layer.
We superimpose three sets of smaller gray
squares onto the layer-connectivity matrix,
one for each of the three possible motif
sizes of v1 , v2 , and v3 considered. Choos-
ing a particular motif size packs neurons
in the layer into multiple motifs, and the                      Figure 5: SC-ML with relaxed
corresponding gray squares illustrate the                       architectural parameters.
intra-motif connectivity introduced within
the SC-ML layer.
The entry of the layer-connectivity matrix at row r and column i specifies the existence and nature
of the connection from neuron r to neuron i. We consider multiple motif size and connection type
choices during architectural search using continuous-valued parameterizations αv and αir     c
                                                                                               , respec-
tively for each motif size v and connection type c. We relax the categorical choice of each motif size
                                                           v
using a softmax over all possible options: α̂v = P exp(α     )
                                                         exp(αv′ )
                                                                   , and similarly relax the categorical
                                                       v ′ ∈V
                                                                        c        exp(αcir )
choice of each connection type based on the corresponding motif size: α̂ir = P              c′ . Here,
                                                                                c′ ∈C exp(αir )
                                                                                       v         c
C and V are the set of all possible connection types and motif sizes, respectively; α̂ and α̂ir    are
the continuous-valued categorical choice of motif size v and connection type c, respectively, which
can also be interpreted as the probability of selecting the corresponding motif size or connection
type. As in Figure 5, the synaptic weight of the connection from neuron r to neuron i is expressed
as the summation of weights under all possible motif sizes and connection types weighted by the
respective continuous-valued categorical choices (selection probabilities).
Based on the leaky integrate-and-fire (LIF) neuron model (Gerstner & Kistler, 2002), the neuronal
membrane voltage ui [t] of neuron i in the SC-ML layer at time t is given by integrating currents
from all inter-layer inputs and intra-layer recurrent connections under all possible architectural pa-
rameterizations:
                                                                       v
                                                            Ii
                     1             R X              X
                                                          v
                                                            X  X
                                                                    c   c
        ui [t] = (1 − )ui [t − 1] + (  wij aj [t] +   (α̂        (α̂ir wir ar [t − 1]))),           (4)
                     τ             τ j                       r
                                                            v∈V            c∈C

where R and τ are the resistance and time constant of the membrane, wij the synaptic weight from
                                               c
neuron j in the previous layer to neuron i, wir   the recurrent weight from neuron r to neuron i of
connection type c, and aj [t] the (unweighted) postsynaptic current (PSC) converted from spikes of
neuron j through a synaptic model. To reduce clutter in the notation, we use Iiv to denote the number
of presynaptic connections afferent onto neuron i’s input in the recurrent layer when choosing motif
size v, which includes both inter-motif and intra-motif connections. We further drop the explicit
                  c
dependence of α̂ir   on α̂v . Through (4), the continuous architecture parameterizations influence
the integration of input currents, and hence firing activities of neurons in all layers and affect the
loss function defined at the output layer. As such, the task of architecture optimization reduces
to the one that learns the set of optimal continuous variables α̂c and α̂v . The final architecture is
constructed by choosing the parameterizations with the highest selection probabilities obtained from
the optimization.
We solve the bi-level optimization defined in (1), (2), (3) using the Temporal Spike Sequence
Learning via Backpropagation (TSSL-BP) method (Zhang & Li, 2020b), which handles non-
differentiability of the all-or-none spiking neural activation function. To alleviate the computa-
tional overhead, we approximate w∗ (α) in (3) by a one step of gradient-based update: w∗ (α) ≈


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        ∗
w − η∇w Ltrain (w, α, β−  ), where w are the initial weight values. The weights and architectural
parameters are updated by gradient descent as:
                                                           v
                                            Nr           Ii
                        R             v
                                            X          RX    X
                                                                    c   c
          ∆wij ∝ δi [t] aj [t], ∆α̂ ∝           δi [t]      (     α̂ir wir ar [t − 1]),
                        τ                    i
                                                       τ  r   c∈C                                   (5)
            c           RX v c                           c           RX v c
          ∆wir ∝ δi [t]      (α̂ α̂ir ar [t − 1]), ∆α̂ir    ∝ δi [t]        (α̂ wir ar [t − 1]).
                        τ                                            τ
                           v∈V                                          v∈V

where δi [t] is the backpropagated error for neuron i at time t given in (22) of the Supplemental
Material, Nr is the number of neurons in this recurrent layer, R and τ are the leaky resistance and
membrane time constant, two intrinsic parameters adapted by the IP rule, aj [t] and ar [t] are the
(unweighted) postsynaptic currents (PSCs) generated based on synpatic model by the presynaptic
neuron j in the preceding layer and the r-th neuron in this recurrent layer, respectively. We include
all details of the proposed gradient-based method and derivation of the involved error backpropaga-
tion in Section B and Section C of the Supplementary Material.

3.2.2   R ISK M INIMIZING O PTIMIZATION WITH I NTRINSIC P LASTICITY

For architectural optimization of non-spiking RNNs, gradient-based methods are shown to be un-
stable in some cases due to misguided architectural changes and conversion from the optimized
continuous-valued parameterization to a discrete architectural solution, hindering the final perfor-
mance and demolishing the effectiveness of learning (Zela et al., 2019). Adaptive regulariza-
tion which modifies the regularization strength (weight decay) guided by the largest eigenvalue
of ∇2α Lvalid was proposed to address this problem (Zela et al., 2019). While this method shows
promise for non-spiking RNNs, it is computationally intensive due to frequent expensive eigenvalue
computation, severely limiting its scalability.
To address risks observed in architectural changes for RSNNs, we introduce a biologically-inspired
risk-mitigation method. Biological circuits demonstrate that Intrinsic Plasticity (IP) is crucial in re-
ducing such risks. IP is a self-regulating mechanism in biological neurons ensuring homeostasis and
influencing neural circuit dynamics (Marder et al., 1996; Baddeley et al., 1997; Desai et al., 1999). It
not only stabilizes neuronal activity but also coordinates connectivity and excitability changes across
neurons to stabilize circuits (Maffei & Fontanini, 2009; Tien & Kerschensteiner, 2018). Drawing
from these findings, our HRMAS framework integrates the IP rule into the architectural optimiza-
tion, applied in the second step of each iteration. IP is based on local neural firing activities and
performs online adaptation with minimal additional computational overhead.
IP has been applied in spiking neural networks for locally regulating neuron activity (Lazar et al.,
2007; Bellec et al., 2018). In this work, we make use of IP for mitigating the risk of RSNN archi-
tectural modifications. We adopt the SpiKL-IP rule (Zhang & Li, 2019a) for all recurrent neurons
during architecture optimization. SpiKL-IP adapts the intrinsic parameters of a spiking neuron while
minimizing the KL-divergence from the output firing rate distribution to a targeted exponential dis-
tribution. It both maintains a level of network activity and maximizes the information transfer for
each neuron. We adapt leaky resistance and membrane time constant of each neuron using SpiKL-
IP which effectively solves the optimization problem in (2) in an online manner. The proposed
alternating two-step optimization of HRMAS is summarized in Algorithm 1. More details of the IP
implementation can be found in Section D of the Supplementary Material.


Algorithm 1: HRMAS - Hybrid Risk-Mitigating Architectural Search
Initialize weights w, intrinsic parameters β, architectural parameters α, and correspondingly α̂.
while no converged do
     Update α̂ by η1 ∇α̂ Lvalid (α̂, w − η2 ∇w Ltrain (α̂, w, β));
     Update w by η2 ∇w Ltrain (α̂, w, β);
     β ←− SpiKL-IP(α̂, w)
end



                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4     E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

The proposed HRMAS optimized RSNNs with the SC-ML layer architecture and five motif size
options are evaluated on speech dataset TI46-Alpha (Liberman et al., 1991), neuromorphic speech
dataset N-TIDIGITS (Anumula et al., 2018), neuromorphic video dataset DVS-Gesture (Amir et al.,
2017), and neuromorphic image dataset N-MNIST (Orchard et al., 2015). The performances are
compared with recently reported state-of-the-art manually designed architectures of SNNs and
ANNs such as feedforward SNNs, RSNNs, LSM, and LSTM. The details of experimental settings,
hyperparameters, loss function and dataset preprocessing are described in Section E of the Supple-
mentary Material. For the proposed work, the architectural parameters are optimized by HRMAS
with the weights trained on a training set and architectural parameters learned on a validation set as
shown in Algorithm 1. The accuracy of each HRMAS optimized network is evaluated on a separate
testing set with all weights reinitialized. Table 1 shows all results.

          Table 1: Accuracy on TI46-Alpha, N-TIDIGITS, DVS-Gesture and N-MNIST.

                 Network Structure             Learning Rule               Hidden Layers         Best
                                       TI46-Alpha
       LSM (Wijesinghe et al., 2019)          Non-spiking BP                   2000             78%
         RSNN (Zhang & Li, 2019b)                ST-RSBP                  400 − 400 − 400      93.35%
        Sr-SNN (Zhang & Li, 2020a)               TSSL-BP                  400 − 400 − 400      94.62%
                This work                        TSSL-BP                        800            96.44%
                                       N-TIDIGITS
         GRU (Anumula et al., 2018)           Non-spiking BP              200 − 200 − 100      90.90%
     Phase LSTM (Anumula et al., 2018)        Non-spiking BP                 250 − 250         91.25%
         RSNN (Zhang & Li, 2019b)                ST-RSBP                  400 − 400 − 400      93.90%
             Feedforward SNN                     TSSL-BP                        400            84.84%
                This work                        TSSL-BP                        400            94.66%
                                       DVS-Gesture
     Feedforward SNN (He et al., 2020)             STBP                       P 4 − 512        87.50%
           LSTM (He et al., 2020)             Non-spiking BP                  P 4 − 512        88.19%
 HeNHeS (Chakraborty & Mukhopadhyay, 2023)         STDP                          500           90.15%
             Feedforward SNN                     TSSL-BP                      P 4 − 512        88.19%
                This work                        TSSL-BP                      P 4 − 512        90.28%
                                        N-MNIST
     Feedforward SNN (He et al., 2020)             STBP                          512           98.19%
            RNN (He et al., 2020)             Non-spiking BP                     512           98.15%
           LSTM (He et al., 2020)             Non-spiking BP                     512           98.69%
           ELSM(Pan et al., 2023)             Non-spiking BP                    8000           97.23%
                This work                        TSSL-BP                         512           98.72%



4.1   R ESULTS

Table 1 shows the results on the TI46-Alpha dataset. The HRMAS-optimized RSNN has one hidden
SC-ML layer with 800 neurons, and outperforms all other models while achieving 96.44% accuracy
with mean of 96.08% and standard deviation (std) of 0.27% on the testing set. The proposed RSNN
outperforms the LSM model in Wijesinghe et al. (2019) by 18.44%. It also outperforms the larger
multi-layered RSNN with more tunable parameters in Zhang & Li (2019b) trained by the spike-train
level BP (ST-RSBP) by 3.1%. Recently, Zhang & Li (2020a) demonstrated improved performances
from manually designed RNNs with self-recurrent connections trained using the same TSSL-BP
method. Our automated HRMAS architectural search also produces better performing networks.
We also show that a HRMAS-optimized RSNN with a 400-neuron SC-ML layer outperforms several
state-of-the-art results on the N-TIDIGITS dataset (Zhang & Li, 2019b), achieving 94.66% testing
accuracy (mean: 94.27%, std: 0.35%). Our RSNN has more than a 3% performance gain over the
widely adopted recurrent structures of ANNs, the GRU and LSTM. It also significantly outperforms


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


a feedforward SNN with the same hyperparameters, achieving an accuracy improvement of almost
9.82%, demonstrating the potential of automated architectural optimization.
On DVS-Gesture and N-MNIST, our method achieves
accuracies of 90.28% (mean: 88.40%, std: 1.71%) and
98.72% (mean: 98.60%, std: 0.08%), respectively. Ta-
ble1 compares a HRMAS-optimized RSNN with models
including feedforward SNNs trained by TSSL-BP (Zhang
& Li, 2020b) or STBP (Wu et al., 2018) with the same
size, and non-spiking ANNs vanilla LSTM (He et al.,
2020). Note that although our RSNN and the LSTM
model have the same number of units in the recurrent
layer, the LSTM model has a much greater number of Figure 6: Optimized motif topologies.
tunable parameters and a improved rate-coding-inspired
loss function. Our HRMAS-optimized model surpasses
all other models. For a more intuitive understanding, Figure 6 presents two examples of the motif
topology optimized by HRMAS: motif sizes 2 in options [2, 4, 8, 16, 32] for the N-MNIST dataset
and motif size 16 in options [5, 10, 16, 25, 40] for the TI-Alpha dataset.

4.2   A BLATION A NALYSIS

We conduct ablation studies on the RSNN optimized by HRMAS for the TI46-Alpha dataset to
reveal the contributions of various proposed techniques. When all proposed techniques are included,
the HRMAS-optimized RSNN achieves 96.44% accuracy. In Table 2, removing of the IP rule from
the second step of the HRMAS optimization iteration visibly degrades the performance, showing the
efficacy of intrinsic plasticity for mitigating risks of architectural changes. A similar performance
degradation is observed when the sparse inter-motif connections are excluded from the SC-ML layer
architecture. Without imposing a structure in the hidden layer by using motifs as a basic building
block, HRMAS can optimize all possible connectivity types of the large set of 800 hidden neurons.
However, this creates a large and highly complex architectural search space, rendering a tremendous
performance drop. Finally, we compare the HRMAS model with an RSNN of a fixed architecture
with full recurrent connectivity in the hidden layer. The application of the BP method is able to
train the latter model since no architectural (motifs or connection types) optimization is involved.
However, albeit its significantly increased model complexity due to dense connections, this model
has a large performance drop in comparison with the RSNN fully optimized by HRMAS.

                       Table 2: Ablation studies of HRMAS on TI46-Alpha

               Setting       Accuracy                  Setting                Accuracy
             Without IP      95.20%        Without inter-motif connections    95.73%
            Without motif    88.35%            Fully connected RSNN           94.10%



5     C ONCLUSION

We present an RSNN architecture based on SC-ML layers composed of multiple recurrent motifs
with sparse inter-motif connections as a solution to constructing large recurrent spiking neural mod-
els. We further propose the automated architectural optimization framework HRMAS hybridizing
the “evolution” of the architectural parameters and corresponding synaptic weights based on back-
propagation and biologically-inspired mitigation of risks of architectural changes using intrinsic
plasticity. We show that HRMAS-optimized RSNNs impressively improve performance on four
datasets over the previously reported state-of-the-art RSNNs and SNNs. Notably, our HRMAS
framework can be easily extended to more flexible network architectures, optimizing sparse and scal-
able RSNN architectures. By sharing the PyTorch implementation of our HRMAS framework, this
work aims to foster advancements in high-performance RSNNs for both general-purpose and dedi-
cated neuromorphic computing platforms, potentially inspiring innovative designs in brain-inspired
recurrent spiking neural models and their energy-efficient deployment.


                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Arnon Amir, Brian Taba, David Berg, Timothy Melano, Jeffrey McKinstry, Carmelo Di Nolfo,
  Tapan Nayak, Alexander Andreopoulos, Guillaume Garreau, Marcela Mendoza, et al. A low
  power, fully event-based gesture recognition system. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 7243–7252, 2017.
Jithendar Anumula, Daniel Neil, Tobi Delbruck, and Shih-Chii Liu. Feature representations for
   neuromorphic audio spike streams. Frontiers in neuroscience, 12:23, 2018.
Roland Baddeley, Larry F Abbott, Michael CA Booth, Frank Sengpiel, Tobe Freeman, Edward A
  Wakeman, and Edmund T Rolls. Responses of neurons in primary and inferior temporal visual
  cortices to natural scenes. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences,
  264(1389):1775–1783, 1997.
Guillaume Bellec, Darjan Salaj, Anand Subramoney, Robert Legenstein, and Wolfgang Maass. Long
  short-term memory and learning-to-learn in networks of spiking neurons. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, pp. 787–797, 2018.
Gyorgy Buzsaki. Rhythms of the Brain. Oxford University Press, 2006.
Biswadeep Chakraborty and Saibal Mukhopadhyay. Heterogeneous recurrent spiking neural net-
  work for spatio-temporal classification. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 17:994517, 2023.
Long Chen, Xuhang Li, Yaqin Zhu, Haitao Wang, Jiayong Li, Yu Liu, Zijian Wang, et al. Intralayer-
  connected spiking neural network with hybrid training using backpropagation and probabilistic
  spike-timing dependent plasticity. International Journal of Intelligent Systems, 2023, 2023.
Kyunghyun Cho, Bart van Merrienboer, Çaglar Gülçehre, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Fethi Bougares, Hol-
  ger Schwenk, and Yoshua Bengio. Learning phrase representations using rnn encoder-decoder
  for statistical machine translation. In EMNLP, 2014.
Niraj S Desai, Lana C Rutherford, and Gina G Turrigiano. Plasticity in the intrinsic excitability of
  cortical pyramidal neurons. Nature neuroscience, 2(6):515, 1999.
Thomas Elsken, Jan Hendrik Metzen, Frank Hutter, et al. Neural architecture search: A survey. J.
  Mach. Learn. Res., 20(55):1–21, 2019.
Wulfram Gerstner and Werner M Kistler. Spiking neuron models: Single neurons, populations,
 plasticity. Cambridge university press, 2002.
Alex Graves, Abdel-rahman Mohamed, and Geoffrey Hinton. Speech recognition with deep recur-
  rent neural networks. In 2013 IEEE international conference on acoustics, speech and signal
  processing, pp. 6645–6649. IEEE, 2013.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Delving deep into rectifiers: Surpassing
  human-level performance on imagenet classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE international
  conference on computer vision, pp. 1026–1034, 2015.
Weihua He, YuJie Wu, Lei Deng, Guoqi Li, Haoyu Wang, Yang Tian, Wei Ding, Wenhui Wang, and
 Yuan Xie. Comparing snns and rnns on neuromorphic vision datasets: Similarities and differ-
 ences. Neural Networks, 132:108–120, 2020.
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural computation, 9(8):
  1735–1780, 1997.
Herbert Jaeger. The “echo state” approach to analysing and training recurrent neural networks-with
  an erratum note. Bonn, Germany: German National Research Center for Information Technology
  GMD Technical Report, 148(34):13, 2001.
Yingyezhe Jin, Wenrui Zhang, and Peng Li. Hybrid macro/micro level backpropagation for training
  deep spiking neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31:7005–7015,
  2018.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Youngeun Kim, Yuhang Li, Hyoungseob Park, Yeshwanth Venkatesha, and Priyadarshini Panda.
  Neural architecture search for spiking neural networks, 2022.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Ho Ko, Sonja B Hofer, Bruno Pichler, Katherine A Buchanan, P Jesper Sjöström, and Thomas D
  Mrsic-Flogel. Functional specificity of local synaptic connections in neocortical networks. Na-
  ture, 473(7345):87–91, 2011.
Andreea Lazar, Gordon Pipa, and Jochen Triesch. Fading memory and time series prediction in
  recurrent networks with different forms of plasticity. Neural Networks, 20(3):312–322, 2007.
R Gary Leonard and George Doddington. Tidigits speech corpus. Texas Instruments, Inc, 1993.
Mark Liberman, Robert Amsler, Ken Church, Ed Fox, Carole Hafner, Judy Klavans, Mitch Marcus,
 Bob Mercer, Jan Pedersen, Paul Roossin, Don Walker, Susan Warwick, and Antonio Zampolli. TI
 46-word LDC93S9, 1991. URL https://catalog.ldc.upenn.edu/docs/LDC93S9/
 ti46.readme.html.
Hanxiao Liu, Karen Simonyan, and Yiming Yang. Darts: Differentiable architecture search. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Richard Lyon. A computational model of filtering, detection, and compression in the cochlea. In
  Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, IEEE International Conference on ICASSP’82., vol-
  ume 7, pp. 1282–1285. IEEE, 1982.
Wolfgang Maass. Networks of spiking neurons: the third generation of neural network models.
 Neural networks, 10(9):1659–1671, 1997.
Wolfgang Maass, Thomas Natschläger, and Henry Markram. Real-time computing without stable
 states: A new framework for neural computation based on perturbations. Neural computation, 14
 (11):2531–2560, 2002.
Amadeus Maes, Mauricio Barahona, and Claudia Clopath. Learning spatiotemporal signals using
 a recurrent spiking network that discretizes time. PLoS computational biology, 16(1):e1007606,
 2020.
Arianna Maffei and Alfredo Fontanini. Network homeostasis: a matter of coordination. Current
  opinion in neurobiology, 19(2):168–173, 2009.
Eve Marder, LF Abbott, Gina G Turrigiano, Zheng Liu, and Jorge Golowasch. Memory from the
  dynamics of intrinsic membrane currents. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 93
  (24):13481–13486, 1996.
Byunggook Na, Jisoo Mok, Seongsik Park, Dongjin Lee, Hyeokjun Choe, and Sungroh Yoon. Au-
  tosnn: Towards energy-efficient spiking neural networks, 2022.
Emre O Neftci, Hesham Mostafa, and Friedemann Zenke. Surrogate gradient learning in spiking
  neural networks: Bringing the power of gradient-based optimization to spiking neural networks.
  IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 36(6):51–63, 2019.
Garrick Orchard, Ajinkya Jayawant, Gregory K Cohen, and Nitish Thakor. Converting static image
  datasets to spiking neuromorphic datasets using saccades. Frontiers in neuroscience, 9:437, 2015.
Wenxuan Pan, Feifei Zhao, Bing Han, Yiting Dong, and Yi Zeng. Emergence of brain-inspired
 small-world spiking neural network through neuroevolution, 2023.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward
  Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
  Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance
  deep learning library. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32, pp. 8024–8035.
  Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.

                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Rodrigo Perin, Thomas K Berger, and Henry Markram. A synaptic organizing principle for cortical
  neuronal groups. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(13):5419–5424, 2011.
Esteban Real, Alok Aggarwal, Yanping Huang, and Quoc V Le. Regularized evolution for image
  classifier architecture search. In Proceedings of the aaai conference on artificial intelligence,
  volume 33, pp. 4780–4789, 2019.
Stephanie C Seeman, Luke Campagnola, Pasha A Davoudian, Alex Hoggarth, Travis A Hage, Al-
  ice Bosma-Moody, Christopher A Baker, Jung Hoon Lee, Stefan Mihalas, Corinne Teeter, et al.
  Sparse recurrent excitatory connectivity in the microcircuit of the adult mouse and human cortex.
  Elife, 7:e37349, 2018.
Sumit Bam Shrestha and Garrick Orchard. Slayer: Spike layer error reassignment in time. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 1412–1421, 2018.
Malcolm Slaney. Auditory toolbox. Interval Research Corporation, Tech. Rep, 10(1998):1194,
 1998.
Gopalakrishnan Srinivasan, Priyadarshini Panda, and Kaushik Roy. Spilinc: Spiking liquid-
  ensemble computing for unsupervised speech and image recognition. Frontiers in neuroscience,
  12, 2018.
Shuo Tian, Lianhua Qu, Lei Wang, Kai Hu, Nan Li, and Weixia Xu. A neural architecture search
  based framework for liquid state machine design. Neurocomputing, 443:174–182, 2021.
Nai-Wen Tien and Daniel Kerschensteiner. Homeostatic plasticity in neural development. Neural
  development, 13(1):1–7, 2018.
Aaron Voelker, Ivana Kajić, and Chris Eliasmith. Legendre memory units: Continuous-time repre-
  sentation in recurrent neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  pp. 15570–15579, 2019.
Qian Wang and Peng Li. D-lsm: Deep liquid state machine with unsupervised recurrent reservoir
  tuning. In 2016 23rd International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR), pp. 2652–2657.
  IEEE, 2016.
Parami Wijesinghe, Gopalakrishnan Srinivasan, Priyadarshini Panda, and Kaushik Roy. Analysis of
  liquid ensembles for enhancing the performance and accuracy of liquid state machines. Frontiers
  in Neuroscience, 13:504, 2019.
Martin Wistuba, Ambrish Rawat, and Tejaswini Pedapati. A survey on neural architecture search.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.01392, 2019.
Yujie Wu, Lei Deng, Guoqi Li, Jun Zhu, and Luping Shi. Spatio-temporal backpropagation for
  training high-performance spiking neural networks. Frontiers in neuroscience, 12:331, 2018.
Arber Zela, Thomas Elsken, Tonmoy Saikia, Yassine Marrakchi, Thomas Brox, and Frank Hutter.
  Understanding and robustifying differentiable architecture search. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2019.
Wenrui Zhang and Peng Li. Information-theoretic intrinsic plasticity for online unsupervised learn-
 ing in spiking neural networks. Frontiers in neuroscience, 13:31, 2019a.
Wenrui Zhang and Peng Li. Spike-train level backpropagation for training deep recurrent spiking
 neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 7800–7811, 2019b.
Wenrui Zhang and Peng Li. Skip-connected self-recurrent spiking neural networks with joint intrin-
 sic parameter and synaptic weight training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.12691, 2020a.
Wenrui Zhang and Peng Li. Temporal spike sequence learning via backpropagation for deep spiking
 neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33, 2020b.
Wenrui Zhang and Peng Li. Spiking neural networks with laterally-inhibited self-recurrent units. In
 2021 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pp. 1–8. IEEE, 2021.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Yong Zhang, Peng Li, Yingyezhe Jin, and Yoonsuck Choe. A digital liquid state machine with
  biologically inspired learning and its application to speech recognition. IEEE transactions on
  neural networks and learning systems, 26(11):2635–2649, 2015.
Yan Zhou, Yaochu Jin, and Jinliang Ding. Surrogate-assisted evolutionary search of spiking neural
  architectures in liquid state machines. Neurocomputing, 406:12–23, 2020.
Barret Zoph and Quoc V. Le. Neural architecture search with reinforcement learning. In 5th In-
  ternational Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2017, Toulon, France, April 24-26,
  2017, Conference Track Proceedings. OpenReview.net, 2017. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=r1Ue8Hcxg.


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX : S UPPLEMENTARY M ATERIALS

A    S PIKING N EURON M ODEL
In this work, we adopt the leaky integrate-and-fire (LIF) neuron model (Gerstner & Kistler, 2002)
which is one of the most popular neuron models for simulating SNNs. During the simulation, we
use the fixed-step first-order Euler method to discretize the LIF model. In the rest of this paper, we
only analyze an SNN in the discretized form.
                                                                      P                 (f )           (f )
Consider the input spike train from pre-synaptic neuron j: sj [t] =         (f ) δ[t − tj    ], where tj
                                                                          t    j
denotes a particular firing time of presynaptic neuron j. The incoming spikes are converted into an
(unweighted) postsynaptic current (PSC) aj [t] through a synaptic model. We adopt the first-order
synaptic model (Gerstner & Kistler, 2002):
                                                 1
                                 aj [t] = (1 −      )aj [t − 1] + sj [t],                       (6)
                                               τsyn
where τsyn is the synaptic time constant.
Then, the neuronal membrane voltage ui [t] of neuron i at time t is given by
                                        1               RX
                         ui [t] = (1 − )ui [t − 1] +           wij aj [t],                             (7)
                                        τ               τ j

where R and τ are the resistance and time constant of the membrane, wij the synaptic weight from
pre-synaptic neuron j to neuron i. Moreover, the firing output of the neuron is expressed as
                                        si [t] = H (ui [t] − Vth ) ,                                   (8)
where Vth is the firing threshold and H(·) is the Heaviside step function.

B    G RADIENT- BASED O PTIMIZATION ON A RCHITECTURAL PARAMETERS
In the proposed HRMAS, architectural parameters and synaptic weights are optimized by the first
step. The architectural parameters are defined as motif size and types of intra/inter-motif connec-
tions. The general architectural optimization is performed by generating architecture and evaluating
the architecture by a standard training and validation process on data. The validation performance
is used to train the architectural parameters and generate a better structure. These steps are repeated
until the optimal architecture is found. The first step of the k-th HRMAS iteration solves a bi-level
optimization problem using BP:
                                minα Lvalid (α, w∗ (α), β−
                                                         ∗
                                                           )                                           (9)
                                      ∗                             ∗
                                s.t. w (α) = argw minLtrain (α, w, β− ),                              (10)
where Lvalid and Ltrain are the loss functions defined based on the validation and training sets used
                                ∗
to train α and w respectively; β−  is the intrinsic parameter values updated in the preceding (k−1)-th
             ∗
iteration; w (α, β) denotes the optimal synaptic weights under the architecture specified by α. The
second step of the k-th iteration solves the optimization problem below:
                                    β ∗ = argβ minLip (α∗ , w∗ , β)                                   (11)
Lip is the local loss to be minimized by the IP rule. Since the synaptic weights and architectural
parameters are computed based on the most recent values of neuronal parameters updated in its
preceding iteration, the IP rule applied in the second step of HRMAS iteration is independent of this
bi-level optimization problem. Therefore, in this section, we do not express the IP method explicitly
and define the bi-level optimization problem as
                                minα Lvalid (α, w∗ (α))
                                                                                                      (12)
                                s.t. w∗ (α) = argw minLtrain (α, w),

Solving bi-level optimization problem has intensive demand on computational resources because it
usually requires the validation performance of all the intermediate architecture. Recently, a gradient-
based search method (Liu et al., 2018) is proposed focusing on efficient architecture search. It


                                                    14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


significantly reduces the computational cost of architecture search by approximating the bi-level
optimization problem, relaxing the discrete architectural parameters to continuous ones, and solving
the continuous model by gradient descent. In the proposed HRMAS framework, we also adopt the
gradient-based approach together with the backpropagation method of SNNs to optimize the SC-ML
architecture.
We denote the type of connection as c, and the size of motif as v. We consider multiple motif size
and connection type choices during architectural search using continuous-valued parameterizations
αv and αir
         c
           , respectively for each motif size v and connection type c. Instead of applying a single
choice to each architectural parameter, the categorical choice of each type or size is relaxed to a
softmax over all possible options which can be expressed as
                                           c
                           c        exp(αir  )                        exp(αv )
                         α̂ir =P               c′
                                                   ,        α̂v = P            v′
                                                                                  .                  (13)
                                   c′ ∈C exp(αir )                 v ′ ∈V exp(α )

C and V are the set of all possible connection types and motif sizes, respectively; α̂v and α̂irc
                                                                                                   are
the continuous-valued categorical choice of motif size v and connection type c, respectively, which
can also be interpreted as the probability of selecting the corresponding motif size or connection
type. In this paper, we use hat over the variable to denote the architectural parameter processed by
softmax. Then, the task of architecture optimization is reduced to learn a set of continuous variables
        c
α̂ = {α̂ir , α̂v }. With the continuous architectural parameters, a gradient-based method like BP is
applicable to learn the recurrent connectivity.
In Liu et al. (2018), the bi-level optimization problem is simply approximated to a one-shot model
to reduce the expensive computational cost of the inner optimization which can be expressed as
                   ∇α̂ Lvalid (α̂, w∗ (α̂)) = ∇α̂ Lvalid (α̂, w − η∇w Ltrain (w, α̂)),               (14)
where η is the learning rate for a step of inner loop. Both the weights of the search network and the
architectural parameters are trained by the BP method.
The architectural gradient can be approximated by
            dLvalid
                    (α̂) = ∇α̂ Lvalid (α̂, w∗ ) − η∇w Lvalid (α̂, w∗ )∇2α̂,w Ltrain (w∗ , α̂)).      (15)
              dα̂
The complexity is further reduced by using the finite difference approximation around w± = w ±
ϵ∇w Lvalid (α̂, w∗ ) for small perturbation ϵ to compute the gradient of ∇α̂ Lvalid (α̂, w∗ ). Finally the
architectural updates in (15) can be calculated as
          dLvalid                              η
                  (α̂) = ∇α̂ Lvalid (α̂, w∗ ) − (∇α̂ Ltrain (w+ , α̂) − ∇α̂ Ltrain (w− , α̂)).       (16)
            dα̂                                2ϵ

C    BACKPROPAGATION VIA HRMAS FRAMEWORK
Without loss of generality, we consider a multi-layered RSNN consisting of one or more SC-ML
layers, where connections between layers are assumed to be feedforward. We focus on a proposed
SC-ML of an RSNN. Based on the leaky integrate-and-fire (LIF) neuron model in (7), the neuronal
membrane voltage ui [t] of neuron i in the SC-ML layer at time t is given by integrating currents
from all inter-layer inputs and intra-layer recurrent connections under all possible architectural pa-
rameterizations:
                                                                      v
                                                         Ii
                   1             R X              X      X  X
      ui [t] = (1 − )ui [t − 1] + (  wij aj [t] +   (α̂v         c
                                                              (α̂ir  c
                                                                    wir ar [t − 1]))),               (17)
                   τ             τ j                      r  v∈V          c∈C

where R and τ are the resistance and time constant of the membrane, wij the synaptic weight from
                                              c
neuron j in the previous layer to neuron i, wir  the recurrent weight from neuron r to neuron i of
connection type c, and aj [t] the (unweighted) postsynaptic current (PSC) converted from spikes of
neuron j through a synaptic model. To reduce clutter in the notation, we use Iiv to denote the num-
ber of presynaptic connections afferent onto neuron i’s input in the recurrent layer when choosing
motif size v, which includes both inter and intra-motif connections. We further drop the explicit
                 c
dependence of α̂ir  on α̂v . We assume feedforward connections have no time delay and recurrent


                                                       15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


connections have one time step delay. The response of neuron i obtained from recurrent connections
is the summation of all the weighted recurrent inputs over the probabilities of connection types and
motif sizes.
During the learning, We define the loss function as
                                                          T
                                                          X
                                                   L=               E[tk ],                                    (18)
                                                          k=0

where T is the total time steps and E[tk ] the loss at tk . From (17) and (8), the membrane potential
ui [t] of the neuron i at time t demonstrates contribution to all future fires and losses of the neuron
through its PSC ai [t]. Therefore, the error gradient with respect to the presynaptic weight wij from
neuron j to neuron i can be defined as
                                       T                  T         k
                        ∂L    X ∂E[tk ] X X ∂E[tk ] ∂ui [tm ]
                            =          =
                       ∂wij      ∂wij     m=0
                                              ∂ui [tm ] ∂wij
                                   k=0                   k=0
                                                                                                               (19)
                            T                     T                          T
                            X R                   X ∂E[tk ]                  X R
                        =              aj [tm ]                          =                aj [tm ]δi [tm ],
                            m=0
                                  τ                     ∂ui [tm ]            m=0
                                                                                      τ
                                                  k=m

where δi [tm ] denotes the error for neuron i at time tm and is defined as:
                                           T                         T
                                           X ∂E[tk ]                 X ∂E[tk ] ∂ai [tk ]
                            δi [tm ] =                        =                                      .         (20)
                                                  ∂ui [tm ]                  ∂ai [tk ] ∂ui [tm ]
                                           k=m                      k=m

In this work, the output layer is regular feedforward layer without recurrent connection. Therefore,
the weight woj of output neuron o is updated by
                                     T             T
                              ∂L    X   R          X ∂E[tk ] ∂ao [tk ]
                                  =       aj [tm ]                       ,                                     (21)
                             ∂woj   m=0
                                        τ            ∂ao [tk ] ∂uo [tm ]
                                                                k=m
      ∂E[tk ]
where ∂a o [tk ]
                 depends on the choice of the loss function.
Now, we focus on the backpropagation in the recurrent hidden layer while the feedforward hidden
layer case can be derived similarly. For a neuron i in SC-ML, in addition to the error signals from
the next layer, the error backpropagated from the recurrent connections should also be taken into
consideration. The backpropagated error can be calculated by:
                              T X T             Np
                              X       ∂ai [tk ] X ∂up [tk ] ∂E[tj ]
                   δi [tm ] =
                                      ∂ui [tm ] p=1 ∂ai [tk ] ∂up [tk ]
                                k=m j=k
                                T T           Nr
                                X X ∂ai [tk ] X    ∂ur [tk + 1] ∂E[tj ]
                            +
                                    ∂ui [tm ] r      ∂ai [tk ] ∂ur [tk + 1]
                                k=m j=k+1
                                                                                                               (22)
                              T            N
                              X ∂ai [tk ] X R
                            =                ( wpi δp [tk ])
                                ∂ui [tm ] p=1 τ
                                k=m
                                                                        v
                                T −1       (l)                      Oi
                                X      ∂ai [tk ] X              v
                                                                    X  XR
                                                                                        c   c
                            +              (l)
                                                          (α̂                         α̂ri wri δr [tk + 1]),
                                                                                  τ
                                k=m ∂ui [tm ] v∈V                    r      c∈C

where Np and Nr are the number of neurons in the next layer and the number of neurons in this
recurrent layer, respectively. δp and δr are the errors of the neuron p in the next layer and the error
from the neuron r through the recurrent connection. Oiv represents all the postsynaptic neurons of
neuron i’s outputs in the recurrent layer when choosing motif size v, which includes both inter and
intra-motif connections.
                        ∂a[tk ]
The key term in (22) is ∂u[tm]
                                which reflects the effect of neuron’s membrane potential on its output
PSC. Due to the non-differentiable spiking events, it becomes the main difficulty for the BP of SNNs.


                                                              16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Various approaches are proposed to handle this problem such as probability density function of spike
state change (Shrestha & Orchard, 2018), surrogate gradient (Neftci et al., 2019), and Temporal
Spike Sequence Learning via Backpropagation (TSSL-BP) (Zhang & Li, 2020b).
With the error backpropagated according to (22), the weights and architectural parameters can be
updated by gradient descent as:
                                                                                  v
                                               Nr           Ii
                           R                   X          RX    X
             ∆wij ∝ δi [t] aj [t], ∆α̂v ∝          δi [t]      (       c
                                                                     α̂ir  c
                                                                          wir ar [t − 1]),
                           τ                    i
                                                          τ  r c∈C                                                                 (23)
               c           RX v c                           c           RX v c
             ∆wir ∝ δi [t]      (α̂ α̂ir ar [t − 1]), ∆α̂ir    ∝ δi [t]        (α̂ wir ar [t − 1]).
                           τ                                            τ
                                    v∈V                                                           v∈V


D      S PI KL-IP
In this work, we apply the SpiKL-IP (Zhang & Li, 2019a) to all the recurrent neurons which not
only maintains the network activity but also maximizes the information of neurons’ outputs from an
information-theoretic perspective. More specifically, SpiKL-IP adapts the intrinsic parameters of a
spiking neuron while minimizing the KL-divergence from the targeted exponential distribution to
the actual output firing rate distribution. The two neuronal parameters R and τ are online updated
according to the approximate average firing rate of the neuron by:
                         2yτ Vth − W − Vth − µ1 τ Vth y 2                                  −1 + µy                   Vth
             ∆R =                                                          ,     ∆τ =                 ,    W =        1        ,   (24)
                                           RW                                                 τ                  e   τy   −1
where µ is the desired mean firing rate, y the average firing rate of the neuron. Similar to biological
neurons, we use the intracellular calcium concentration ϕ[t] as a good indicator of the averaged
firing activity and y can be expressed with the time constant of calcium concentration τcal as
                                                          1                                           ϕi [t]
                                 ϕi [t] = (1 −                  )ϕi [t − 1] + si [t],      yi [t] =          .                     (25)
                                                         τcal                                         τcal

We explicitly express the neuronal parameters R and τ of neuron i tuned through time as Ri [t] and
τi [t], since they are adjusted by the IP rule at each time step. They are updated by
                                Ri [t] = Ri [t − 1] − γ∆Ri ,                   τi [t] = τi [t − 1] − γ∆τi ,                        (26)
where γ is the learning rate of the SpiKL-IP rule.
In addition, by including time-variant neuronal parameters R and τ into (22) and (23), the one time
step architectural parameter and weight updates change to
                 T            N
                 X ∂ai [tk ] X Rp [tk ]
    δi [tm ] =                  (         wpi δp [tk ])
                   ∂ui [tm ] p=1 τp [tk ]
                 k=m
                                                     v
                 T −1     (l)                       Oi
                 X      ∂ai [tk ] X             v
                                                    X  X Rr [tk + 1]
                                                                                   c   c
           +              (l)
                                          (α̂                                    α̂ri wri δr [tk + 1])
                                                                  τr [tk + 1]
                 k=m ∂ui [tm ] v∈V                   r    c∈C
                                                                                                                                   (27)
                                                                  Nr                  Iv
                                                                                      i
                        Ri [t]                                    X            Ri [t] X  X
          ∆wij ∝ δi [t]        aj [t],              ∆α̂v ∝              δi [t]          (    c
                                                                                           α̂ir  c
                                                                                                wir ar [t − 1])
                        τi [t]                                      i
                                                                               τi [t] r
                                                                                            c∈C

            c           Ri [t] X v c                                                            Ri [t] X v c
          ∆wir ∝ δi [t]         (α̂ α̂ir ar [t − 1]),                          ∆α̂ir ∝ δi [t]           (α̂ wir ar [t − 1]),
                        τi [t]                                                                  τi [t]
                                     v∈V                                                                  v∈V


E      E XPERIMENTS
The proposed HRMAS framework with SC-ML is evaluated on speech dataset TI46-Alpha (Liber-
man et al., 1991), neuromorphic speech dataset N-TIDIGITS (Anumula et al., 2018), neuromorphic


                                                                        17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


video dataset DVS-Gesture (Amir et al., 2017), and neuromorphic image dataset N-MNIST (Orchard
et al., 2015). The performances are compared with several existing results on different structures of
SNNs and ANNs such as feedforward SNNs, RSNNs, Liquid State Machine(LSM), LSTM, and so
on. We will share our Pytorch (Paszke et al., 2019) implementation on GitHub. We expect this work
would motivate the exploration of RSNNs architecture in the neuromorphic community.

E.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

All reported experiments are conducted on an NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU. The implementation of the
proposed methods is on the Pytorch framework (Paszke et al., 2019).
In the SNNs of the experiments, the fully connected weights between layers are initialized by the
He Normal initialization proposed in He et al. (2015). The recurrent weights of excitatory connec-
tions are initialized to 0.2 and tuned by the BP method. The weights of inhibitory connections are
initialized to −2 and fixed. The simulation step size is set to 1 ms. The parameters like thresholds
and learning rate are empirically tuned. No synaptic delay is applied for feedforward connections
while recurrent connections have 1 time step delay. No refractory period, normalization, or dropout
is used. Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014) is adopted as the optimizer. The mean and standard deviation
(std) of the accuracy reported is obtained by repeating the experiments five times.
Our experiments contain two phases. In the first phase, the weights are trained via the training set
while the validation set is used to optimize architectural parameters. In the second phase, the motif
topology and type of lateral connections are fixed after obtaining the optimal architecture. All the
weights of the network are reinitialized. Then, the new network is trained on the training set and
tested on the testing set. The test performance is reported in the paper. In addition, since all the
datasets adopted in this paper only contain training sets and testing sets, our strategy is to divide
the training set. In the first phase, the training set is equally divided into a training subset and a
validation subset. Then, the architecture is optimized on these subsets. In the second phase, since
all the weights are reinitialized, we can train the weights with the full training set and test on the
testing set. Note that the testing set is only used for the final evaluation.
Table 3 lists the typical constant values of parameters adopted in our experiments for each dataset.
The SC-ML size denotes the number of neurons in the SC-ML. In our experiments, each network
contains one SC-ML as the hidden layer. In addition, five motif sizes are predetermined before the
experiment. The HRMAS framework optimizes the motif size from one of the five options.

             Parameter           TI46-Alpha      N-TIDIGITS         DvsGesture     N-MNIST
                τm                  16 ms             64 ms           64 ms          16 ms
                 τs                  8 ms              8 ms            8 ms           8 ms
                τcal                16 ms             16 ms           16 ms          16 ms
           learning rate            0.0005            0.0005          0.0001         0.0005
            Batch Size                50                50              20              50
            Time steps               100                300            400             100
        Epochs for searching         300                200             60              30
         Epochs for testing          400                400            150             100
           SC-ML size                800                800            512             512
         Motif size options            [5, 10, 16, 25, 40]              [2, 4, 8, 16, 32]

                                    Table 3: Parameters settings.


E.2   L OSS F UNCTION

For the BP method used in this work, the loss function can be defined by any errors that measure the
distance between the actual outputs and the desired outputs. In our experiments, since hundreds of
time steps are required for simulating speech and neuromorphic inputs, we choose the accumulated
output PSCs to define the error which is similar to the firing count used in many existing works (Jin
et al., 2018; Shrestha & Orchard, 2018).


                                                 18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We suppose the simulation time steps for a sample is T . In addition, for neuron o of the output layer,
                                                                     PT
we define the desired output as do and real output as ro where ro = k=1 ao [tk ] and do is manually
determined. Therefore, the loss is determined by the square error of the outputs
                                                       (out)
                                     T                NX
                                     X                         1
                                L=         E[tk ] =              (do − ro )2 ,                     (28)
                                                           o
                                                               2
                                     k=1

where N (out) is the number of neurons in the output layer.
Furthermore, the error at each time step is simply defined by the averaged loss through all the time
steps:
                                         L               (do − ro )2
                                E[tk ] = , Eo [tk ] =                .                           (29)
                                         T                   2T
With the loss function defined above, the error δ can be calculated for each layer according to (22).

E.3   DATASETS

TI46 speech corpus (Liberman et al., 1991) contains spoken English alphabets and digits audios
from 16 speakers. In our experiments, the full alphabets subset of the TI46 is used and dubbed
TI46-Alpha. The TI46-Alpha has 4142 and 6628 spoken English examples in 26 classes for training
and testing, respectively. The continuous temporal speech waveforms are preprocessed by Lyon’s
ear model (Lyon, 1982) which is the same as the preprocessing steps in Zhang & Li (2019b). The
sample rate of this dataset is 12.5 kHz. The decimation factor of Lyon’s ear model is 125. The
MATLAB implementation of Lyon’s ear model is available online (Slaney, 1998). Each sample is
encoded into 78 channels. In our experiments, the preprocessed real-value intensities are directly
applied as the inputs.
The N-TIDIGITS (Anumula et al., 2018) is the neuromorphic version of the speech dataset
Tidigits (Leonard & Doddington, 1993). The original audios are processed by a 64-channel
CochleaAMS1b sensor and recorded as the spike responses. The dataset contains both single-digit
samples and connected-digit sequences with a vocabulary consisting of 11 digits including “oh,”
“zero” and the digits “1” to “9”. In the experiments, only single-digit samples are used. In total,
there are 55 male and 56 female speakers with 2475 single-digit samples for training and the same
number of samples for testing. In the original dataset, each sample has 64 input channels and takes
about 0.9 s. To speed up the simulation, each sample is reduced to 300 time steps by compressing
the time resolution from 1 us to 3 ms. During the compression, a channel has a spike at a cer-
tain time step in the preprocessed sample if it contains at least one spike in the corresponding time
window of the original sample.
The DVS-Gesture dataset (Amir et al., 2017) consists of recordings of 29 different individuals (sub-
jects) performing hand and arm gestures. The spikes are generated from natural motion. There are
122 trials in total. Each trial contains the recording for one subject by a dynamic vision sensor (DVS)
camera under one of the three different lighting conditions. In each trial, 11 hand and arm gestures
of the subject are recorded. Samples from the first 23 subjects are used for training and the other 6
subjects for testing. During preprocessing, the trials are separated into individual actions (gestures).
The task is to classify the action sequence video into an action label. Each action (sample) lasts
for about 6 s. In addition, two channels with 128 × 128 pixels in each channel are recorded. We
compress the temporal resolution to 15 ms which means it takes 400 time steps for each sample.
Similar to the preprocessing of N-TIDIGITS, the input pixel has a spike at a certain time step in the
preprocessed sample if it contains at least one spike in the corresponding 15 ms time window of
the original sample. In the experiments, the inputs are first processed by the pooling layer of 4 × 4
pooling kernel size. Thus, the inputs to the hidden layer have 2 channels with the size of 32 × 32 in
each channel.
The N-MNIST dataset (Orchard et al., 2015) is a neuromorphic version of the MNIST dataset gener-
ated by tilting a DVS in front of static digit images on a computer monitor. The movements inducing
pixel intensity changes at each location are encoded as spike trains. Since the intensity can either
increase or decrease, two kinds of ON- and OFF-events spike events are recorded. Due to the rela-
tive shifts of each image, an image size of 34 × 34 is produced. Each sample of the N-MNIST is a
spatio-temporal pattern with 34 × 34 × 2 spike sequences lasting for 300ms with the resolution of


                                                      19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


1us. In our experiments, we reduce the time resolution of the N-MNIST samples by 3000 times to
speed up the simulation. Therefore, the preprocessed samples only have about 100 time steps.


F     A DDITIONAL INFORMATION

F.1   A DDITIONAL DATA

We provided additional experimental data in Table 4, including: random search in the search space as
the baseline for HRMAS, effect of IP rule, HRMAS perfermence on Larger network. Experimental
results show that: the HRMAS method shows consistent superiority (around 2%) over the random
search baseline; IP rule brings stable performance improvement (around 1.3%); our method can be
efficiently extended to networks with more neurons while providing good performance.

Table 4: Test Accuracy on TI46-Alpha, obtained by repeating 5 times with different random seeds,
including: HRMAS perfermence on Larger network, effect of IP rule, random search as the baseline
architecture.

       Arch Optimization      Learning Rule     SC-ML Sizes       Best       Mean         Std
       HRMAS (with IP)          TSSL-BP             800          96.44%     96.08%      0.27%
       HRMAS (with IP)          TSSL-BP            1600          96.26%        -           -
       HRMAS (with IP)          TSSL-BP            2400          96.58%        -           -
       HRMAS (with IP)          TSSL-BP            3200          96.45%        -           -
       HRMAS (w/o IP)           TSSL-BP             800          95.17%     94.74%      0.32%
           Random               TSSL-BP             800          94.47%     94.18%      0.30%



F.2   T HE COMPUTATIONAL RESOURCES REQUIRED FOR OUR METHOD

The proposed HRMAS bi-level optimization process is similar to DARTS, so the overall computa-
tional complexity is similar to DARTS; the IP method is an localized unsupervised learning method
and does not constitute significant computational consumption. Furthermore, our proposed SC-ML
topology greatly reduces the search space. Specifically, as the Figure 9 shows, the HRMAS opti-
mization of a SC-ML layer, with n neurons, a motif size of s and n/s motifs, reduces the parameters
that need to be optimized for the recurrent connection matrix from O(n2 ) to O(sn): O(n/s) inter-
motif connections + O(n/s ∗ s2 ) intra-motif connections + O(n) neuron hyperparameters. Gen-
erally, s ≪ n, which reduces the parameter space of recurrent connections to linear growth with
the neuron numbers, allowing our algorithm scale well. Specifically, a complete training process
of a RSNN with 800 neurons hidden layer for TI46-alpha dataset, including 150 epoch for cell size
search, 150 epoch for connection type search and 400 epoch for finetune, takes 4 hours on single
NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPU.

F.3   IP RULE ’ S EFFECT ON PERFORMANCE DURING OPTIMIZING PROCESS

We plotted the performance curve of the network optimization process on the TI46-alpha dataset.
Figure 7 and Figure 8 show the loss and accuracy on the validation set respectively. The solid line
and shading show the mean and standard deviation of the 5 experiments. We conducted experiments
with ip rule turned on and off. We use green text to mark each phase of architecture optimization.
The experimental results show: 1.When the network architecture changes drastically, such as itera-
tion = 750 (the cell size search ends and the connection type search starts), and iteration = 1500 (the
connection type search ends, the network is discretized and fine-tuned), the network There will be a
slight performance degradation. But it can be quickly improved to a higher level by the next stage
of training. 2.It can be found that IP method brings two benefits: improved network performance
and a more stable training process. The figures showed that the red solid line (mean) has always
performed better than the blue solid line without the IP method; at the same time, the red shadow
(standard deviation) has always been narrower than the blue shadow, which means a more stable
network architecture search process.


                                                  20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 7: Test Loss in architectural optimization in HRMAS. The solid line and shading show the
mean and standard deviation of the 5 experiments. We conducted experiments with ip rule turned
on (red) and off (blue). It can be found that IP method brings two benefits: improved network
performance and a more stable training process. The figures showed that the red solid line (mean)
has lower loss than the blue solid line without the IP method; at the same time, the red shadow
(standard deviation) has always been narrower than the blue shadow, which means a more stable
network architecture search process.


Figure 8: Test Accuracy in architectural optimization in HRMAS. The solid line and shading show
the mean and standard deviation of the 5 experiments. We conducted experiments with ip rule
turned on (red) and off (blue). It can be found that IP method brings two benefits: improved network
performance and a more stable training process. The figures showed that the red solid line (mean)
has higher accuracy than the blue solid line without the IP method; at the same time, the red shadow
(standard deviation) has always been narrower than the blue shadow, which means a more stable
network architecture search process.


                                                21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F.4   S PARSITY RECURRENT CONNECTION OF OPTIMIZED RSNN

We shows in the Figure 9 the weight matrix of the RSNN with SC-ML optimized by the HRMAS
method. The original fully connected recurrent matrix size is 800*800. We set the search space of
motif size to [2,4,8,16,32]. In five random experiments, the HRMAS optimization method always
gave the search results of motif-size=2, with similar inter/intra motif topology. This limits the huge
recurrent matrix to a highly sparse band matrix with non-zero values only near the diagonal, greatly
reducing the search space, parameter amount, and optimization difficulty.


Figure 9: Recurrent Weight Matrix after optimization by HRMAS. The original fully connected
recurrent matrix size is 800*800. We set the search space of motif size to [2,4,8,16,32]. In five
random experiments, the HRMAS optimization method always gave the search results of motif-
size=2, with similar inter/intra motif topology. This limits the huge recurrent matrix to a highly
sparse band matrix with non-zero values only near the diagonal, greatly reducing the search space,
parameter amount, and optimization difficulty.


                                                 22
