Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F ORMING S CALABLE , C ONVERGENT GNN L AYERS
THAT M INIMIZE A S AMPLING -BASED E NERGY

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review

                                             A BSTRACT
         Among the many variants of graph neural network (GNN) architectures capable of
         modeling data with cross-instance relations, an important subclass involves layers
         designed such that the forward pass iteratively reduces a graph-regularized energy
         function of interest. In this way, node embeddings produced at the output layer
         dually serve as both predictive features for solving downstream tasks (e.g., node
         classification) and energy function minimizers that inherit transparent, exploitable
         inductive biases. However, scaling GNN architectures constructed in this way
         remains challenging, in part because the convergence of the forward pass may
         involve models with considerable depth. To tackle this limitation, we propose a
         sampling-based energy function and scalable GNN layers that iteratively reduce
         it, guided by convergence guarantees in certain settings. We also instantiate a
         full GNN architecture based on these designs, and the model achieves competi-
         tive accuracy and scalability when applied to the largest publicly-available node
         classification benchmark exceeding 1TB in size.

1    I NTRODUCTION
Graph neural networks (GNNs) are a powerful class of deep learning models designed specifically
for graph-structured data. Unlike conventional neural networks that primarily operate on indepen-
dent samples, GNNs excel in capturing the complex cross-instance relations modeled by graphs
(Hamilton et al., 2017; Kearnes et al., 2016; Kipf & Welling, 2017; Velickovic et al., 2018). Foun-
dational to GNNs is the notion of message passing (Gilmer et al., 2017), whereby nodes iteratively
gather information from neighbors to update their representations. In doing so, information can
propagate across the graph in the form of node embeddings, reflecting both local patterns and global
network effects, which are required by downstream tasks such as node classification.
Among many GNN architectures, one promising subclass is based on graph propagation layers
derived to be in a one-to-one correspondence with the descent iterations of a graph-regularized
energy function (Chen et al., 2022; Ahn et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2021; Ma et al., 2021; Gasteiger
et al., 2019; Pan et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2021; Xue et al., 2023). For these models,
the layers of the GNN forward pass computes increasingly-refined approximations to a minimizer
of the aforementioned energy. Importantly, if such energy minimizers possess desirable properties
or inductive biases, the corresponding GNN architecture naturally inherits them, unlike traditional
GNN constructions that may be less transparent. More broadly, this association between the GNN
forward pass and optimization can be exploited to introduce targeted architectural enhancements
(e.g., robustly handling graphs with spurious edges and/or heterophily (Fu et al., 2023; Yang et al.,
2021). Borrowing from (Chen & Eldar, 2021; Yang et al., 2022), we will henceforth refer to models
of this genre as unfolded GNNs, given that the layers are derived from a so-called unfolded (in
time/iteration) energy descent process.
Despite their merits w.r.t. transparency, unfolded GNNs face non-trivial scalability challenges. This
is in part because they can be constructed with arbitrary depth (i.e., arbitrary descent iterations)
while still avoiding undesirable oversmoothing effects (Oono & Suzuki, 2020; Li et al., 2018), and
the computational cost and memory requirements of this flexibility are often prohibitively high. Even
so, there exists limited prior work explicitly tackling the scalability of unfolded GNNs, or providing
any complementary guarantees regarding convergence on large graphs. Hence most unfolded GNN
models are presently evaluated on relatively small benchmarks.
To address these shortcomings, we propose a scalable unfolded GNN model that incorporates effi-
cient subgraph sampling within the fabric of the requisite energy function. Our design of this model


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


is guided by the following three desiderata: (i) maintain the characteristic properties and extensi-
ble structure of full-graph unfolded GNN models, (ii) using a consistent core architecture, preserve
competitive accuracy across datasets of varying size, including the very largest publicly-available
benchmarks, and (iii) do not introduce undue computational or memory overheads beyond what is
required to train the most common GNN alternatives. Our proposed model, which we will later
demonstrate satisfies each of the above, is termed MuseGNN in reference to a GNN architecture
produced by the minimization of an unfolded sampling-based energy. Building on background mo-
tivations presented in Section 2, our MuseGNN-related contributions herein are three-fold:

       • In Sections 3 and 4, we expand a widely-used unfolded GNN framework to incorporate
         offline sampling into the architecture-inducing energy function design itself, as opposed to
         a post hoc application of sampling to existing GNN methods. The resulting model, which
         we term MuseGNN, allows us to retain the attractive attributes of unfolded GNNs, and an
         unbiased estimator of the original full-graph energy, with the scalability of canonical GNN
         architectures.
       • We analytically demonstrate in Section 5 that MuseGNN possesses desirable convergence
         properties regarding both upper-level (traditional model training) and lower-level (energy
         function descent) optimization processes. In doing so we increase our confidence in re-
         liable performance when moving to new problem domains that may deviate from known
         benchmarks.
       • Finally, in Section 6 we provide complementary empirical support that MuseGNN perfor-
         mance is stable in practice, preserving competitive accuracy and scalability across task size.
         En route, we achieve SOTA performance w.r.t. homogeneous graph models applied to the
         largest, publicly-available node classification datasets from OGB and IGB exceeding 1TB.

2     BACKGROUND AND M OTIVATION
This section provides background details regarding existing unfolded GNN architectures. Later, we
discuss why GNNs formed in this way are relevant, followed by their scalability challenges.

2.1   GNN A RCHITECTURES FROM U NFOLDED O PTIMIZATION

Notation. Let G = {V, E} denote a graph with n = |V| nodes and edge set E. We define D and A
as the degree and adjacency matrices of G such that the corresponding graph Laplacian is L = D−A.
Furthermore, associated with each node is both a d-dimensional feature vector, and a d′ -dimensional
                                                                                         ′
label vector, the respective collections of which are given by X ∈ Rn×d and T ∈ Rn×d .

GNN Basics. Given a graph defined as above, canonical GNN architectures are designed to pro-
duce a sequence of node-wise embeddings {Y (k) }K  k=1 that are increasingly refined across K model
layers according to the rule Y (k) = h(Y (k−1) ; W, A, X) ∈ Rn×d . Here h represents a function
that updates Y (k−1) based on trainable model weights W as well as A (graph structure) and option-
ally X (input node features). To facilitate downstream tasks such as node classification, W may be
                                                                                                  ′
trained, along with additional parameters θ of any application-specific output layer g : Rd → Rd ,
to minimize a loss of the form           n′     h
                                        X                        i
                            L(W, θ) =        D g Y (K) (W )i ; θ , Ti .                         (1)
                                         i=1
                      (K)        (K)
In this expression, Yi     ≡ Y      (W )i reflects the explicit dependency of GNN embeddings on
W and the subscript i denotes the i-th row of a matrix. Additionally, n′ refers to the number of
nodes in G available for training, while D is a discriminator function such as cross-entropy. We
will sometimes refer to the training loss (1) as an upper-level energy function to differentiate its role
from the lower-level energy defined next.

Moving to Unfolded GNNs. An unfolded GNN architecture ensues when the functional form of h
is explicitly chosen to align with the update rules that minimize
                                                                  a second, lower-level
                                                                                        energy function

denoted as ℓ(Y ). In this way, it follows that ℓ Y (k) = ℓ h Y (k−1) ; W, A, X ≤ ℓ Y (k−1) ,
This restriction on h is imposed to introduce desirable inductive biases on the resulting GNN layers
that stem from properties of the energy ℓ and its corresponding minimizers (see Section 2.2 ).


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


While there are many possible domain-specific choices for ℓ(Y ) in the growing literature on un-
folded GNNs (Chen et al., 2022; Ahn et al., 2022; Ma et al., 2021; Gasteiger et al., 2019; Pan et al.,
2020; Yang et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2021; Xue et al., 2023), we will focus our
attention on a particular form that encompasses many existing works as special cases, and can be
easily generalized to cover many others. Originally inspired by Zhou et al. (2003) and generalized
by Yang et al. (2021) to account for node-wise nonlinearities, we consider
                                                                    Xn
                     ℓ(Y ) := ∥Y − f (X; W )∥2F + λ tr(Y ⊤ LY ) +       ζ(Yi ),                   (2)
                                                                        i=1

where λ > 0 is a trade-off parameter, f represents a trainable base model parameterized by W (e.g.,
a linear layer or MLP), and the function ζ denotes a (possibly non-smooth) penalty on individual
node embeddings. The first term in (2) favors embeddings that resemble the input features as pro-
cessed by the base model, while the second encourages smoothness across graph edges. And finally,
the last term is included to enforce additional node-wise constraints (e.g., non-negativity).
We now examine the form of h that can be induced when we optimize (2). Although ζ may be non-
smooth and incompatible with vanilla gradient descent, we can nonetheless apply proximal gradient
descent in such circumstances (Combettes & Pesquet, 2011), leading to the descent update
                                                        h                             i
    Y (k) = h Y (k−1) ; W, A, X = proxζ Y (k−1) − α (I + λL)Y (k−1) − f (X; W ) ,             (3)

where α controls the learning rate and proxζ (u) := arg miny 21 ∥u−y∥22 +ζ(y) denotes the proximal
operator of ζ. Analogous to more traditional GNN architectures, (3) contains a ζ-dependent nonlin-
ear activation applied to the output of an affine, graph-dependent filter. With respect to the former, if
ζ is chosen as an indicator function that assigns an infinite penalty to any embedding less than zero,
then proxζ reduces to standard ReLU activations; we will adopt this choice for MuseGNN.
2.2 W HY U NFOLDED GNN S ?
There are a variety of reasons why it can be advantageous to construct h using unfolded optimiza-
tion steps as in (3) or related. Of particular note here, unfolded GNN node embeddings inherit ex-
ploitable characteristics of the lower-level energy, especially if K is sufficiently large such that Y (K)
approximates a minimum of ℓ(Y ). For example, it is well-known that an oversmoothing effect can
sometimes cause GNN layers to produce node embeddings that converge towards a non-informative
constant (Oono & Suzuki, 2020; Li et al., 2018). This can be understood through the lens of mini-
mizing the the second term of (2) in isolation (Cai & Wang, 2020). The latter can be driven to zero
             (K)       (K)                                                                (K)      (K)
                            for all i, j ∈ V, since tr[(Y (K) )⊤ LY (K) ] ≡ (i,j)∈E ∥Yi       − Yj ∥22 .
                                                                             P
whenever Yi       = Yj
However, it is clear how to design ℓ(Y ) such that minimizers do not degenerate in this way, e.g.,
by adding the first term in (2), or related generalizations, it has been previously established that
oversmoothing is effectively mitigated, even while spreading information across the graph (Fu et al.,
2023; Ma et al., 2021; Pan et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2021).
Unfolded GNNs provide other transparent entry points for customization as well. For example, if
an energy function is insensitive to spurious graph edges, then a corresponding GNN architecture
constructed via energy function descent is likely be robust against corrupted graphs from adversarial
attacks or heterophily (Fu et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2021). More broadly, the flexibility of unfolded
GNNs facilitates bespoke modifications of (3) for handling long-range dependencies (Xue et al.,
2023), forming connections with the gradient dynamics of physical systems (Di Giovanni et al.,
2023) and deep equilibrium models (Gu et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2022), exploiting the robustness of
boosting algorithms (Sun et al., 2019), or differentiating the relative importance of features versus
network effects in making predictions (Yoo et al., 2023).

2.3   S CALABILITY C HALLENGES AND C ANDIDATE S OLUTIONS

As benchmarks continue to expand in size (see Table 1 below), it is no longer feasible to conduct
full-graph GNN training using only a single GPU or even single machine, especially so for rela-
tively deep unfolded GNNs. To address such GNN scalability challenges, there are presently two
dominant lines of algorithmic workarounds. The first adopts various sampling techniques to extract
much smaller computational subgraphs upon which GNN models can be trained in mini-batches.
Relevant examples include neighbor sampling (Hamilton et al., 2017; Ying et al., 2018), layer-wise


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


sampling (Chen et al., 2018; Zou et al., 2019), and graph-wise sampling (Chiang et al., 2019; Zeng
et al., 2021). For each of these, there exist both online and offline versions, where the former in-
volves randomly sampling new subgraphs during each training epoch, while the latter (Zeng et al.,
2021; Gasteiger et al., 2022) is predicated on a fixed set of subgraphs for all epochs; MuseGNN will
ultimately be based on a novel integration and analysis of this approach as introduced in Section 3.
The second line of work exploits the reuse of historical embeddings, meaning the embeddings of
nodes computed and saved during the previous training epoch. In doing so, much of the recursive
forward and backward computations required for GNN training, as well as expensive memory access
to high-dimensional node features, can be reduced (Chen et al., 2017; Fey et al., 2021; Huang et al.,
2023). This technique has recently been applied to training unfolded GNN models (Xue et al., 2023),
although available performance results do not cover large-scale graphs, there are no convergence
guarantees, and no code is available (at least as of the time of this submission) for enabling further
comparisons. Beyond this, we are unaware of prior work devoted to the scaling and coincident
analysis of unfolded GNNs.


3     G RAPH -R EGULARIZED E NERGY F UNCTIONS I NFUSED WITH S AMPLING

Our goal of this section is to introduce a convenient family of energy functions formed by applying
graph-based regularization to a set of subgraphs that have been sampled from a given graph of
interest. For this purpose, we first present the offline sampling strategy which will undergird our
approach, followed by details of energy functional form we construct on top of it for use with
MuseGNN. Later, we conclude by analyzing special cases of these sampling-based energies, further
elucidating relevant properties and connections with full-graph training.

3.1   O FFLINE S AMPLING F OUNDATION

In the present context, offline sampling refers to the case where we sample a fixed set of subgraphs
from G once and store them, which can ultimately be viewed as a form of preprocessing step. More
formally, we assume an operator Ω : G → {Gs }m        s=1 , where Gs = {Vs , Es } is a subgraph of G
containing ns = |Vs | nodes, of which we assume n′s are target training nodes (indexed from 1 to
n′s ), and Es represents the edge set. The corresponding feature and label sets associated with the s-th
                                                   ′   ′
subgraph are denoted Xs ∈ Rns ×d and Ts ∈ Rns ×d , respectively.
There are several key reasons we employ offline sampling as the foundation for our scalable unfolded
GNN architecture development. Firstly, conditioned on the availability of such pre-sampled/fixed
subgraphs, there is no additional randomness when we use them to replace energy functions depen-
dent on G and X (e.g., as in (2)) with surrogates dependent on {Gs , Xs }m    s=1 . Hence we retain a
deterministic energy substructure contributing to a more transparent bilevel (upper- and lower-level)
optimization process and attendant node-wise embeddings that serve as minimizers. Secondly, of-
fline sampling allows us to conduct formal convergence analysis that is agnostic to the particular
sampling operator Ω. In this way, we need not compromise flexibility in choosing a practically-
relevant Ω in order to maintain desirable convergence guarantees. For example, as will be detailed
later, ShadowKHop (Zeng et al., 2021) sampling pairs well with our approach and directly adheres
to our convergence analysis in Section 5. And lastly, offline sampling facilitates an attractive balance
between model accuracy and efficiency within the confines of unfolded GNN architectures. As will
be shown in Section 6, we can match the accuracy of full-graph training with an epoch time similar
to online sampling methods, e.g., neighbor sampling.

3.2   E NERGY F UNCTION F ORMULATION

To integrate offline sampling into a suitable graph-regularized energy function, we first introduce two
sets of auxiliary variables that will serve as more flexible input arguments. Firstly, to accommodate
multiple different embeddings for the same node appearing in multiple subgraphs,
                                                                               P        we define Ys ∈
Rns ×d for each subgraph index s = 1, . . . , m, as well as Y = {Ys }ms=1 ∈ R
                                                                              ( ns )×d
                                                                                         to describe the
concatenated set. Secondly, we require additional latent variables that, as we will later see, facilitate
a form of controllable linkage between the multiple embeddings that may exist for a given node (i.e.,
when a given node appears in multiple subgraphs). For this purpose, we define the latent variables


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


as M ∈ Rn×d , where each row can be viewed as a shared summary embedding associated with each
node in the original/full graph.
We then define our sampling-based extension of (2) for MuseGNN as
                  m
                     "                                                       ns
                                                                                        #
                  X                                                          X
                                        2           ⊤                    2
 ℓmuse (Y, M ) :=     ∥Ys − f (Xs ; W )∥F + λ tr(Ys Ls Ys ) + γ∥Ys − µs ∥F +    ζ(Ys,i ) , (4)
                   s=1                                                                  i=1

where Ls is the graph Laplacian associated with Gs , γ ≥ 0 controls the weight of the additional
penalty factor, and each µs ∈ Rns ×d is derived from M as follows. Let I(s, i) denote a function
that maps the index of the i-th node in subgraph s to the corresponding node index in the full graph.
For each subgraph s, we then define µs such that its i-th row satisfies µs,i = MI(s,i) ; per this
construction, µs,i = µs′ ,j if I(s, i) = I(s′ , j). Consequently, {µs }m
                                                                       s=1 and M represent the same
overall set of latent embeddings, whereby the former is composed of repeated samples from the
latter aligned with each subgraph.
Overall, there are three prominent factors which differentiate (4) from (2):

      1. ℓmuse (Y, M ) involves a deterministic summation over a fixed set of sampled subgraphs,
         where each Ys is unique while W (and elements of M ) are shared across subgraphs.
      2. Unlike (2), the revised energy involves both an expanded set of node-wise embeddings Y
         as well as auxiliary summary embeddings M . When later forming GNN layers designed
         to minimize ℓmuse (Y, M ), we must efficiently optimize over all of these quantities, which
         alters the form of the final architecture.
      3. The additional γ∥Ys − µs ∥2F penalty factor acts to enforce dependencies between the em-
         beddings of a given node spread across different subgraphs.

With respect to the latter, it is elucidating to consider minimization of ℓmuse (Y, M ) over Y with M
set to some fixed M ′ . In this case, up to an irrelevant global scaling factor and additive constant, the
energy can be equivalently reexpressed as
                             m
                                 "                                                          ns
                                                                                                          #
                            X                                                               X
  ℓmuse (Y, M = M ′ ) ≡           ∥Ys − [f ′ (Xs ; W ) + γ ′ µs ] ∥2F + λ′ tr(Ys⊤ Ls Ys ) +    ζ ′ (Ys,i ) ,
                           s=1                                                            i=1
                                                                                                        (5)
                                                γ
where f ′ (Xs ; W ) := 1+γ
                        1
                           f (Xs ; W ), γ ′ := 1+γ , λ′ := 1+γ
                                                            λ
                                                               , and ζ ′ (Ys,i ) := 1+γ
                                                                                     1
                                                                                        ζ(Ys,i ). From this
expression, we observe that, beyond inconsequential rescalings (which can be trivially neutralized
by simply rescaling the original choices for {f, γ, λ, ζ}), the role of µs is to refine the initial base
predictor f (Xs ; W ) with a corrective factor reflecting embedding summaries from other subgraphs
sharing the same nodes. Conversely, when we minimize ℓmuse (Y, M ) over M with Y fixed, we find
that the optimal µs for every s is equal to the mean embedding for each constituent node across all
subgraphs. Hence M ′ chosen in this way via alternating minimization has a natural interpretation
as grounding each Ys to a shared average representation reflecting the full graph structure. We now
consider two limiting special cases of ℓmuse (Y, M ) that provide complementary contextualization.

3.3   N OTABLE L IMITING C ASES
We first consider setting γ = 0, in which case the resulting energy completely decouples across each
subgraph such that we can optimize each
                                                                       ns
                                                                       X
                s                               2            ⊤
               ℓmuse (Ys ) := ∥Ys − f (Xs ; W )∥F + λ tr(Ys Ls Ys ) +     ζ(Ys,i ) ∀s             (6)
                                                                           i=1

independently. Under such conditions, the only cross-subgraph dependency stems from the shared
base model weights W which are jointly trained. Hence ℓsmuse (Ys ) is analogous to a full graph energy
as in (2) with G replaced by Gs . In Section 5 we will examine convergence conditions for the full
bilevel optimization process over all Ys and W that follows from the γ = 0 assumption. We have
also found that this simplified setting performs well in practice; see Appendix B.1 for ablations.
At the opposite extreme when γ = ∞, we are effectively enforcing the constraint Ys = µs for all
s. As such, we can directly optimize all Ys out of the model leading to the reduced M -dependent
energy


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             m
                                 "                                          ns
                                                                                       #
                             X                                              X
             ℓmuse (M ) :=       ∥µs − f (Xs ; W )∥2F + λ tr(µ⊤
                                                              s Ls µs ) + ζ(µs,i ) .         (7)
                           s=1                                        i=1
Per the definition of {µs }m
                           s=1 and the correspondence with unique node-wise elements of M , this
scenario has a much closer resemblance to full graph training with the original G. In this regard, as
long as a node from the original graph appears in at least one subgraph, then it will have a single,
unique embedding in (7) aligned with a row of M .
Moreover, we can strengthen the correspondence with full-graph training via the suitable selection
of the offline sampling operator Ω. In fact, there exists a simple uniform sampling procedure such
that, at least in expectation, the energy from (7) is equivalent to the original full-graph version from
(2), with the role of M equating to Y . More concretely, we present the following (all proofs are
deferred to Appendix D):
Proposition 3.1. Suppose we have m subgraphs (V1 , E1 ), . . . , (Vm , Em ) constructed independently
such that ∀s = 1, . . . , m, ∀u, v ∈ V, Pr[v ∈ Vs ] = Pr[v ∈ Vs | u ∈ Vs ] = p; (i, j) ∈ Es ⇐⇒ i ∈
Vs , j ∈ Vs , (i, j) ∈ E. Then when γ = ∞, we have E[ℓmuse (M )] = mp ℓ(M ) with the λ in ℓ(M )
rescaled to pλ.

Strengthened by this result, we can more directly see that (7) provides an intuitive bridge between
full-graph models based on (2) and subsequent subgraph models we intend to build via (4), with the
later serving as an unbiased estimator of the former. Even so, we have found that relatively small
γ values nonetheless work well in practice (although in principle it is actually possible to handle
γ = ∞ using techniques like ADMM (Boyd et al., 2011)).

4   F ROM S AMPLING - BASED E NERGIES TO THE M USE GNN F RAMEWORK
Having defined and motivated a family of sampling-based energy functions vis-a-vis (4), we now
proceed to derive minimization steps that will serve as GNN model layers that define MuseGNN
forward and backward passes as summarized in Algorithm 1. Given that there are two input argu-
ments, namely Y and M , it is natural to adopt an alternating minimization strategy whereby we fix
one and optimize over the other, and vice versa.
With this in mind, we first consider optimization over Y with M fixed. Per the discussion in Section
3.2, when conditioned on a fixed M , ℓmuse (Y, M ) decouples over subgraphs. Consequently, opti-
mization can proceed using subgraph-independent proximal gradient descent, leading to the update
rule
                     h                                                               i
       Ys(k) = proxζ Ys(k−1) − α [(1 + γ)I + λLs ] Ys(k−1) − [f (Xs ; W ) + γµs ] , ∀s.          (8)

Here the input argument to the proximal operator is given by a gradient step along (4) w.r.t. Ys .
We also remark that execution of (8) over K iterations represents the primary component of a single
forward training pass of our proposed MuseGNN framework as depicted on lines 6-8 of Algorithm 1.
We next turn to optimization over M which, as mentioned previously, can be minimized by the mean
of the subgraph-specific embeddings for each node. However, directly computing these means is
problematic for computational reasons, as for a given node v this would require the infeasible col-
lection of embeddings from all subgraphs containing v. Instead, we adopt an online mean estimator
with forgetting factor ρ. For each node v in the full graph, we maintain a mean embedding Mv and
a counter cv . When this node appears in the s-th subgraph as node i (where i is the index within the
subgraph), we update the mean embedding and counter via
                     ρcI(s,i)             (1 − ρ)cI(s,i) + 1 (K)
        MI(s,i) ←               MI(s,i) +                   Ys,i ,        cI(s,i) ← cI(s,i) + 1.    (9)
                    cI(s,i) + 1               cI(s,i) + 1
Also shown on line 9 of Algorithm 1, we update M and c once per forward pass, which serves to
refine the effective energy function observed by the core node embedding updates from (8).
For the backward pass, we compute gradients of
                                               ′
                                            ns
                                          m X          h               i
                                          X
                        Lmuse (W, θ) :=             D g Ys(K) (W )i ; θ , Ts,i                     (10)
                                          s=1 i=1


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


w.r.t. W and θ as listed on line 10 of Algorithm 1, where Lmuse (W, θ) is a sampling-based modifica-
                                                                               (K)
tion of (1). For W though, we only pass gradients through the calculation of Ys , not the full online
M update; however, provided ρ is chosen to be sufficiently large, M will change slowly relative to
  (K)
Ys such that this added complexity is not necessary for obtaining reasonable convergence.

Algorithm 1 Training procedure for MuseGNN
    Input: {Gs }m                     m
                s=1 : subgraphs, {Xs }s=1 : features, K: # unfolded layers, E: # epochs
 1: Randomly initialize W and θ; initialize c ∈ Rn and M ∈ Rn×d to be zero
 2: for e = 1, 2, . . . , E do
 3:     for s = 1, 2, . . . , m do
 4:         µs,i ← MI(s,i) , i = 1, 2, . . . , ns
              (0)
 5:        Ys ← f (Xs ; W )
 6:        for k = 1, 2, . . . , K do
                          (k)         (k−1)
 7:            Update Ys from Ys            by (8) using µs
 8:        end for
                                               (K)
 9:        Update M and c using (9) with Ys,i , i = 1, 2, . . . , ns
10:        Update W and θ via SGD over Lmuse from (10)
11:    end for
12: end for


5   C ONVERGENCE A NALYSIS OF M USE GNN
Global Convergence with γ = 0. In the more restrictive setting where γ = 0, we derive conditions
whereby the entire bilevel optimization pipeline converges to a solution that jointly minimizes both
lower- and upper-level energy functions in a precise sense to be described shortly. We remark here
that establishing convergence is generally harder for bilevel optimization problems relative to more
mainstream, single-level alternatives (Colson et al., 2005). To describe our main result, we first
require the following definition:
Definition 5.1. Assume f (X; W ) = XW , γ = 0, ζ(y)=0, g(y; θ) = y, and that D is a Lipschitz
                                                                     (k)
continuous convex function. Given the above, we then define Lmuse (W ) as (10) with K set to k.
                                                          (K)
Analogously, we also define L∗muse (W ) as (10) with Ys       replaced by Ys∗ := arg minYs ℓsmuse (Ys )
for all s.
Theorem 5.2. Let W ∗ be the optimal value of the loss L∗muse (W ) per Definition 5.1, while W (t) de-
                                                                         (k)
notes the value of W after t steps of stochastic gradient descent over Lmuse (W ) with diminishing step
                                                                                      (0)
sizes ηt = O( √1t ). Then provided we choose α ∈ 0, mins ∥I + λLs ∥−1

                                                                           2    and Ys = f (Xs ; W ),
for some constant C we have that

                         h
                             (k)     (t)
                                         i
                                               ∗       ∗          1      −Ck
                       E Lmuse (W ) − Lmuse (W ) ≤ O √ + e                      .
                                                                   t
Given that L∗muse (W ∗ ) is the global minimum of the combined bilevel system, this result guarantees
that we can converge arbitrarily close to it with adequate upper- and lower-level iterations, i.e., t
and k respectively. Note also that we have made no assumption on the sampling method. In fact, as
long as offline sampling is used, convergence is guaranteed, although the particular offline sampling
approach can potentially impact the convergence rate; see Appendix C.2 for further details.

Lower-Level Convergence with arbitrary γ. We now address the more general scenario where
γ ≥ 0 is arbitrary. However, because of the added challenge involved in accounting for alternating
minimization over both Y and M , it is only possible to establish conditions whereby the lower-level
energy (4) is guaranteed to converge as follows.
Theorem 5.3. Assume ζ(y) = 0. Suppose that we have a series of Y(k) and M (k) , k = 0, 1, 2, . . .
constructed following the updating rules Y(k) := arg minY ℓmuse (Y, M (k−1) ) and M (k) :=
arg minM ℓmuse (Y(k) , M ), with Y(0) and M (0) initialized arbitrarily. Then
                             lim ℓmuse (Y(k) , M (k) ) = inf ℓmuse (Y, M ).                       (11)
                            k→∞                         Y,M


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


While technically this result does not account for minimization over the upper-level MuseGNN loss,
we still empirically find that the entire process outlined by Algorithm 1, including the online mean
update, is nonetheless able to converge in practice. See Appendix C.1 for an illustration.

6       E XPERIMENTS
We now seek to empirically show that MuseGNN serves as a reliable unfolded GNN model that:
          1. Preserves competitive accuracy across datasets of widely varying size, including the very
             largest publicly-available graph benchmarks, with a single fixed architecture, and
          2. Operates with comparable computational complexity relative to common alternatives that
             are also capable of scaling to the largest graphs.
For context though, we note that graph benchmark leaderboards often include top-performing en-
tries based on complex compositions of existing models and training tricks, at times dependent on
additional features or external data not included in the original designated dataset. Although these
approaches have merit, our goal herein is not to compete with them, as they typically vary from
dataset to dataset. Additionally, they are more frequently applied to smaller graphs using architec-
tures that have yet to be consistently validated across multiple, truly large-scale benchmarks.

Datasets. We evaluate the performance of MuseGNN on node classification tasks from the Open
Graph Benchmark (OGB) (Hu et al., 2020; 2021) and the Illinois Graph Benchmark (IGB) (Khatua
et al., 2023). Table 1 presents the details of these datasets, which are based on homogeneous graphs
spanning a wide range of sizes. Of particular note is IGB-full, currently the largest publicly-
available graph benchmark, along with a much smaller version called IGB-tiny that we include
for comparison purposes. We also point out that while MAG240M is originally a heterogenous graph,
we follow the common practice of homogenizing it (Hu et al., 2021); similarly for IGB datasets, we
adopt the provided homogeneous versions.

Table 1: Dataset details, including node feature dimension (Dim.) and number of classes (# Class).

          Dataset                                            |V|     |E|   Dim.   # Class   Dataset Size
          ogbn-arxiv (Hu et al., 2020)                  0.17M       1.2M    128       40        182MB
          IGB-tiny (Khatua et al., 2023)                 0.1M       0.5M   1024       19        400MB
          ogbn-products (Hu et al., 2020)                2.4M      123M     100       47          1.4GB
          ogbn-papers100M (Hu et al., 2020)              111M       1.6B    128      172           57GB
          MAG240M (Hu et al., 2021)                    244.2M       1.7B    768      153        377GB1
          IGB-full (Khatua et al., 2023)               269.3M       4.0B   1024       19         1.15TB


MuseGNN Design. For all experiments, we choose the following fixed MuseGNN settings: Both
f (X; W ) and g(Y ; θ) are 3-layer MLPs, the number of unfolded layers K is 8 (rationale discussed
later below), and the embedding dimension d is 512, and the forgetting factor ρ for the online mean
estimation is 0.9. For offline subgraph sampling, we choose a variation on neighbor sampling called
ShadowKHop (Zeng et al., 2021), which loosely approximates the conditions of Proposition 3.1.
See Appendix A for further details regarding the MuseGNN implementation and hyperparameters.

Baseline Models. With the stated objectives of this section in mind, we compare MuseGNN with
GCN (Kipf & Welling, 2017), GAT (Velickovic et al., 2018), and GraphSAGE (Hamilton et al.,
2017), in each case testing with both neighbor sampling (NS) (Hamilton et al., 2017) and GNNAu-
toScale (GAS) (Fey et al., 2021) for scaling to large graphs. As a point of reference, we note that
GAT with neighbor sampling is currently the top-performing homogeneous graph model on both
the MAG240M and IGB-full leaderboards. We also compare with an analogous full-graph (FG)
unfolded GNN (UGNN) with the same architecture as MuseGNN but without scalable sampling.

Accuracy Comparisons. As shown in Table 2, MuseGNN achieves similar accuracy to a com-
parable full-graph unfolded GNN model on the small datasets (satisfying our first objective from
    1
        The size includes author and institution features.


                                                             8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


above), while the latter is incapable of scaling to even the mid-sized ogbn-products bench-
mark. Meanwhile, MuseGNN is generally better than the other GNN baselines, particularly so on
the largest dataset, IGB-full. Notably, MuseGNN exceeds the performance of GAT with neigh-
bor sampling, the current SOTA for homogeneous graph models on both MAG240M and IGB-full.
Please also refer to Appendix B.1 for MuseGNN accuracy ablations involving γ, where we show
that while even γ = 0 achieves strong results, increasing γ > 0 can lead to further improvement.
Likewise, Appendix B.2 contains experiments showing that the improvement of MuseGNN is not
merely a product of using ShadowKHop sampling instead of more traditional neighbor sampling
with baseline models; there we show that when switched to offline ShadowKHop sampling, the
baseline GNNs degrade further, possibly because they are not anchored to an integrated energy.

Timing Comparisons. Turning to model complexity, Table 3 displays the training speed of
MuseGNN relative to two common baselines. From these results, we observe that MuseGNN exe-
cutes with a similar epoch time (satisfying our second objective from above).

Table 2: Node classification accuracy (%) on the test set, except for MAG240M which only has la-
bels for validation set. Bold numbers denote the highest accuracy, and error bars are missing for
some GNN baselines that were too expensive to compute. For the two largest datasets, MuseGNN is
currently the top-performing homogeneous graph model on the relevant OGB-LSC and IGB leader-
boards respectively, even while maintaining the attractive attributes of an unfolded GNN. We omit
error bars for baseline results in the two largest datasets because of the high cost to run them.

                           Small              Medium                           Large                 Largest
 Model             arxiv       IGB-tiny      products                papers100M            MAG240M        IGB-full
 GCN (NS)        69.71±0.25    69.77±0.11    78.49±0.53                   65.83±0.36         65.24             48.59
 SAGE (NS)       70.49±0.20    72.42±0.09    78.29±0.16                   66.20±0.13         66.79             54.95
 GAT (NS)        69.94±0.28    69.70±0.09    79.45±0.59                   66.28±0.08         67.15             55.51
 GCN (GAS)       71.68±0.3     67.86±0.20     76.6±0.3                     54.2±0.7          OOM               OOM
 SAGE (GAS)      71.35±0.4     69.35±0.06     77.7±0.7                     57.9±0.4          OOM               OOM
 GAT (GAS)       70.89±0.1     69.23±0.17     76.9±0.5                      OOM              OOM               OOM
 UGNN (FG)       72.74±0.25    72.44±0.09       OOM                          OOM              OOM            OOM
 MuseGNN         72.50±0.19    72.80±0.02    81.23±0.39                   66.82±0.02       67.26±0.06     60.21±0.18

Table 3: Training speed (epoch time) in sec-
onds; hardware configurations in Appendix A.                                                                   =0
Even on the largest graph, IGB-full,                                                                           = 1.0
                                                       Log-Energy


MuseGNN remains comparable to popular                                                                          = 2.0
baselines that adopt online sampling.                                                                          = 3.0
                                                                    107
               papers-
 Model                       MAG240M    IGB-full                           1      2    3   4     5    6    7       8
                 100M
                                                                                            Layer
 SAGE (NS)       102.48       795.19     17279.98
 GAT (NS)        164.14       1111.30    19789.79
                                                      Figure 1: Convergence of (4) for MuseGNN
 MuseGNN         158.85       1370.47    20413.69     trained on papers100M with varying γ.


Convergence Illustration. In Figure 1 we show the empirical convergence of (4) w.r.t. Y during
the forward pass of MuseGNN models on ogbn-papers100M for differing values of γ. In all
cases the energy converges within 8 iterations, supporting our choice of K = 8 for experiments.

7   C ONCLUSION
In this work, we have proposed MuseGNN, an unfolded GNN model that scales to large datasets by
incorporating offline graph sampling into the design of its lower-level, architecture-inducing energy
function. In so doing, MuseGNN readily handles graphs with ∼ 108 or more nodes and high-
dimensional node features, exceeding 1TB in total size, all while maintaining transparent layers
inductive biases and concomitant convergence guarantees.


                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E THICS S TATEMENT
While we do not envision that there are any noteworthy risks introduced by our work, it is of course
always possible that a large-scale model like MuseGNN could be deployed, either intentionally or
unintentionally, in such a way as to cause societal harm. For example, a graph neural network
designed to screen fraudulent credit applications could be biased against certain minority groups.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We present the detailed algorithm for training MuseGNN in Section 4. Meanwhile, supplementary
experimental details are recorded in Appendix A and proofs for all technical results are deferred
to Appendix D. Additionally, because ICLR submissions are immediately public, we choose not to
release the model code until the decision.

R EFERENCES
Hongjoon Ahn, Yongyi Yang, Quan Gan, Taesup Moon, and David P Wipf. Descent steps of a
  relation-aware energy produce heterogeneous graph neural networks. Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, 35:38436–38448, 2022.
Stephen Boyd, Neal Parikh, Eric Chu, Borja Peleato, Jonathan Eckstein, et al. Distributed optimiza-
  tion and statistical learning via the alternating direction method of multipliers. Foundations and
  Trends® in Machine learning, 3(1):1–122, 2011.
Sébastien Bubeck et al. Convex optimization: Algorithms and complexity. Foundations and
   Trends® in Machine Learning, 8(3-4):231–357, 2015.
Chen Cai and Yusu Wang. A note on over-smoothing for graph neural networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2006.13318, 2020.
Jianfei Chen, Jun Zhu, and Le Song. Stochastic training of graph convolutional networks with
   variance reduction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10568, 2017.
Jie Chen, Tengfei Ma, and Cao Xiao. FastGCN: fast learning with graph convolutional networks via
   importance sampling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.10247, 2018.
Jiuhai Chen, Jonas Mueller, Vassilis N. Ioannidis, Soji Adeshina, Yangkun Wang, Tom Goldstein,
   and David Wipf. Does your graph need a confidence boost? convergent boosted smoothing on
   graphs with tabular node features. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
   2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=nHpzE7DqAnG.
Siheng Chen and Yonina C Eldar. Graph signal denoising via unrolling networks. In ICASSP 2021-
  2021 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp.
  5290–5294, 2021.
Wei-Lin Chiang, Xuanqing Liu, Si Si, Yang Li, Samy Bengio, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. Cluster-GCN:
 An efficient algorithm for training deep and large graph convolutional networks. In Proceedings
 of the 25th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery & data mining, pp.
 257–266, 2019.
Benoı̂t Colson, Patrice Marcotte, and Gilles Savard. Bilevel programming: A survey. 4or, 3:87–107,
  2005.
Patrick L Combettes and Jean-Christophe Pesquet. Proximal splitting methods in signal processing.
  Fixed-point algorithms for inverse problems in science and engineering, pp. 185–212, 2011.
I. Csiszár and G. Tusnády. Information geometry and alternating minimization procedures. Statistics
   and Decisions, Supplemental Issue Number 1:205–237, 1984.
Francesco Di Giovanni, James Rowbottom, Benjamin Paul Chamberlain, Thomas Markovich, and
  Michael M Bronstein. Understanding convolution on graphs via energies. Transactions on Ma-
  chine Learning Research, 2023.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Matthias Fey, Jan E Lenssen, Frank Weichert, and Jure Leskovec. GNNAutoScale: Scalable and
 expressive graph neural networks via historical embeddings. In International Conference on
 Machine Learning, pp. 3294–3304. PMLR, 2021.
Guoji Fu, Mohammed Haroon Dupty, Yanfei Dong, and Lee Wee Sun. Implicit graph neural dif-
  fusion based on constrained dirichlet energy minimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03306,
  2023.
Johannes Gasteiger, Aleksandar Bojchevski, and Stephan Günnemann. Predict then propagate:
  Graph neural networks meet personalized pagerank. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=H1gL-2A9Ym.
Johannes Gasteiger, Chendi Qian, and Stephan Günnemann. Influence-based mini-batching for
  graph neural networks. In Learning on Graphs Conference, pp. 9–1. PMLR, 2022.
Justin Gilmer, Samuel S Schoenholz, Patrick F Riley, Oriol Vinyals, and George E Dahl. Neural
  message passing for quantum chemistry. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  1263–1272. PMLR, 2017.
Fangda Gu, Heng Chang, Wenwu Zhu, Somayeh Sojoudi, and Laurent El Ghaoui. Implicit graph
  neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Will Hamilton, Zhitao Ying, and Jure Leskovec. Inductive representation learning on large graphs.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
Weihua Hu, Matthias Fey, Marinka Zitnik, Yuxiao Dong, Hongyu Ren, Bowen Liu, Michele Catasta,
 and Jure Leskovec. Open graph benchmark: Datasets for machine learning on graphs. Advances
 in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:22118–22133, 2020.
Weihua Hu, Matthias Fey, Hongyu Ren, Maho Nakata, Yuxiao Dong, and Jure Leskovec. OGB-
 LSC: A large-scale challenge for machine learning on graphs. arXiv:2103.09430, 2021.
Kezhao Huang, Haitian Jiang, Minjie Wang, Guangxuan Xiao, David Wipf, Xiang Song, Quan
  Gan, Zengfeng Huang, Jidong Zhai, and Zheng Zhang. Refresh: Reducing memory access
  from exploiting stable historical embeddings for graph neural network training. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2301.07482, 2023.
Steven M. Kearnes, Kevin McCloskey, Marc Berndl, Vijay S. Pande, and Patrick Riley. Molecular
  graph convolutions: moving beyond fingerprints. J. Comput. Aided Mol. Des., 30(8):595–608,
  2016.
Arpandeep Khatua, Vikram Sharma Mailthody, Bhagyashree Taleka, Tengfei Ma, Xiang Song, and
  Wen-mei Hwu. Igb: Addressing the gaps in labeling, features, heterogeneity, and size of public
  graph datasets for deep learning research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13522, 2023.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Thomas N. Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-Supervised Classification with Graph Convolutional Net-
  works. In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR
  ’17, Palais des Congrès Neptune, Toulon, France, 2017. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=SJU4ayYgl.
Qimai Li, Zhichao Han, and Xiao-Ming Wu. Deeper insights into graph convolutional networks
  for semi-supervised learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 32, 2018.
Yao Ma, Xiaorui Liu, Tong Zhao, Yozen Liu, Jiliang Tang, and Neil Shah. A unified view on
  graph neural networks as graph signal denoising. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International
  Conference on Information & Knowledge Management, pp. 1202–1211, 2021.
Arkadi Nemirovski, Anatoli Juditsky, Guanghui Lan, and Alexander Shapiro. Robust stochastic
  approximation approach to stochastic programming. SIAM Journal on optimization, 19(4):1574–
  1609, 2009.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Kenta Oono and Taiji Suzuki. Graph neural networks exponentially lose expressive power for node
  classification. In 8th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR, 2020.
Xuran Pan, Shiji Song, and Gao Huang. A unified framework for convolution-based graph neural
  networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.10234, 2020.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style,
  high-performance deep learning library. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32,
  2019.
Ke Sun, Zhanxing Zhu, and Zhouchen Lin. AdaGCN: Adaboosting graph convolutional networks
  into deep models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.05081, 2019.
Petar Velickovic, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro Liò, and Yoshua
  Bengio. Graph attention networks. In 6th International Conference on Learning Representations,
  ICLR 2018, Vancouver, BC, Canada, April 30 - May 3, 2018, Conference Track Proceedings, Van-
  couver, BC, Canada, 2018. OpenReview.net. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=rJXMpikCZ.
Minjie Yu Wang. Deep graph library: Towards efficient and scalable deep learning on graphs. In
 ICLR workshop on representation learning on graphs and manifolds, 2019.
Rui Xue, Haoyu Han, MohamadAli Torkamani, Jian Pei, and Xiaorui Liu. Lazygnn: Large-scale
  graph neural networks via lazy propagation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.01503, 2023.
Yongyi Yang, Tang Liu, Yangkun Wang, Jinjing Zhou, Quan Gan, Zhewei Wei, Zheng Zhang,
  Zengfeng Huang, and David Wipf. Graph neural networks inspired by classical iterative algo-
  rithms. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 11773–11783. PMLR, 2021.
Yongyi Yang, Tang Liu, Yangkun Wang, Zengfeng Huang, and David Wipf. Implicit vs unfolded
  graph neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.06592, 2022.
Rex Ying, Ruining He, Kaifeng Chen, Pong Eksombatchai, William L Hamilton, and Jure Leskovec.
  Graph convolutional neural networks for web-scale recommender systems. In Proceedings of the
  24th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery & data mining, pp. 974–
  983, 2018.
Jaemin Yoo, Meng-Chieh Lee, Shubhranshu Shekhar, and Christos Faloutsos. Less is more: Slimg
  for accurate, robust, and interpretable graph mining. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGKDD
  Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 3128–3139, 2023.
Hanqing Zeng, Muhan Zhang, Yinglong Xia, Ajitesh Srivastava, Andrey Malevich, Rajgopal Kan-
  nan, Viktor Prasanna, Long Jin, and Ren Chen. Decoupling the depth and scope of graph neural
  networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Hongwei Zhang, Tijin Yan, Zenjun Xie, Yuanqing Xia, and Yuan Zhang. Revisiting graph convo-
  lutional network on semi-supervised node classification from an optimization perspective. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2009.11469, 2020.
Dengyong Zhou, Olivier Bousquet, Thomas Lal, Jason Weston, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Learning
  with local and global consistency. Advances in neural information processing systems, 16, 2003.
Meiqi Zhu, Xiao Wang, Chuan Shi, Houye Ji, and Peng Cui. Interpreting and unifying graph neural
 networks with an optimization framework. In Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021, pp.
 1215–1226, 2021.
Difan Zou, Ziniu Hu, Yewen Wang, Song Jiang, Yizhou Sun, and Quanquan Gu. Layer-dependent
  importance sampling for training deep and large graph convolutional networks. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    E XPERIMENT D ETAILS

Model Details. For MuseGNN, we choose the base model f (X; W ) and output function g(Y ; θ)
to be two shallow 3-layer MLPs with standard residual skip connections (although for the somewhat
differently-structured ogbn-products data we found that skip connections were not necessary).
The number of unfolded layers, K, is selected to be 8, and the hidden dimension d is set to 512. The
forgetting factor ρ for the online mean estimation is set to be 0.9. All the models and experiments are
implemented in PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) using the Deep Graph Library (DGL) (Wang, 2019).


Offline Samples. As supported by Proposition 3.1, subgraphs induced from nodes (where all the
edges between sampled nodes are kept) pair naturally with the energy function. Therefore we use
node-induced subgraphs for our experiments. For ogbn-arxiv, we use the 2-hop full neighbor
because it is a relatively small graph. For IGB-tiny, ogbn-papers100M, and MAG240M, we
use ShadowKHop with fanout [5,10,15]. For the rest of the datasets, we use ShadowKHop with
fanout [10, 15]. Note that ShadowKHop sampler performs node-wise neighbor sampling and returns
the subgraph induced by all the sampled nodes.


Training Hyperparameters. In the training process, we set the dropout rate of the MLP layers to
be 0.2, and we do not have dropout between the propagation layers. The parameters are optimized
by Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2014) with the weight decay parameter set to 0 and the learning
rate being 0.001. For ogbn-arxiv and ogbn-papers100M, α = 0.05, λ = 20. For MAG240M
and the IGB series datasets, α = 0.2, λ = 4. And for ogbn-products, α = λ = 1 with precon-
ditioning on the degree matrix for each unfolded step/layer. The batch size n′s in the offline samples
are all set to 1000. For large-scale datasets, an expensive hyperparameter grid search as commonly
used for GNN tuning is not feasible. Hence we merely applied simple heuristics informed from
training smaller models to pick hyperparameters for the larger datasets. Also it is worth noticing
that α should not in principle affect accuracy if set small enough, since the model will eventually
converge. In this regard, α can be set dependent on λ, since the latter determines the size of α needed
for convergence.


Evaluation Process. In the presented results, the evaluation process for validation and test datasets
uses the same pipeline as the training process does: doing offline sampling first and then use these
fixed samples to do the calculation. The only difference is that in the evaluation process, the
backward propagation is not performed. While we used the same pipeline for training and test-
ing, MuseGNN is modular and we could optionally use online sampling for the evaluation or even
multi-hop full-neighbor loader in the evaluation time.


Configurations in the Speed Experiments. We use a single AWS EC2 p4d.24xlarge instance
to run the speed experiments. It comes with dual Intel Xeon Platinum 8275CL CPU (48 cores,
96 threads), 1.1TB main memory and 8 A100 (40GB) GPUs. All the experiments are run on single
GPU. When running MuseGNN, the pre-sampled graph structures are stored in the NVMe SSDs and
the input feature is loaded into the main memory (for IGB-full, its feature exceeds the capacity
of the main memory, so mmap is employed). In the baseline setting, ogbn-papers100M and
MAG240M are paired with neighbor sampling of fanout [5, 10, 15] and IGB-full is paired with
neighbor sampling of fanout [10, 15]. So the fanout for the online neighbor sampling baselines and
MuseGNN are the same so that they can have a fair comparison. In these experiments, the hidden
size is set to 256 as commonly does.


Model Code.     Because ICLR submissions are public, we choose not to release the code until the
decision.


Extra Dataset. Table 4 specifies details of the extra dataset we used for the ablation study in
Appendix B.1.


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 4: Dataset details, including node feature dimension (Dim.) and number of classes (# Class).

         Dataset                               |V|      |E|     Dim.   # Class    Dataset Size
         IGB-medium (Khatua et al., 2023)     10M     120M      1024       19         40.8GB


B     A DDTIONAL E XPERIMENTS AND D ISCUSSIONS
B.1   F URTHER D ETAILS R EGARDING THE ROLE OF γ IN M USE GNN

The incorporation of γ > 0 serves two purposes within our MuseGNN framework and its sup-
porting analysis. First, by varying γ we are able to build a conceptual bridge between the decou-
pled/inductive γ = 0 base scenario, and full-graph training as γ → ∞, provided the sampled
subgraphs adhere to the conditions of Proposition 3.1. In this way, the generality of γ > 0 has
value in terms of elucidating connections between modeling regimes, independently of empirical
performance.
That being said, the second role is more pragmatic, as γ > 0 can indeed improve predictive accuracy.
As shown in the ablation in Table 5 (where all hyperparameters except γ remain fixed), γ = 0
already achieves good performance; however, increasing γ leads to further improvements. This is
likely because larger γ enables the model to learn similar embeddings for the same node in different
subgraphs, which may be more robust to the sampling process.

Table 5: Ablation study of the penalty factor γ. Results shown represent the accuracy (%) on the
test set. Bold numbers denote the best performing method.

                                  γ=0       γ = 0.1   γ = 0.5     γ=1     γ=2       γ=3
               papers100M         66.29      66.31     66.53      66.45   66.64     66.82
                IGB-tiny          72.66      72.78     72.81       N/A     N/A       N/A
               IGB-medium         75.18      75.80     75.83       N/A     N/A       N/A
             ogbn-products        80.42      80.92     81.23       N/A     N/A       N/A

That being said, while we can improve accuracy with γ > 0, this generality comes with an additional
memory cost for storing the required mean vectors. However, this memory complexity for the mean
vectors is only O(nd), which is preferable to the memory complexity O(ndK) of GAS (Fey et al.,
2021), which depends on the number of layers K. Importantly, this more modest O(nd) storage
is only an upper bound for the MuseGNN memory complexity, as the γ = 0 case is already very
effective even without requiring additional storage. As an additional point of reference, the GAS-
related approach from (Xue et al., 2023) also operates with only single-layer O(nd) of additional
storage; however, unlike MuseGNN, this storage is mandatory for large graphs (not amenable to full-
graph training) and therefore serves as a lower bound for memory complexity. Even so, the approach
from (Xue et al., 2023) is valuable and complementary, and should their code become available in
the future, it would be interesting to explore the possibility of integrating with MuseGNN.

B.2   S AMPLING A BLATION ON THE BASELINE M ODELS

We choose neighbor sampling for the baselines because it is most commonly used, but since Shad-
owKHop is paired with MuseGNN, we use Table 6 to show that the improvement is not coming from
the change in the sampling method but the usage of energy-based scalable unfolded model. In Ta-
ble 6, the baseline models are trained on ogbn-papers100M with the same offline ShadowKHop
samples used in the training of MuseGNN, but they suffer from a decrease in the accuracy compared
with the online neighbor sampling counterparts, so the change in sampling method cannot account
for the enhancement in the accuracy.

B.3   A LTERNATIVE S AMPLING M ETHOD FOR M USE GNN

We also paired MuseGNN with online neighbor sampling, the most popular choice for sampling,
on ogbn-papers100M to account for our design choice of sampling methods coupled with


                                                 14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 6: Ablation study of the accuracy improvement compared with baselines. Shown results are
the accuracy (%) on the test set of ogbn-papers100M.

                                                                         Baseline Model
                      Sampling Method                                 GCN        GAT        SAGE
                      ShadowKHop (offline)                            64.89     63.84       65.57
                      Neighbor Sampling (online)                      65.83     66.28       66.2



MuseGNN. Theoretically, the convergence guarantee no longer holds true for online sampling. Ad-
ditionally, neighbor sampling removes terms regarding edge information from the energy function,
so we expect it to be worse than the offline ShadowKHop sampling that we use. This is also sup-
ported by Proposition 3.1 because neighbor sampling does not provide subgraphs induced from the
nodes with all the edges. Empirically, with online neighbor sampling, the test accuracy is 66.11%;
it is indeed lower than the 66.82% from our offline ShadowKHop results.


C     A DDITIONAL C ONVERGENCE D ETAILS

C.1   E MPERICAL C ONVERGENCE R ESULTS

Here we show the empirical results of the previous convergence analysis. Though we do not have
the full bilevel convergence results for the γ > 0 case like Theorem 5.2, Figure 2 shows that in
real-world dataset, the bilevel optimization system will still converge with the imprecise estimation
                           (K)
of optimal embeddings Ys       ≈ Ys∗ and the online mean estimation of M .


                                 3.5

                                 3.0

                                 2.5
                          Loss


                                 2.0

                                 1.5

                                 1.0

                                       0   250   500   750 1000        1250   1500   1750
                                                          Iteration


Figure 2: Convergence of the upper-level loss on ogbn-arxiv dataset for 20 epochs with penalty
factor γ = 1.



C.2   A N OTE ON S AMPLING M ETHODS I MPACTING C ONVERGENCE R ATES

As stated in the main paper, offline sampling allows us to conduct formal convergence analysis that is
agnostic to the particular sampling operator. So our convergence guarantee is valid for all sampling
methods. However, different sampling methods can still actually have an impact on the convergence
rate of the bilevel optimization. This is because different sampling methods will produce subgraphs
with different graph Laplacian matrices, and the latter may have differing condition numbers στ as
mentioned later in Lemma D.4. In this regard, a larger such condition number will generally yield a
slower convergence rate. Further details are elaborated in the proof of Theorem 5.2 in Appendix D.2.


                                                          15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D     P ROOFS

D.1    C ONNECTION WITH F ULL G RAPH T RAINING

Proposition 3.1. Suppose we have m subgraphs (V1 , E1 ), . . . , (Vm , Em ) constructed independently
such that ∀s = 1, . . . , m, ∀u, v ∈ V, Pr[v ∈ Vs ] = Pr[v ∈ Vs | u ∈ Vs ] = p; (i, j) ∈ Es ⇐⇒ i ∈
Vs , j ∈ Vs , (i, j) ∈ E. Then when γ = ∞, we have E[ℓmuse (M )] = mp ℓ(M ) with the λ in ℓ(M )
rescaled to pλ.

Proof. The probability that an edge is sampled is Pr[(i, j) ∈ Es | (i, j) ∈ E] = p2 . ∀v ∈ V, if
v ∈ Vs , v ∈ Vt , then Ys,v = Yt,v = Mv . We have
                                                                                         
                       Xm    X                                   λ X
                                                     2                                  2
          ℓmuse (M ) =            ∥Mv − f (X; W )v ∥2 + ζ(Mv ) +            ∥Mi − Mj ∥2 
                       s=1
                                                                    2
                              v∈Vs                                            (i,j)∈Es
                         m X
                         X
                                                       2
      E [ℓmuse (M )] =               ∥Mv − f (X; W )v ∥2 + ζ(Mv ) · Pr[v ∈ Vs ]
                         s=1 v∈Vs
                               m
                          λ   X    X                2
                         +                ∥Mi − Mj ∥2 · Pr[(i, j) ∈ Es ]
                           2 s=1
                                 (i,j)∈Es
                           X                        2
                                                                           λ X                 2
                       =mp       ∥Mv − f (X; W )v ∥2 + ζ(Mv ) + mp2                  ∥Mi − Mj ∥2
                                                                           2
                           v∈V                                               (i,j)∈E
                           "                                             n
                                                                                    #
                                              2              ⊤
                                                                     X
                       =mp ∥M − f (X; W )∥F + pλ tr M LM +                   ζ(Mi )
                                                                            i=1
                       =mp ℓ(M )



D.2    F ULL C ONVERGENCE A NALYSIS

According to Definition 5.1, Ys∗ (W ) = (I + λLs )−1 f (Xs ; W ) := Ps∗ f (Xs ; W ) is the optimal
                                                                                (0)
embedding for the subgraph energy ℓsmuse (Ys ). Additionally, we initialize Ys as f (Xs ; W ), so
  (k)                     (k)                   (k)
Ys can be written as Ps f (X; W ) where Ps is also a matrix. We have α ≤ ∥I + λLs ∥−1       2 , so
  (k)
Ps will converge to Ps∗ as k grows. The output of D over matrix input is the sum of D over each
row vectors, as typical discriminator function like squared error or cross-entropy do.
                 (k)
Plugging the Ys (W ) and Ys∗ (W ) into the loss function, we have

                                      m
                                      X
                       L(k)
                        muse (W ) =         D Ys(k) (W )1:n′s , Ts = D P(k) XW, T                                 (12)
                                      s=1
                                                                                                                  m
                                                                                               (k)
where 1 : n′s means the first n′s rows, T := (T1 , T2 , . . . , Tm )⊤ ,   P(k) := diag        Ps                        .
                                                                                                         1:n′s    s=1
                                                 (k)         (k)
Similarly, for ℓ∗W (W ), we change all the Ys and Ps to Ys∗ and Ps∗ . That is,
                                n           om
                     P∗ := diag (Ps∗ )1:n′s    , L∗muse (W ) = D (P∗ XW, T)
                                                  s=1


Stochastic Gradient Descent The updating rule by gradient descent for the parameter is

                                                               m ∂D Ys(k) (W (t) ), T
                                                              X                      s
         W (t+1) = W (t) − η∇W (t) L(k)
                                    muse (W
                                            (t)
                                                ) = W (t) − η              (t)
                                                              s=1
                                                                       ∂W


                                                        16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                         (k)
In reality, we use stochastic gradient descent to minimize Lmuse (W ), and the updating rule becomes

                                                             (k)
                                                 ∂D Ts , g Ys (W (t) )
                           W (t+1) = W (t) − η                                                   (13)
                                                          ∂W (t)
Here s is picked at random from {1, 2, . . . , m}, so the gradient is an unbiased estimator of the true
gradient.
                                      (k)
Lemma D.1. As defined in (12), Lmuse (W ) is a convex function of W . Furthermore, there exist the
                                 (k)               (k)
global optimal W (k∗) such that Lmuse (W (k∗) ) ≤ Lmuse (W ) for all W .

         (k)
Proof. Lmuse (W ) is a composition of convex function D with an affine function, so the convexity is
retained. By the convexity, the global optimal W (k∗) exists.
                                            (k)
Lemma D.2. When the loss function Lmuse is defined as equation
                                                            h   (12), andi the parameter W is
                                                              (k)               (k)
updated by (13) with diminishing step sizes ηt = O( √1t ), E Lmuse (W (t) ) − Lmuse (W (k∗) ) =
     √
O(1/ t).

                                    (k)
Proof. Since the loss function Lmuse is convex by Lemma D.1, and the step size is diminishing in
O( √1t ), by Nemirovski et al. (2009), the convergence rate of the difference in expected function
value and optimal function value is O( √1t ).

Lemma D.3. The subgraph energy function (6) with ζ(y) = 0 (as defined in Definition 5.1) is σs -
smooth and τs -strongly convex with respect to Ys , with σs = σmax (I + λLs ) and τs = σmin (I +
λLs ), where σmax and σmin are the maximum and minimum singular value of the matrix.

Proof. The proof is simple by computing the Hessian of the energy function. Additionally, since the
graph Laplacian matrix Ls is positive-semidefinite, we have σs ≥ τs > 0.
Lemma D.4. Let σ, τ = arg maxσs ,τs στss , s = 1, 2, · · · , m, where στ gives the worst condition
number of all subgraph energy functions. In the descent iterations from (8) that minimizes (6)
with step size α = σ1 , we can establish the bound on the propagation matrix ∥P(k) − P∗ ∥ ≤
               Pm       (0)
m exp(− 2στ
            k) s=1 ∥Ps − Ps∗ ∥

Proof. By Bubeck et al. (2015)[Theorem 3.10], we have
                                                  2           τs                                  2
               Ps(k) f (X; W ) − Ps∗ f (X; W )        ≤ e− σs k Ps(0) f (X; W ) − Ps∗ f (X; W )

Since this bound holds true for any f (X; W ), by choosing f (X; W ) = I to be the identity matrix,
we have                                τs                      τ
                   Ps(k) − Ps∗ ≤ e− 2σs k Ps(0) − Ps∗ ≤ e− 2σ k Ps(0) − Ps∗
Adding up all the m subgraphs, we have
                                                                   m
                                                          τ
                                                                   X
                                 P(k) − P∗ ≤ me− 2σ k                    Ps(0) − Ps∗
                                                                   s=1


Theorem 5.2. Let W ∗ be the optimal value of the loss L∗muse (W ) per Definition 5.1, while W (t) de-
                                                                        (k)
notes the value of W after t steps of stochastic gradient descent over Lmuse (W ) with diminishing step
                                                                                      (0)
sizes ηt = O( √t ). Then provided we choose α ∈ 0, mins ∥I + λLs ∥−1
                1

                                                                          2     and Ys = f (Xs ; W ),
for some constant C we have that

                         h
                             (k)     (t)
                                         i
                                               ∗       ∗          1     −Ck
                       E Lmuse (W ) − Lmuse (W ) ≤ O √ + e                      .
                                                                   t

                                                         17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. In Definition 5.1, we assume D to be Lipschitz continuous for the embedding variable, so
for any input Y and Y′ , we have |D(Y, T) − D(Y′ , T)| ≤ LD ∥Y − Y′ ∥.

                                L(k)
                                  muse W
                                          (k∗)
                                                 − L∗muse (W ∗ )
                                         ∗      ∗     ∗
                                ≤L(k)
                                  muse (W ) − Lmuse (W )

                                =D P(k) XW ∗ , T − D (P∗ XW ∗ , T)

                                ≤LD P(k) XW ∗ − P∗ XW ∗

                                ≤LD P(k) − P∗ ∥XW ∗ ∥
                                       τ
                                ≤O e− 2σ k



Therefore,
                   h               i
                  E L(k)
                     muse (W
                             (t)
                                 ) − L∗muse (W ∗ )
                   h               i
                 =E L(k)
                     muse (W (t)
                                 )   − L(k)
                                        muse (W
                                                (k∗)
                                                     ) + L(k)
                                                          muse (W
                                                                  (k∗)
                                                                       ) − L∗muse (W ∗ )
                     1           τ
                 ≤O( √ ) + O(e− 2σ k )
                      t
                     1
                 ≤O( √ + e−ck )
                      t
           τ
where c = 2σ .

D.3   A LTERNATING M INIMIZATION

The main reference for alternating minimization is Csiszár & Tusnády (1984). In this paper, they
proved that the alternating minimization method will converge to the optimal value when a five-point
property or both a three-point property and a four-point property holds true. We will show that the
global energy function and the corresponding updating rule satisfy the three-point property and the
four-point property. Thus, the alternating minimization method will converge to the optimal value.
                                        Pm Pn′s
For simplicity, we define rs,i as rs,i = s′ =1 j=1     I{I(s, i) = I(s′ , j)}, where I{·} is the indica-
tor function. Therefore, rs,i means the node in the full graph with index I(s, i) appears rs,i times in
all subgraphs. With some abuse of the notation, we let rI(s,i) = rs,i .
In the energy function (4), we still want to find a set of {Ys }m              m
                                                                s=1 and {µs }s=1 to minimize the
global energy function. We can use the alternating minimization method to solve this problem. In
each step, we minimize {Ys }m                                 m
                             s=1 first and then minimize {µs }s=1 . We want to show that when the
parameter W is fixed, by alternatively minimizing {Ys }ms=1 and {µs }m
                                                                     s=1 , the energy will converge
to the optimal value.
We can easily get the updating rule for {Ys }m            m
                                             s=1 and {µs }s=1 by taking the derivative of the energy
function. Note that we always first update {Ys }s=1 and then update {µs }m
                                                m
                                                                         s=1 . For {Ys }, we have

                         Ys(k) = [(1 + γ)I + λLs ]−1 [f (Xs ; W ) + γµ(k−1)
                                                                      s     ]                      (14)
                                        (k)
For {µs }m
         s=1 , we have the i-th row of µs is

                                         m   s n′
                            (k)      1 XX        (k)
                           µs,i =              Y ′ · I{I(s, i) = I(s′ , j)}                        (15)
                                    rs,i ′ j=1 s ,j
                                        s =1

In another word, the updated µ(k) is the average of the embeddings of the same node in different
subgraphs.
Note that here {Ys } with {µs } and Y with M are used simultaneously. We will use {Ys } and {µs }
when we want to emphasize the subgraphs and use Y and M when we want to emphasize them as


                                                    18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the input of the global energy function. But in essence they represent the same variables and can be
constructed from each other.
The three-point property and four-point property call for a non-negative valued helper function
δ(Y, Y ′ ) such that δ(Y, Y ) = 0. We define the helper function as δ(Y, Y ′ ) = (1 + γ)∥Y − Y ′ ∥2F .
We can easily verify that δ(Y, Y ) = 0 and δ(Y, Y ′ ) ≥ 0.
Lemma D.5 (Three-point property). Suppose that we have a series of Y(k) and M (k) , k =
0, 1, 2, · · · constructed following the updating rule (14) and (15) and that they are initialized ar-
bitrarily. For any Y and k, ℓmuse (Y, µ(k) ) − ℓmuse (Y(k+1) , µ(k) ) ≥ δ(Y, Y(k+1) ) holds true.


                                                (k)                 (k+1)       (k)                  (k+1)
Proof. We only need to show ℓsmuse (Ys , µs ) − ℓsmuse (Ys   , µs ) ≥ δ(Ys , Ys      ). By iterating
s from 1 to m and adding the m inequalities together, we can get the desired result.

 ℓmuse (Ys , µ(k)
              s ) − ℓmuse (Ys
                             (k+1)
                                   , µ(k)
                                      s ) − δ(Ys , Ys
                                                     (k+1)
                                                           )
                                                             2                          2
                     2
= ∥Ys − f (Xs ; W )∥F + λ tr Ys⊤ Ls Ys + γ Ys − µ(k)            − Ys(k+1) − f (Xs ; W )

                                                         s
                                                             F                          F
                                                        2                           2
  − λ tr Ys(k+1)⊤ Ls Ys(k+1) − γ Ys(k+1) − µ(k)     s      − (1 + γ) Ys − Ys(k+1)
                                                                F                                       F
                                                 2
    Ys − Ys(k+1) + Ys(k+1) − f (Xs ; W )                       Ys⊤ Ls Ys

=                                                     + λ tr
                                                 F
                                            2                                          2
 + γ Ys − Ys(k+1) − Ys(k+1) − µ(k)   s      − Ys(k+1) − f (Xs ; W )
                                          F                            T
                                                      2                             2
          (k+1)⊤         (k+1)           (k+1)    (k)
 − λ tr Ys         Ls Ys         − γ Ys        − µs      − (1 + γ) Ys − Ys(k+1)
                                                      F
  D                                       E     D                                E F
          (k+1)      (k+1)                                (k+1)     (k+1)    (k)
=2 Ys − Ys       , Ys      − f (Xs ; W ) + 2γ Ys − Ys           , Ys      − µs

 + λ tr Ys⊤ Ls Ys − λ tr Ys(k+1)⊤ Ls Ys(k+1)

  D                                                         E
=2 Ys − Ys(k+1) , (1 + γ)Ys(k+1) − f (Xs ; W ) + γµ(k)  s
     D                                     E
 + λ Ys − Ys(k+1) , Ls Ys + Ys(k+1)
 D                                                                                              E
= Ys − Ys(k+1) , 2 (λLs + (1 + γ)I) Ys(k+1) − 2 f (Xs ; W ) + γµ(k)    s    + λLs Ys − Ys(k+1)
 D                                     E
= Ys − Ys(k+1) , λLs Ys − Ys(k+1)         ⩾0


Lemma D.6 (four-point property). Suppose that we have a series of Y(k) and M (k) , k = 0, 1, 2, · · ·
constructed following the updating rule (14) and (15) and that they are initialized arbitrarily. For
any Y, µ and k, δ(Y, Y(k) ) ≥ ℓmuse (Y, µ(k) ) − ℓmuse (Y, µ) holds true.


Proof. Expanding all the functions we can get our target is equivalent to
               m
               X                            2          m
                                                       X                        2

                                                                                                  2
                     (1 + γ)   Ys − Ys(k)       ≥γ             Ys − µ(k)
                                                                     s                − ∥Ys − µs ∥F
                                                                                F
               s=1                                     s=1

We can actually show a stronger result, that is
                     m
                     X                  2       m
                                                X                       2

                                                                                             2
                           Ys − Ys(k)       ≥             Ys − µ(k)
                                                                s           − ∥Ys − µs ∥F
                                        F                               F
                     s=1                        s=1


                                                         19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


By the updating rule for µs , we have
                      m D
                      X                                       E
                              µs − µ(k)  (k)
                                    s , µs − Ys
                                               (k)

                      s=1
                        ns D
                      m X                                               E
                                                (k)     (k)       (k)
                      X
                  =              µs,i − µs,i , µs,i − Ys,i
                      s=1 i=1
                      n X ns
                        m X
                      X                           D
                                                                          (k)
                                                                              E                                (16)
                  =                 I{I(s, i) = v} Mv − Mv(k) , Mv(k) − Ys,i
                      v=1 s=1 i=1
                       n
                            *                                              m     n
                                                                                                           +
                                                                           s
                      X                                           1 XX                       (k)
                  =         rv   Mv − Mv(k) , Mv(k) −                        I{I(s, i) = v}Ys,i
                      v=1
                                                                  rv s=1 i=1
                  =0
                  m
                  X                     2
Therefore,              Ys − Ys(k)
                                        F
                  s=1
                  Xm                                               2       D                     E
                                       2
              =          ∥Ys − µs ∥F + µs − Ys(k)                       + 2 Ys − µs , µs − Ys(k)
                                                                   F
                  s=1
                  Xm                                              2                           2
                                       2
              =          ∥Ys − µs ∥F + µs − µ(k)
                                             s                         + µ(k)
                                                                          s − Ys
                                                                                (k)
                                                                  F                           F
                  s=1
                    D                       m
                                         E  X  D                         E
                  +2 Ys − µs , µs − Ys(k) +   2 µs − µ(k)
                                                      s   , µ(k)
                                                             s   − Ys
                                                                     (k)

                                                              s=1
                  m                            2                2

             (16) X              2
              =      2 ∥Ys − µs ∥F + Ys − µ(k)
                                           s     + µ(k)
                                                    s   − Ys
                                                            (k)
                                                                       F                          F
                  s=1
                        m  D
                        X                            E D                    E
                  +2             Ys − µs , µs − Ys(k) + µs − Ys , Ys − µ(k)
                                                                        s
                        s=1
                m
                X                            2              2

                               2         (k)      (k)   (k)
              =    2 ∥Ys − µs ∥F + Ys − µs     + µs − Ys
                                                                       F                          F
                  s=1
                      m
                      X                         D                       E
                                           2
                  +           −2 ∥Ys − µs ∥F + 2 Ys − µs , µ(k)
                                                            s   − Ys
                                                                    (k)

                      s=1
                  m
                  X                         2                              2      D                       E
              =             Ys − µ(k)
                                  s             + µ(k)
                                                   s − Ys
                                                         (k)
                                                                               + 2 Ys − µs , µ(k)
                                                                                              s   − Ys
                                                                                                      (k)
                                            F                              F
                  s=1
                  Xm                       2                                           2

                                                                                                       2
              =             Ys − µ(k)
                                  s            +      µ(k)
                                                       s − Ys
                                                             (k)
                                                                 + Ys′ − µs                − ∥Ys − µs ∥F
                                           F                                           F
                  s=1
                  Xm                        2

                                                                  2
              ≥             Ys − µ(k)
                                  s             − ∥Ys − µs ∥F
                                            F
                  s=1


Theorem 5.3. Assume ζ(y) = 0. Suppose we have a series of Y(k) and M (k) , k = 0, 1, 2, · · ·
constructed following the updating rule (14) and (15), with Y(0) and M (0) initialized arbitrarily.
Then
                           lim ℓmuse (Y(k) , M (k) ) = inf ℓmuse (Y, M ),
                                 k→∞                                       Y,M


Proof. By Lemma D.5 and Lemma D.6 where both the three-point and four-point property hold
true, the theorem is obtained according to Csiszár & Tusnády (1984).


                                                              20
