Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


M INIMUM E DIT D ISTANCE T RAINING FOR
C ONDITIONAL L ANGUAGE G ENERATION M ODELS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                              A BSTRACT
         The utilization of attention-based encoder-decoder (AED) structures, including
         transformers, has further advanced the capabilities of conditional language gen-
         eration (CLG) models. However, the conventional AED model training approach
         which aims to maximize the likelihood conditioned on the prefix of reference la-
         bel sequence, introduces exposure bias and possesses limitations in that it uses
         different evaluation metrics in the training and inference stages. In this study,
         we introduce a novel AED model training technique focused on minimizing the
         Levenshtein distance between the reference and inferred label sequences. The
         proposed method effectively mitigates exposure bias and improves the generaliza-
         tion performance of neural machine translation and automatic speech recognition
         models. Furthermore, we demonstrate that a post-hoc calibration function trained
         with the proposed objective function significantly reduces the calibration error of
         the ASR model, resulting in notable performance improvements.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Conditional language generation (CLG) tasks aim to find the optimal sequence of tokens Ŷ for a
given source context X.
                                   Ŷ = argmax P (Y |X)                                     (1)
                                                    Y
Depending on the composition of the source context and target token sequence, various tasks such
as automatic speech recognition (ASR), neural machine translation (NMT), image captioning, and
generative question answering are classified into CLG categories Cho et al. (2014); Bahdanau et al.
(2015); Sutskever et al. (2014); Chorowski et al. (2015); Vinyals et al. (2015); Nenkova et al. (2011).
In order to perform the CLG task well, it is important to approximate P (Y |X) well. Today, neu-
ral network models trained on large paired datasets have exhibited notable performance. Among
these models, recurrent neural network (RNN)-based sequence-to-sequence models and transform-
ers, which are specialized in time-series data processing, have demonstrated exceptional capabilities
in CLG tasks Cho et al. (2014); Bahdanau et al. (2015); Sutskever et al. (2014); Vaswani et al. (2017).
Since direct modeling of P (Y |X) is intractable, the following factorization process is required:
                                                   T
                                                   Y
                                      P (Y |X) =            P (Yt |Y0:t−1 , X)                       (2)
                                                   t=1

where Y = [Y1 , ..., YT ] = Y1:T , Y0 denotes the start of sentence token and T denotes the length of
the token sequence. Most neural network-based CLG models update the parameter θ to minimize
the negative-log-likelihood (NLL) of the factorized linear chain.
                                                        i
                                                   T
                                                   X
                                  i     i
                          NLL(X , Y ; θ) = −                 log P (Yti |Y0:t−1
                                                                           i
                                                                                , X i ; θ)           (3)
                                                   t=1

where (X i , Y i ) denotes ith paired sample in n-sized paired dataset {(X i , Y i )}ni=1 and T i denotes
the length of Y i . In the above equation, the CLG model is trained to maximize the likelihood
                                                     i
computed conditionally on true previous tokens (Y0:t−1   ). This training method is known as teacher
forcing or simply maximum likelihood estimation (MLE), and the loss function in Equation 3 is
referred to as next-word prediction loss. The teacher forcing method parallelizes the training process


                                                         1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


of the autoregressive models, thereby increasing the efficiency of training and freeing the model
from the effects of accumulated errors resulting from incorrect inferences of the previous time step
during the training process Venkatraman et al. (2015). However, in the inference stage of CLG
                                           i
models, the previously inferred tokens Ŷ0:t−1   are used instead of the true previous tokens to infer
the token of the current time step. At this point, exposure bias occurs because of the difference
between P (Y ) and P (Ŷ ) Bengio et al. (2015); Ranzato et al. (2016). The exposure bias of the
CLG model exacerbates hallucinations Wang & Sennrich (2020), and causes calibration errors, and
error accumulation problems Wang et al. (2020); Arora et al. (2022). In addition, exposure bias
is attracting attention as a cause of chronic problems in CLG models, such as lack of vocabulary
diversity and word-level repetition Li et al. (2016); Welleck et al. (2019); Choi et al. (2020).
Another problem with the CLG model trained by teacher forcing is that the model evaluation criteria
differ during the training and inference processes. While most CLG models utilize measures that
evaluate decoding results at the sequence level, such as the bilingual evaluation understudy (BLEU)
or recall-oriented understudy for gisting evaluation (ROUGE) score and word error rate (WER), the
MLE in Equation 3 uses measures that evaluate candidates at the token level Papineni et al. (2002);
LIN (2004); Wiseman & Rush (2016). We present the differences between the evaluation metric in
the training and inference processes in more detail in Section 2.3. These two problems in CLG mod-
els are well-known, and numerous studies have been conducted to address them. Sampling-based
methods that take some prefixes from P (Ŷ ) in the training process and label smoothing methods
that prevent giving an excessively high probability mass to reference label sequences are two simple
heuristics used to alleviate these problems Müller et al. (2019); Wang et al. (2020). In addition,
there are methods for training models by using sequence-level loss or reinforcement learning-based
methods that directly minimize evaluation metrics Edunov et al. (2018); Wang & Sennrich (2020);
Veselỳ et al. (2013); Zhao et al. (2022); Paulus et al. (2018). Our study shares the same motivation
as existing studies in that it trains the CLG model in a way that overcomes exposure bias and directly
minimizes evaluation measures. The contributions of this study can be summarized as follows:

      1. We defined a Levenshtein distance-based alignment that is uniquely determined between
         two sequences of different lengths.

      2. The alignment defined in Step 1 was used to design a new sequence-level loss function.

      3. We train the NMT and ASR models using the proposed loss function and obtain the fol-
         lowing results:

          (a) The proposed method outperforms other sequential model training strategies such as
              teacher forcing, scheduled sampling, and minimum Bayes risk (MBR) in ASR and
              NMT tasks.
          (b) The proposed method uses the autoregressively obtained decoding result as a prefix
              to train the CLG model and mitigate exposure bias. We experimentally demonstrated
              that the proposed method alleviates the accumulated errors caused by exposure bias.
          (c) We experimentally demonstrate that the post-hoc calibration function trained with the
              proposed loss function achieves a lower calibration error and higher performance gain.


2     BACKGROUND

2.1   E DIT D ISTANCE

Edit distances serve as distance measures at the sequence level for assessing the similarity between
pairs of sequences. The edit distance defines the number of operations needed to transform a source
sequence into a target sequence as the distance between the two sequences. Edit operations encom-
pass substitution, insertion, deletion, and transposition; specific types of edit distances permit only
certain operations. A notable instance of edit distance is the Hamming distance. Hamming distance
Hamming(·, ·) is defined as the number of substitutions required to convert a source sequence to a
target sequence with the same lengths.


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Definition 2.1. (Hamming distance) For two label sequences Y1:T and Ŷ1:T of length T , the Ham-
ming distance is defined as follows:
                                                                T
                                                                X
                                  Hamming(Y1:T , Ŷ1:T ) =            1(Yt ̸= Yˆt )                                (4)
                                                                t=1

where 1 denotes the indicator function. It is also possible to define the distance between a pair of
sequences of different lengths using sequence-level edit operations such as insertion or deletion.
The Levenshtein distance Lev(·, ·) is a distance measure that utilizes three types of edit operations:
insertion, deletion, and substitution.
Definition 2.2. (Levenshtein distance) Given a token sequence Y1:T of length T and a token se-
quence Ŷ1:T̂ of length T̂ , the Levenshtein distance between the prefixes of the two sequences Y1:t
and Ŷ1:t̂ is defined as follows:
                                         
                                         
                                          Lev(Y1:t−1
                                                   , Ŷ1:t̂−1 )              if Yt = Ŷt̂
                                         
                                                   Lev(Y1:t−1 , Ŷ1:t̂−1 )
                                                  
                   Lev(Y1:t , Ŷ1:t̂ ) =                                                         (5)
                                         
                                          1 + min    Lev(Y1:t , Ŷ1:t̂−1 )   otherwise
                                                  
                                                   Lev(Y
                                                             1:t−1 , Ŷ1:t̂ )
                                         

where t ∈ {1, ..., T }, t̂ ∈ {1, ..., T̂ }, Lev(Y0 , Ŷ1:t̂ ) = t̂, Lev(Y1:t , Ŷ0 ) = t and Lev(Y0 , Ŷ0 ) = 0.

2.2    E VALUATION M EASURES FOR CLG MODELS

This study carried out experiments utilizing ASR and NMT models. NMT is the task of generating
target language sentences corresponding to source language sentences, while ASR is the task of
extracting language information inherent in given speech signals. Despite their commonality in
dealing with time-series data, these tasks employ different evaluation measures. In NMT, N -gram
matching-based evaluation measures are predominantly used. A representative evaluation metric
for NMT models is the BLEU score, which gauges sequence-level similarity based on the count
of consecutive token sequences of length N shared between target and candidate token sequences
Papineni et al. (2002).
A characteristic of the ASR, which differs from other CLG tasks, is that there are few reference
label sequences corresponding to one speech feature. Except for homonyms and ambiguous tran-
scriptions, most speech features have a unique token sequence as a target. Therefore, Levenshtein
distance was used as an evaluation measure in the ASR task. Depending on the unit criterion to be
evaluated, the word error rate or token error rate (TER) was used.
Definition 2.3. (Token error rate) Given a reference token sequence Y1:T and a candidate token
sequence Ŷ1:T̂ , the TER is defined as follows:
                                                             Lev(Y1:T , Ŷ1:T̂ )
                                    TER(Y1:T , Ŷ1:T̂ ) =                                                          (6)
                                                                   T

2.3    D ISCREPANCY IN E VALUATION C RITERIA BETWEEN T RAINING AND I NFERENCE

Given a source context X, well-trained CLG models generate a candidate label sequence Ŷ resem-
bling the reference label sequence Y . The sequence-level error of the CLG model trained in the
teacher-forcing scenario can be quantified with Hamming distance as follows:
                              Errortrain (X, Y1:T ; θ) = Hamming(Y0:T , Ŷ1:T )                                    (7)
where Ŷt = argmax P (y|X, Y1:t−1 ; θ), t ∈ {1, ..., T }, θ denotes the parameters of the CLG model,
                 y∈V
and V denotes vocabulary. It’s evident that the teacher-forcing-based MLE loss in Equation 3 com-
pels CLG models to minimize the above error. The accuracy estimated during the training phase of
the CLG model using MLE can be expressed as follows:
                                          #correct          #correct
                           ACCtrain =              =                                                               (8)
                                            T        #correct + #substitution


                                                         3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


While error and accuracy are defined as above in the training phase, CLG models typically employ
sequence-level evaluation measures during the evaluation phase. The error in CLG models evaluated
using the TER can be represented as:

                                  Errortest (X, Y1:T ; θ) = Lev(Y1:T , Ŷ1:T̂ )                                        (9)

where Ŷt̂ = argmax P (y|X, Ŷ0:t̂−1 ; θ) and t̂ ∈ {1, ..., T̂ }. Accuracy estimated in the evaluation
                 y∈V
phase was also redefined as follows.
                                                     #correct
                   ACCtest =                                                                                         (10)
                                 #correct + #substitution + #deletion + #insertion
We hypothesized that this discrepancy between the training and evaluation phases deteriorates the
generalization performance of CLG models. Based on this assumption, we propose a new objective
function to train the CLG model to directly minimize Errortest .

3     P ROPOSED M ETHODS

3.1    L EVENSHTEIN BACKWARD PATH (LBP)

The sequence-level error (Errortest ) presented in Equation 9 is calculated between sequences of
differing lengths. To design a loss function directly minimizing it, identifying a suitable alignment
between the sequence pair is essential. In this regard, we define a path derived through the Leven-
shtein distance between sequence suffixes.
Definition 3.1. (LBP) LBP between a pair of sequences ψ0,0 (Y1:T , Ŷ1:T̂ ) is defined as follows:
                
                
                
                 t+1,t̂+1 ∪ (t + 1, t̂ + 1)
                  ψ                                                                   if Yt = Ŷt̂
                                                          Lev(Y t+1:T  ,Ŷ         )
                  ψt+1,t̂+1 ∪ (t + 1, t̂ + 1) if Levmin =
                
                                                                          t̂+1:T̂
                  
                                                                  t+t̂+2
        ψt,t̂ =                                           Lev(Yt:T ,Ŷt̂+1:T̂ )
                   ψt,t̂+1 ∪ (t, t̂ + 1)      if Levmin =                            otherwise
                
                
                                                              t+t̂+1
                                                           Lev(Y        ,Ŷ       )
                  
                                                                 t+1:T
                
                     t+1,t̂ ∪ (t + 1, t̂)
                ψ                           if Levmin =                  t̂:T̂
                                                                t+t̂+1

                           Lev(Yt+1:T ,Ŷt̂+1:T̂ ) Lev(Yt:T ,Ŷt̂+1:T̂ ) Lev(Yt+1:T ,Ŷt̂:T̂ )
where Levmin = min(              t+t̂+2
                                                  ,     t+t̂+1
                                                                        ,     t+t̂+1
                                                                                               ), t ∈ {0, ..., T − 1}, t̂ ∈
{0, ..., T̂ − 1}, ψT,t̂ = {(T, t̂), (T, t̂ + 1), ..., (T, T̂ )}, ψt,T̂ = {(t, T̂ ), (t + 1, T̂ ), . . . , (T, T̂ )},
ψT,T̂ = ∅. In Figure 1, we depicted the edit distance matrix pertaining to the string pair (‘DIVERS’
and ‘DRIVE’) as a heatmap and highlighted LBP on it. This LBP encompasses four types of edit
operations correct, insertion, deletion, and substitution. In Figure 1, we highlighted insertion errors
on LBP in yellow, deletion errors in red, and correct in green.

3.2    M INIMUM E DIT D ISTANCE T RAINING OVER THE LBP

We introduce a new training technique for CLG models minimizing the Levenshtein distance be-
tween a reference label sequence and a candidate sequence obtained via autoregressive decoding.
The proposed method trains CLG models to maximize the likelihood computed over the LBP.
Definition 3.2. (MED) For the paired sample (X i , Y1:T           i
                                                                       i ) ∼ P (X, Y ) and its beam search decoding
         i                                           i     i         i
result Ŷ1:T̂ i
                , objective function NLL MED      (X   , Y1:T i , Ŷ 1:T̂ i
                                                                            ; θ) is defined as follows:
                                                              X
                       NLLMED (X i , Y i , Ŷ i ; θ) = −                 log P (Yti |Ŷ0:
                                                                                        i
                                                                                               , X i ; θ)
                                                                                          t̂−1                 (11)
                                                           (t,t̂)∈ψ i

where ψ i = ψ0,0
             i      i
                 (Y1:T i , Ŷ
                              i
                             1:T̂ i
                                    ) and Ŷt̂i = argmax P (y|Ŷ0:
                                                                i
                                                                   t̂−1
                                                                        , X i ; θ). As shown in Figure 1, the
                                                      y∈V
MED loss trains the model to correct the three types of errors (insertion, deletion, and substitution)
presented on the LBP. This results in the proposed method minimizing the Levenshetin distance-
based error (Errortest ) between the candidate and the reference label sequence.


                                                            4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Edit distance matrix with Levenshtein backward path (LBP). The LBP in the matrix is
highlighted by colored boxes.


The proposed training technique employs the beam search decoding results Ŷ i as a prefix for like-
lihood calculation. Ŷ i is pre-generated via an external model that has been trained already (offline
scenario) or generated in real-time during each iteration using a model that is being trained (online
scenario). The two training scenarios are illustrated in Figure 2. Among the beam-search decoding
results, we chose the sentence with the highest score; however, if the TER of the sentence exceeded
the threshold ξTER , it was excluded from MED training. We obtained higher performance when
                                                         λ
ξTER was scheduled therefore, we set ξTER = ξmax λmax       in all experiments. λ denotes the current
training epoch, and λmax denotes the last training epoch. Unless otherwise specified, we used 1.0 as
the ξmax value. Through this scheduling method, it is possible to prevent the phenomenon in which
the convergence speed is degraded owing to erroneous decoding results generated in the initial stage
of training in an online scenario.
Because the inferred label sequence Ŷ1:i t̂ is used to calculate the LBP, the CLG model trained using
only NLLMED in an offline scenario has a trivial solution that outputs the input label of the current
time step. We avoid this problem by using a multi-task learning approach that minimizes NLL
and NLLMED together. Finally, we updated the CLG model parameters to minimize the objective
function as follows:
                 LMED (X i , Y i , Ŷ i ; θ) = NLL(X i , Y i ; θ) + NLLMED (X i , Y i , Ŷ i ; θ)         (12)

3.3   S EGMENT- LEVEL L EVENSHTEIN BACKWARD PATH ( S LBP)

In many CLG tasks, there can be multiple semantically similar token sequences corresponding to a
single source context. In these tasks, proper alignment may not exist because of the morphological
differences between Y i and Ŷ i . In this section, we propose a minimum edit distance training method
for more relaxed conditions. Given a sentence Y i = Y0:T       i
                                                                 i and an integer N ∈ {1, ..., T }, we
                                                                                                       i

define N -gram segments of Y i as [G(Y i , N )] = [Y1:N i      i
                                                           , Y2:N               i
                                                                  +1 , . . . , YT −N +1:T ]. We find the set of
                 i   i  i
segment pairs Ω (Y , Ŷ ; N , ξN ) with the smallest edit distance from each of all N -gram segments
of Y i to the N -gram segments of Ŷ i .
                               i
                          T +1−N
                   Ωi = {∪u=1    (u, û)|Lev([G(Y i , N )]u , [G(Ŷ i , N )]û )
                                                                                   i
                                                                                                          (13)
                       = min({ξN } ∪ {Lev([G(Y i , N )]u , [G(Ŷ , N )]l )}T̂l=1+1−N )},

where ξN ≥ 0 denotes the minimum edit distance threshold and [G(Y i , N )]u = Yu:u−1+N
                                                                                 i
                                                                                          . We set
N as the value IID sampled from the discrete uniform distribution U(2, 6) for every iteration and
set ξN as the quotient of N divided by 2. We create a new tuple set (sLBP) by finding the LBP for
each pair of segments in Ωi .


                                                        5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Proposed MED training scenarios. Left: Teacher forcing-based MLE. Middle: Offline
MED training scenario. Right: Online MED training scenario. “AD” denotes autoregressive decod-
ing (e.g., beam search decoding).


Definition 3.3. (sLBP) sLBP ϕi (Y i , Ŷ i ; N , ξN ) is defined as follows:

             ϕi = ∪(u,û)∈Ωi (Y i ,Ŷ i ;N ,ξN ) ∪(t,t̂)∈ψi ([G(Y i ,N )]u ,[G(Ŷ i ,N )]û ) (u + t, û + t̂)   (14)
                                                           0,0


3.4    M INIMUM E DIT D ISTANCE T RAINING OVER THE S LBP

We present segment-level minimum edit distance training (sMED), a technique for training CLG
models to maximize the likelihood on ∪ni=1 ϕi . Similar to the evaluation measures based on N -
gram matching, sMED assumes that the properly inferred token sequence Ŷ corresponding to the
source context shares many N -gram segments with the reference label sequence Y . Therefore,
the proposed method trains the CLG model to minimize the Levenshtein distance between similar
N -gram segments shared by Y and Ŷ .
Definition 3.4. (sMED) For the paired sample (X i , Y1:T    i
                                                               i ) ∼ P (X, Y ) and its beam search decoding
         i                                           i     i        i
result Ŷ1:T̂ i
                , the objective function NLL sMED (X   , Y1:T i , Ŷ1:T̂ i ; θ, N , ξN ) is defined as follows:

                                                                    X
                 NLLsMED (X i , Y i , Ŷ i ; θ, N , ξN ) = −                 log P (Yti |Ŷ0:
                                                                                           i
                                                                                                  , X i ; θ)
                                                                                             t̂−1                (15)
                                                                 (t,t̂)∈ϕi


where ϕi = ϕi (Y i , Ŷ i ; N , ξN ) and Ŷt̂i = argmax P (y|Ŷ0:
                                                               i
                                                                  t̂−1
                                                                       , X i ; θ). We trained the CLG model
                                                       y∈V
to minimize both NLL and NLLsMED using a multi-task learning approach.

      LsMED (X i , Y i , Ŷ i ; θ, N , ξN ) = NLL(X i , Y i ; θ) + NLLsMED (X i , Y i , Ŷ i ; θ, N , ξN )       (16)

Because NLLMED and NLLsMED use the beam search decoding candidate Ŷ for model training, it
is affected by the accuracies of these candidates. We did not use candidates with errors above the
ξTER for training. We calculated the loss using a smaller N value when the reference label sequence
and the candidate did not have any shared segments at the N -gram level. These filtering schemes
are shown in Algorithm 1 of the Appendix.


3.5    C ALIBRATION F UNCTION T RAINING WITH MED

If the lengths of the inferred and reference label sequences are different, calibration error measures
such as the expected calibration error (ECE), cannot be estimated because the token-wise accuracy is
not defined Guo et al. (2017). In Wang et al. (2020), the calibration error between two sequences of
different lengths was quantified using an edit distance. Using the LBP defined in 4.1, the calibration
error measure proposed in Wang et al. (2020) is formulated concisely.


                                                             6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Definition 3.5 (ECELBP ). For n paired samples and their best beam search decoding results Dseq =
{(X i , Y i , Ŷ i )}ni=1 , ECELBP with B bins evaluated on Dseq is defined as follows:
                                            B
                                            X |Ψb |
                  ECELBP (Dseq , B) =                    |ACCLBP (Ψb ) − CONFLBP (Ψb )|,
                                                  |Ψ |
                                            b=1
                                                          X
                       ACCLBP (Ψb ) = |Ψb |−1                        1(Yti = Ŷt̂i ),
                                                       (i,t,t̂)∈Ψb                                         (17)
                                                          X
                                                  −1
                     CONFLBP (Ψb ) = |Ψb |                           P (Ŷt̂i |Ŷ1:
                                                                                 i
                                                                                    t̂−1
                                                                                         , X i ; θ),
                                                       (i,t,t̂)∈Ψb

                                                                                  (b − 1) b
                    Ψb = {(i, t, t̂) ∈Ψ : P (Ŷt̂i |Ŷ1:
                                                      i
                                                         t̂−1
                                                              , X i ; θ) ∈ (             , ]}
                                                                                     B    B
where Ψ = ∪ni=1 ∪(t,t̂)∈ψi (i, t, t̂), Ŷt̂i is the estimated label sequence conditioned on (Ŷ0:
                                                                                               i
                                                                                                 t̂−1
                                                                                                      , X i ; θ)
and |Ψb | denotes the size of bin. As shown in the aforementioned equation, the calibration error mea-
sure of the CLG model proposed in Wang et al. (2020) can be interpreted as the difference between
the accuracy and confidence estimated on LBP (ACCLBP is equal to ACCtest estimated per bin).
Accordingly, a post-hoc calibration function trained to minimize the MED loss on the validation set
directly minimizes ECELBP . In Section 5, we show that the post-hoc calibration function trained
with MED loss produces a well-calibrated output compared to the calibration function trained with
MLE Kumar & Sarawagi (2019) in the inference stage, and consequently improves the beam-search
decoding result.

4     E XPERIMENTS

We used FairSeq in the NMT experiments and ESPNet in the ASR experiments Watanabe et al.
(2018); Ott et al.. We used label smoothing (with a label smoothing factor of 0.1) for all NMT model
training. We trained the NMT model with the online scenario shown in Figure 2, and the ASR model
with the offline scenario. The performance of the NMT model trained using the scheduled sampling
method is presented in Table 1. In these experiments, we sampled the prefix from an interpolated
distribution ϵSS P (Ŷ ) + (1 − ϵSS )P (Y ) created with an interpolation factor ϵSS Bengio et al. (2015).
We linearly increased the interpolation factor for every epoch λ up to the maximum epoch λmax .
                                                                λ
                                               ϵSS = ϵmax                                                  (18)
                                                               λmax
We conducted experiments on ϵmax ∈ {0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 0.9}, and the experiments with the highest
performance are presented in Table 1. In all calibration experiments, we utilized the temperature-
scaling method Guo et al. (2017). We determined the optimal temperature value by gradient descent
using a validation set, and in this process, the CLG model parameters were frozen.

4.1   DATA

In the NMT experiment, the IWSLT14 (En-De), IWSLT17 (En-Fr), and the WMT14 (En-De)
datasets were employed, which consist of English, French, and German Cettolo et al. (2014). The
IWSLT14 dataset encompassed a trainset of 160k, a validation set of 7k, and a test set of 6k in-
stances. We adopted the byte pair encoding (BPE)-based tokenization technique, resulting in a
composition of 6.6k tokens for English and 8.8k tokens for German Sennrich et al. (2016). The
IWSLT17 dataset’s training set constituted 226k sentence pairs and it is tokenized with BPE as 7k
subwords for English and 9k subwords for French. The WMT dataset’s training set constituted 4.5
million sentence pairs, with newstest13 and newstest14 serving as the validation and test sets, re-
spectively. The WMT dataset was tokenized with 40k BPE tokens for English and 43k BPE tokens
for German.
In our ASR experiments, the LibriSpeech dataset was used Panayotov et al. (2015). The LibriSpeech
training set consists of 960h and was divided into three partitions 100h, 360h, and 500h. We used
only the 100h dataset for our experiments. The LibriSpeech evaluation set was divided into two


                                                           7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Training results of the NMT and ASR models. Superscript 1 denotes the results in Wang
& Sennrich (2020), and superscript 2 denotes the results in Vaswani et al. (2017).
                                                                         BLEU4
               data                 training method
                                                                    avg            std
                          MLE1                                        34.7 -
                          MBR1                                        35.2 -
            IWSLT14
                          MLE                                        34.65       0.12
            (De→En)
                          Scheduled sampling (ϵmax = 0.10)           35.03       0.09
                          sMED                                       35.73       0.07
                          MLE                                        28.43       0.07
            IWSLT14
                          Scheduled sampling (ϵmax = 0.10)           28.68       0.04
            (En→De)
                          sMED                                       29.51       0.06
                          MLE                                        41.76       0.06
            IWSLT17
                          Scheduled sampling (ϵmax = 0.25)           42.03       0.12
            (En→Fr)
                          sMED                                       42.40       0.08
                          MLE                                        41.27       0.10
            IWSLT17
                          Scheduled sampling (ϵmax = 0.50)           41.32       0.11
            (Fr→En)
                          sMED                                       41.46       0.10
                          MLE2                                        28.4 -
             WMT14        MLE                                        28.47       0.14
            (En→De)       Scheduled sampling (ϵmax = 0.25)           28.68       0.04
                          sMED                                       28.86       0.06
                                                                       WER (%)
                data                training method
                                                                test clean test other
           LibriSpeech    MLE                                          5.4       14.8
             (100h)       MED                                          4.9       13.8


validation (dev clean and dev other) and two test sets (test clean and test other). In ASR experi-
ments, 300 tokenized subwords were used as recognition units Kudo & Richardson (2018). The raw
speech signal was converted into 80-dimensional f-bank features, and the sampling rate was reduced
to 1/6 through two CNN layers. For the language model training, we used the LibriCorpus dataset,
which consists of 40M sentences extracted from books. The LibriCorpus dataset was tokenized us-
ing the 300-subword vocabulary used in the ASR training. We trained models for 70 epochs on the
IWSLT14 and IWSLT17 datasets and 100 epochs each on the WMT and LibriSpeech datasets.

4.2   M ODELS

The ASR models consist of two 2d-CNN-based subsampling layers, a 12-layer transformer encoder,
and a 6-layer transformer decoder and were trained in a multi-task learning scenario using AED
loss and auxiliary connectionist temporal classification loss Kim et al. (2017). The NMT model
used in our experiments with the WMT14 dataset has a transformer structure, and we used the same
hyperparameter setup as the transformer (big) model in Vaswani et al. (2017). We have shown the
model structure in more detail as a table in Appendix A.

4.3   E VALUATION

A beam width of 20 was employed to evaluate the NMT model, while five was used for the ASR
model. We used a beam width of 3 for the NMT models and 20 for the ASR models to generate the
beam-search candidate Ŷ. In the decoding process of ASR models, we summed the scores of the
recurrent neural network (RNN)-based external language model trained with Libri Corpus through
the shallow fusion Mikolov et al. (2010). We used the weight average method in ASR experiments.
We saved the model weights for each epoch and evaluated each model by calculating the token
accuracy for a validation set. The weights from five models demonstrating the highest accuracy on
the validation set were averaged and employed for evaluation. All NMT experiments were repeated


                                                8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: WER and ECELBP of the calibrated ASR models according to the calibration function
training method.
                               test-clean            test-other
                   loss WER (%) ECELBP WER (%) ECELBP
                     -          5.4       0.046     14.8        0.128
                  MLE           5.1       0.036     14.3        0.099
                  MED           5.0       0.018     14.1        0.055


Table 3: ACCtest of the ASR models per position measured on the LibriSpeech test set (test other).
We divided it into four parts according to the length of the prefix and presented the average accuracy.
                                         t̂ <50    50≤ t̂ <100     100≤ t̂ <150     150≤ t̂
                     MLE                82.13%        82.87%           80.24%       57.53%
                     MED                82.21%        83.22%           81.18%       64.91%
          relative accuracy gain (%)      0.10%          0.42%            1.17%     12.83%


thrice, with the seed altered each time. The average and standard deviation of the computed BLEU4
scores were then presented.

5   R ESULTS
The evaluation results for the ASR and NMT models trained using the proposed method are pre-
sented in Table 1. This approach demonstrated superior generalization performance compared to
the scheduled sampling and MBR loss-based methods presented in Wang & Sennrich (2020), both
of which utilized the same transformer-based baseline. Our method used a beam search candidate
as a prefix and depends on the accuracy of the candidates. This dependency was controlled by ad-
justing hyperparameters (ξTER , N , and beam width). We presented the generalization performance
of models trained with more diverse hyperparameter settings in Appendix D.
We conducted experiments to calibrate the calibration error of the trained ASR model using a
temperature-scaling method Guo et al. (2017). The results of utilizing MLE and MED are show-
cased in Table 2 to ascertain the optimal temperature. MED effectively halved ECELBP compared
to MLE and concurrently enhanced the ASR model’s generalization performance. These findings
indicated that the calibration function trained with the MED loss provided a better approximation
of the actual probability distribution. We presented more details of the calibration function train-
ing methods, evaluation results about out-of-distribution (OOD) datasets and reliability diagrams in
Appendix C.
In Arora et al. (2022); Lin et al. (2021), a method quantifying exposure bias through accumulated er-
ror was introduced. We measured the accumulated error for each position of the ASR model output
using ACCtest from Equation 10, with the results listed in Table 3. The ASR model exhibited perfor-
mance degradation at the end of lengthy sentences. Notably, models trained with MED showcased
higher accuracy than those trained with MLE, and this accuracy gap widened with increasing prefix
length. These experimental outcomes suggest that the MED loss effectively mitigates accumulated
error attributed to exposure bias.

6   C ONCLUSION
We introduced the LBP, a deterministically derived path between two sequences. Moreover, we put
forth a novel loss function designed to maximize the likelihood of CLG models estimated over the
LBP. The MED loss, introduced in Section 3.2, effectively alleviates the exposure bias and main-
tains consistent evaluation criteria throughout both the training and evaluation phases. Comparative
experiments in ASR and NMT tasks demonstrated that the MED loss yields enhanced generalization
performance compared to MLE. Notably, the MED loss significantly reduces calibration error when
compared to MLE in experiments involving the training of the post-hoc calibration function.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Kushal Arora, Layla El Asri, Hareesh Bahuleyan, and Jackie Chi Kit Cheung. Why Exposure Bias
  Matters: An Imitation Learning Perspective of Error Accumulation in Language Generation. In
  Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: (ACL), pp. 700–710, 2022.
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyung Hyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Neural Machine Translation by Jointly
  Learning to Align and Translate. In Proc. of The International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations (ICLR), 2015.
Samy Bengio, Oriol Vinyals, Navdeep Jaitly, and Noam Shazeer. Scheduled Sampling for Sequence
  Prediction with Recurrent Neural Networks. In Proc. of the Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems (Neurips), volume 28, 2015.
Mauro Cettolo, Jan Niehues, Sebastian Stüker, Luisa Bentivogli, and Marcello Federico. Report on
 the 11th IWSLT Evaluation Campaign. In Proc. of the 11th International Workshop on Spoken
 Language Translation: Evaluation Campaign, pp. 2–17, 2014.
Kyunghyun Cho, Bart van Merrienboer, Caglar Gulcehre, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Fethi Bougares,
  Holger Schwenk, and Yoshua Bengio. Learning Phrase Representations using RNN Encoder–
  Decoder for Statistical Machine Translation. In Proc. of the Conference on Empirical Methods in
  Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 1724. Association for Computational Linguistics,
  2014.
Byung-Ju Choi, Jimin Hong, David Park, and Sang Wan Lee. F2-Softmax: Diversifying Neural Text
  Generation via Frequency Factorized Softmax. In Proc. of The Conference on Empirical Meth-
  ods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 9167–9182. Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 2020.
Jan K Chorowski, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Dmitriy Serdyuk, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio.
  Attention-based Models for Speech Recognition. In Proc. of the Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems (Neurips), volume 28, 2015.
Sergey Edunov, Myle Ott, Michael Auli, David Grangier, and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. Classical
  Structured Prediction Losses for Sequence to Sequence Learning. In Proc. of the Conference of
  the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers), pp. 355–364, 2018.
Jiatao Gu, Changhan Wang, and Junbo Zhao. Levenshtein Transformer. In Proc. of the Advances in
   Neural Information Processing Systems (Neurips), volume 32, 2019.
Chuan Guo, Geoff Pleiss, Yu Sun, and Kilian Q Weinberger. On Calibration of Modern Neural
  Networks. In Proc. of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 1321–
  1330. PMLR, 2017.
Suyoun Kim, Takaaki Hori, and Shinji Watanabe. Joint CTC-attention based End-to-end Speech
  Recognition Using Multi-Task Learning. In Proc. of the IEEE International Conference on Acous-
  tics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 4835–4839. IEEE, 2017.
Taku Kudo and John Richardson. SentencePiece: A simple and Language Independent Subword
  Tokenizer and Detokenizer for Neural Text Processing. In Proc. of The Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP): System Demonstrations, pp. 66–71, 2018.
Aviral Kumar and Sunita Sarawagi. Calibration of Encoder Decoder Models for Neural Machine
  Translation. Proc. of the ICLR Debugging Machine Learning Models Workshop, 2019.
Mun-Hak Lee and Joon-Hyuk Chang. Deep neural network calibration for e2e speech recogni-
 tion system. In Proc. of the Annual Conference of the International Speech Communication
 Association (INTERSPEECH), volume 3, pp. 4064–4068. International Speech Communication
 Association, 2021.
Jiwei Li, Michel Galley, Chris Brockett, Jianfeng Gao, and William B Dolan. A Diversity-Promoting
  Objective Function for Neural Conversation Models. In Proc. of the Conference of the North
  American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
  nologies, pp. 110–119, 2016.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


CY LIN. ROUGE: A Package for Automatic Evaluation of Summaries. In Proc. Workshop on Text
 Summariation Branches Out, Post-Conference Workshop of ACL 2004, 2004.

Xiang Lin, Simeng Han, and Shafiq Joty. Straight to the Gradient: Learning to Use Novel Tokens for
  Neural Text Generation. In Proc. of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
  pp. 6642–6653. PMLR, 2021.

Yixin Liu, Pengfei Liu, Dragomir Radev, and Graham Neubig. BRIO: Bringing Order to Abstrac-
  tive Summarization. In Proc. of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 2890–2903, 2022.

Tomas Mikolov, Martin Karafiát, Lukas Burget, Jan Cernockỳ, and Sanjeev Khudanpur. Recur-
  rent Neural Network based Language Model. In Proc. of the Annual Conference of the In-
  ternational Speech Communication Association (INTERSPEECH), volume 2, pp. 1045–1048.
  Makuhari, 2010.

Rafael Müller, Simon Kornblith, and Geoffrey E Hinton. When Does Label Smoothing Help? In
  Proc. of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (Neurips), volume 32, 2019.

Ani Nenkova, Kathleen McKeown, et al. Automatic Summarization. Foundations and Trends® in
  Information Retrieval, 5(2–3):103–233, 2011.

Myle Ott, Sergey Edunov, Alexei Baevski, Angela Fan, Sam Gross, Nathan Ng, David Grangier,
 and Michael Auli. Fairseq: A Fast, Extensible Toolkit for Sequence Modeling. In Proc. of the
 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics
 (Demonstrations), pp. 48–53.

Vassil Panayotov, Guoguo Chen, Daniel Povey, and Sanjeev Khudanpur. Librispeech: an ASR
  Corpus based on Public Domain Audio Books. In Proc. of the IEEE International Conference on
  Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 5206–5210. IEEE, 2015.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. BLEU: a Method for Automatic
  Evaluation of Machine Translation. In Proc. of the 40th annual meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics (ACL), pp. 311–318, 2002.

Romain Paulus, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. A Deep Reinforced Model for Abstractive
  Summarization. In Proc. of The International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
  2018.

Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Sumit Chopra, Michael Auli, and Wojciech Zaremba. Sequence Level Train-
 ing with Recurrent Neural Networks. In Proc. of The International Conference on Learning Rep-
 resentations (ICLR), 2016.

Sara Sabour, William Chan, and Mohammad Norouzi. Optimal Completion Distillation for Se-
  quence Learning. In Proc. of The International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
  2018.

Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch. Neural Machine Translation of Rare Words
  with Subword Units. In Proc. of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics (ACL), pp. 1715–1725. Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2016.

Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V Le. Sequence to Sequence Learning with Neural Net-
   works. In Proc. of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (Neurips), volume 27,
   2014.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is All You Need. In Proc. of the Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems (Neurips), volume 30, 2017.

Arun Venkatraman, Martial Hebert, and J Bagnell. Improving Multi-step Prediction of Learned
  Time Series Models. In Proc. of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 29, 2015.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Karel Veselỳ, Arnab Ghoshal, Lukás Burget, and Daniel Povey. Sequence-discriminative Train-
  ing of Deep Neural Networks. In Proc. of the Annual Conference of the International Speech
  Communication Association (INTERSPEECH), volume 2013, pp. 2345–2349, 2013.

Oriol Vinyals, Alexander Toshev, Samy Bengio, and Dumitru Erhan. Show and Tell: A Neural
  Image Caption Generator. In Proc. of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), pp. 3156–3164, 2015.

Chaojun Wang and Rico Sennrich. On Exposure Bias, Hallucination and Domain Shift in Neural
  Machine Translation. In Proc. of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics (ACL), pp. 3544–3552, 2020.

Shuo Wang, Zhaopeng Tu, Shuming Shi, and Yang Liu. On the Inference Calibration of Neural
  Machine Translation. In Proc. of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics (ACL), pp. 3070–3079, 2020.

Shinji Watanabe, Takaaki Hori, Shigeki Karita, Tomoki Hayashi, Jiro Nishitoba, Yuya Unno, Nelson
  Enrique Yalta Soplin, Jahn Heymann, Matthew Wiesner, Nanxin Chen, et al. ESPnet: End-to-
  End Speech Processing Toolkit. Proc. of the Annual Conference of the International Speech
  Communication Association (INTERSPEECH), 2018.

Sean Welleck, Ilia Kulikov, Stephen Roller, Emily Dinan, Kyunghyun Cho, and Jason Weston.
  Neural Text Generation With Unlikelihood Training. In Proc. of The International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), 2019.

Sam Wiseman and Alexander M Rush. Sequence-to-Sequence Learning as Beam-Search Opti-
  mization. In Proc. of The Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
  (EMNLP), pp. 1296–1306, 2016.

Bianca Zadrozny and Charles Elkan. Transforming Classifier Scores into Accurate Multiclass Prob-
  ability Estimates. In Proc. of the eighth ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
  discovery and Data Mining, pp. 694–699, 2002.

Yao Zhao, Mikhail Khalman, Rishabh Joshi, Shashi Narayan, Mohammad Saleh, and Peter J Liu.
  Calibrating Sequence Likelihood Improves Conditional Language Generation. In Proc. of The
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022.


A     R EPRODUCIBILITY

A.1    H ARDWARE S ETTING

We used four Nvidia A100 in parallel to train the NMT models on the WMT14 dataset. We used a
single A100 GPU for NMT model training on the IWSLT17 and IWSLT14 datasets. ASR experi-
ments were performed with a single RTX3090 GPU.

A.2    S OURCE C ODE

We uploaded our code for the LBP generation algorithm as supplementary material. We showed the
hyperparameter settings of the transformer models we used in Table 5. All notations in Table 5 are
the same as in Vaswani et al. (2017).

B     R ELATED W ORKS

The proposed method shares similar motivations with sequence-level training or scheduled sampling
techniques. It employs decoded candidates sampled from P (Ŷ |X; θ) to formulate a loss function
and mitigate exposure bias Veselỳ et al. (2013); Liu et al. (2022). The proposed method differs from
sequence-level training approaches by defining an edit distance-based error (insertion, deletion, and
substitution) and training the model to rectify it Edunov et al. (2018); Zhao et al. (2022); Paulus et al.


                                                   12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(2018). Notably, while scheduled sampling trains the model to minimize the Hamming distance be-
tween the reference and inferred label sequences, the proposed method trains the model to minimize
the Levenshtein distance between these sequences Bengio et al. (2015); Venkatraman et al. (2015).
The proposed method bears similarities to training techniques that directly minimize evaluation met-
rics through reinforcement learning Sabour et al. (2018); Gu et al. (2019); Paulus et al. (2018). In
Sabour et al. (2018), a reinforcement learning-based CLG model training method was introduced
aiming to minimize the Levenshtein distance between suffixes of the target and inferred sequences.
The proposed method distinguishes itself by determining a single path with the minimum Leven-
shtein distance, optimizing the likelihood of this determined path, and defining the loss at a segment
level so that it can be applied to CLG tasks with multiple target sequences.
The LBP defined in Section 3.1 aligns with the alignment search technique utilized to quantify
calibration error with the autoregressive decoding results of the CLG model in Wang et al. (2020).
Notably, our study demonstrates the direct minimization of ECELBP through MED training, whereas
in Wang et al. (2020), the calibration error was alleviated by using the adaptive label smoothing.


C    C ALIBRATION OF CLG M ODELS

Various methods have been studied to alleviate calibration errors. These methods can be classified
into two categories. The first category is methods applied during the model training process (label
smoothing or sequence-level training are typical examples) Müller et al. (2019); Zhao et al. (2022);
Veselỳ et al. (2013); Paulus et al. (2018); Edunov et al. (2018). The second category is a method
of calibrating the output probability distribution of a trained model through post-processing and is
called post-hoc calibration methods. As post-hoc calibration methods, isotonic regression, and Platt
scaling are general examples Zadrozny & Elkan (2002). The temperature scaling is an extension
of the Platt scaling to multi-class classification Guo et al. (2017). The scaling factor (temperature,
T ) is trained to maximize the likelihood on a validation set. In this process, the model parameters
are frozen, and the output probability distribution of the model is calibrated through the following
temperature scaling function:
                                                            zi
                                           P̂ (xi ) = [σ(      )]                                (19)
                                                            T
where, zi ∈ RK denotes the logit vector for xi , K denotes the number of calsses and σ denotes
softmax function. As can be seen from the above equation, a temperature value greater than 1
increases the entropy of the calibrated output probability distribution P̂ (x̂i ) and, in the opposite
case, lowers the entropy.
Guo et al. (2017) presented a way to find the optimal temperature T̂ for a scalar classification model
by solving the following convex optimization problem:
                                         n X
                                           K
                                         X                                zi
                         T̂ = argmin               −1(yi = k) · log([σ(      )]k )               (20)
                                  T      i=1 k=1
                                                                          T

where, {(xi , yi )}ni=1 denotes validation set. In Kumar & Sarawagi (2019); Lee & Chang (2021), the
teacher forcing method was used to calibrate the output probability distribution of the CLG models.


                                           i
                                      n X
                                        T X
                                          K
                                      X                                     [Zti ]
                     T̂ = argmin                    −1(Yti = k) · log([σ(          )]k )         (21)
                              T       i=1 t=1 k=1
                                                                             T

where, [Zti ] = f (Y0:t−1
                     i
                          , X i ; θ) denotes unnormalized CLG model output. The above equation finds
a scaling factor that minimizes the cross entropy between the one-hot encoded true label distribu-
tion and the model’s output probability distribution for the validation set, and as a result, the CLG
model’s confidence approximates ACCtrain . We insist that confidence should approximate accuracy
considering sequence level errors (ACCtest ). To this end, we train the calibration function using the
MED loss proposed in section 3.2.


                                                    13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                    n   K
                                    X X X                                      [Ẑt̂i ]
                     T̂ = argmin                         −1(Yti = k) log([σ(            )]k )       (22)
                              T     i=1 (t,t̂)∈ψ i k=1
                                                                                T

where, [Ẑt̂i ] = f (Ŷ0:
                       i
                          t̂−1
                               , X i ; θ). We conducted an evaluation using the WSJ dataset to prove that
the proposed calibration function training method has an effect on the OOD dataset. The proposed
method improved calibration error and generalization performance even for OOD datasets (Table
4). We showed the result of calibrating the output probability distribution of the ASR models as
a reliability diagram in Figure 3 (in distribution, LibriSpeech), Figure 4 (OOD, test eval92), and
Figure 5 (OOD, test eval93).

D    F ILTERING S CHEME
As shown in Algorithm 1, we did not use beam-search decoding results with errors above the ξTER
for training. We calculated the sMED loss using a smaller N value when the reference label se-
quence and the candidate did not have any shared segments at the N -gram level. We showed the
evaluation results of the NMT model according to the application of the filtering scheme in Ta-
ble 6. When candidates with high TER are not removed at all (ξTER = ∞), sMED loss showed
performance degradation. However, with an appropriate filtering scheme, the proposed sMED loss
exhibited robust training across diverse hyperparameter settings and consistently achieved BLEU
scores surpassing the baseline (bottom two rows).


Figure 3: Reliability diagram estimated on LibriSpeech test other (in distribution) with trained ASR
model. Left: Uncalibrated, Middle: Calibrated with temperature scaling function trained with MLE,
Right: Calibrated with temperature scaling function trained with MED.


Figure 4: Reliability diagram estimated on WSJ test eval92 (out of distribution) with trained ASR
model. Left: Uncalibrated, Middle: Calibrated with temperature scaling function trained with MLE,
Right: Calibrated with temperature scaling function trained with MED.


                                                    14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: Reliability diagram estimated on WSJ test eval93 (out of distribution) with trained ASR
model. Left: Uncalibrated, Middle: Calibrated with temperature scaling function trained with MLE,
Right: Calibrated with temperature scaling function trained with MED.



Algorithm 1 Filtering Scheme for sMED Objective
Input: Paired data (Y i , X i ) and its decoding result Ŷ i
Parameter: θ, Nmin , Nmax , λ, λmax
Output: sMED loss
 1: N ∼ U(Nmin , Nmax )
 2: ξN ← N   2 , ξTER ← λmax
                            λ

 3: if TER(Y i , Ŷ i ) < ξTER then
 4:    Ŷ i ← argmax P (Y |Ŷ i , X i ; θ)
                  Y
 5:    while Ωi (Y i , Ŷ i ; N , ξN ) = ∅ and N > 1 do
 6:      N ←N −1
 7:    end while
 8:    return NLLsMED (X i , Y i , Ŷ i ; θ, N , ξN )
 9: else
10:    return 0
11: end if


           Table 4: Calibration error and word error rate for out-of-distribution dataset .
                                      test eval92           test eval93
                         loss    WER (%) ECE WER (%) ECE
                           -            14.7 0.122            19.2 0.147
                         MLE            14.1 0.086            18.5 0.103
                         MED            14.0 0.035            18.3 0.044


Table 5: Hyperparametter setting. 2d-CNN denotes the number of subsampling layers in ASR mod-
els, dmodel denotes dimension of attention module, dff denotes dimension of feed forward networks,
and h denotes the number of attention heads.
  task           dataset         # 2d-CNN Encoder layer Decoder layer dmodel               dff    h
          IWSLT14,IWSLT17                  -                6                6      512 1024       4
  NMT
                WMT14                      -                6                6     1024 4096 16
  ASR         LibriSpeech                  2              12                 6      256 2048       4



                                                     15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 6: Evaluation of NMT models on IWSLT14 (De2En) according to the hyperparameter set-
tings.
                                                                BLEU4
             Label smoothing   ξTER     beam-width    N
                                                              avg      std
                                    λ
                    0.1           λmax            1   U(2, 6)   35.51   0.07
                                    λ
                    0.1           λmax            6   U(2, 6)   35.68   0.09
                                    λ
                    0.1           λmax            3   U(2, 6)   35.73   0.07
                                      λ
                    0.1         0.5 λmax          3   U(2, 6)   35.50   0.08
                                      λ
                    0.1         0.8 λmax          3   U(2, 6)   35.62   0.14
                                    λ
                    0.1           λmax            3   U(2, 4)   35.67   0.12
                                    λ
                    0.1           λmax            3   U(4, 8)   35.54   0.08
                    0.1           0.50            3   U(2, 6)   35.47   0.10
                    0.1           0.99            3   U(2, 6)   35.31   0.06
                    0.1            ∞              3   U(2, 6)   33.36   0.16
                                   λ
                    0.0           λmax            3   U(2, 6)   35.19   0.11
                    0.1             -             -     -       34.65   0.12
                    0.0             -             -     -       33.94   0.17


                                             16
