Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


BALANCED M ULTIMODAL L EARNING :
A N I NTEGRATED F RAMEWORK F OR
M ULTI -TASK L EARNING I N AUDIO -V ISUAL F USION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Multimodal learning integrates sensory information from various perspectives,
         providing significant advantages in different fields like sentiment analysis. How-
         ever, recent studies have highlighted challenges associated with imbalanced con-
         tributions and varying convergence rates across different modalities. Neglecting
         these imbalances in joint-learning models compromises both information utiliza-
         tion and overall performance. We further find that neither advanced semantic
         representations nor complex deep networks effectively address these imbalances.
         To empirically examine these challenges, we approach them from an audio-visual
         multi-task perspective, focusing on two tasks: lip reading and sentiment analysis,
         and exploring the contributions of different modalities under varying scenarios.
         We introduce BalanceMLA in our work, a multimodal learning framework de-
         signed to dynamically balance and optimize each modality. This framework can
         independently adjust the objectives of each modality and adaptively control their
         optimization. Additionally, we propose a bilateral residual feature fusion and an
         adaptive weighted decision fusion strategy to dynamically manage these imbal-
         ances. We also introduce a dynamically generated class-level weighting scheme
         to cater to fine-grained tasks. Extensive experimental results validate the supe-
         riority of our model in addressing modality imbalances, showcasing both its ef-
         fectiveness and versatility. Furthermore, experiments conducted under extreme
         noise conditions demonstrate that our model maintains high fusion efficiency and
         robustness, even in challenging environments.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Human sensory integration, involving vision, auditory, and tactile modalities, offers a rich canvas for
perception and understanding. This holistic, multimodal approach has spurred advances in machine
learning, particularly in the realm of representation learning. Recent advancements in multimodal
learning have not only enhanced the performance of traditional unimodal tasks but also have paved
the way for tackling more complex challenges. These include action recognition utilizing temporal
and spatial data Xing et al. (2023); Yang et al. (2023), audio-visual fusion in speech processing Zhao
et al. (2020); Cheng et al. (2023), and emotion recognition Goncalves & Busso (2022).
However, the pervasive adoption of multimodal learning has also exposed underlying challenges.
The predominant concern revolves around modality imbalances—disparities in the contributions of
individual modalities to the final decision-making process. Such imbalances not only diminish the
utility of less dominant modalities but also create inconsistency in convergence rates, leading to
suboptimal model performance Peng et al. (2022); Xu et al. (2023). Existing studies indicate that
models employing traditional architectures, such as fully connected layers and Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs), fall short in dynamically reconciling these imbalances. These models, although
robust for unimodal tasks, lack the adaptability required for efficient multimodal integration, thereby
reinforcing the issue of modality imbalances.
The advent of transformer-based architectures Vaswani et al. (2017) has revolutionized various do-
mains, including speech, text, and vision, giving rise to powerful models like Wav2vec2.0 Baevski
et al. (2020), HuBERT Hsu et al. (2021), BERT Devlin et al. (2018), and Vision Transformer(ViT)


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Kolesnikov et al. (2021) for feature learning or encoding. Increasingly, multimodal approaches
are leveraging transformer architectures. Despite their inherent advantages—such as self-attention
mechanisms, deep network structures, and extensive parameterization—transformer-based models
have yet to adequately address the issue of modality imbalances.
In light of these challenges, this work makes several key contributions:

       • We conduct an in-depth investigation into multimodal models with transformer backbones,
         focusing on the learning and fusion of features. We analyze the convergence rates, contribu-
         tions, and fusion efficacy of each modality across various fine-grained tasks. Our findings
         indicate that the unique self-attention mechanisms, deep structures, and advanced semantic
         representations in transformers are insufficient to alleviate challenges posed by modality
         imbalances.
       • To address the identified shortcomings, we present a balanced framework for multi-task
         learning in audio-visual fusion (BalanceMLA), a novel framework that dynamically ad-
         justs the learning and optimization process of different modalities. This approach not only
         enhances overall task performance but also improves the efficiency of feature utilization.
       • We introduce two advanced fusion strategies within BalanceMLA: A new bilateral residual
         feature fusion strategy that seamlessly integrates multimodal features, and an autonomously
         adaptive decision fusion algorithm, fine-tuning the model’s reliance on each modality dur-
         ing inference.
       • The framework includes a unique, dynamically generated class-level weighting scheme,
         making it exceptionally adaptable to tasks that require nuanced semantic understanding.

Our rigorous experimental validation underscores the robustness and versatility of BalanceMLA,
establishing its efficacy across various tasks and under challenging environmental conditions.


2     R ELATED W ORK

2.1   AUDIO -V ISUAL F USION IN S PEECH TASKS

Emerging studies in audio-visual fusion are making strides in application areas such as speech recog-
nition and speech enhancement. One commonly adopted paradigm is concatenation-based fusion
methods Ebrahimi Kahou et al. (2015); Petridis et al. (2018); Afouras et al. (2019), which amal-
gamate features from both acoustic and visual signals into a unified representation for subsequent
neural network-based modeling. However, this approach has the limitation of not explicitly mod-
eling the inter-modal interactions, leaving this crucial aspect to be learned implicitly by the neural
network’s architecture. Such an implicit representation can be detrimental, particularly when there is
a weak correlation between visual cues, such as lip movements, and corresponding acoustic signals.
In speech enhancement tasks, the overarching goal is to elevate the quality of the acoustic signals.
Within this framework, visual cues, predominantly lip movements, function as supplementary data
for the fine-tuning of acoustic features. Various methods, such as Squeeze-Excitation algorithms
Iuzzolino & Koishida (2020), attention-based schemes Sun et al. (2020); Li & Qian (2020), and
product-based fusion Wang et al. (2020), are leveraged to achieve this objective. During the training
phase, the fused features are meticulously fine-tuned with an emphasis on the acoustic attributes,
thus mitigating any potential disruption from the visual modality and optimizing fusion efficacy.
Lip motion patterns are often incorporated with the aim of creating more robust and accurate speech
recognition models, especially in noisy conditions. However, this shouldn’t imply an exclusive
focus on the acoustic modality, relegating visual cues to a secondary, rectifying role. While audio-
only models generally exhibit superior discriminative features compared to visual-only models, this
performance gap diminishes when visual features are optimized in synergy with acoustic data. Con-
sequently, the performance disparity between the two modalities becomes notably subtle when they
participate in specific audio-visual fusion tasks. The optimal balance between these two modalities
is precisely what we aims to explore in our work.


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2.2   AUDIO -V ISUAL E MOTION R ECOGNITION

In addition to audio-visual speech processing, we also explores audio-visual emotion recognition
as one of several fine-grained tasks. Unlike speech tasks, emotion recognition often sees other
modalities taking the lead. For instance, when visual, acoustic, and textual modalities are all present,
the textual modality often contributes the most to emotion identification. In audio-visual emotion
recognition, facial expressions and muscle movements in the visual modality serve as potent cues,
often surpassing the expressiveness of pitch and amplitude in the audio modality. However, there
are scenarios where facial expressions may be difficult to capture, such as in low lighting or rapid
movement. In these cases, discerning specific emotional tones can serve as an effective mechanism
for emotion recognition, making audio features critical.
Recent studies have shown combining multiple modalities has proven effective in emotion recogni-
tion with appropriate fusion techniques. For example, Goncalves et al. Goncalves & Busso (2022)
proposed a deep learning architecture that trains a single-mode auxiliary network and the main net-
work simultaneously to combine and align audio-visual functions.

3     M ETHOD
3.1   M ODAL I MBALANCE

The issue of modality imbalance has been a persistent challenge in multimodal learning frameworks.
Traditional techniques often prioritize one modality over another, based on the assumption that one
type of sensory data is more pertinent to a specific task. For instance, the auditory modality may
be given more weight in speech recognition tasks, while visual cues may be emphasized in emo-
tion recognition. This modality-centric approach, however, overlooks the potential complementary
benefits that could be derived from other less-dominant modalities.
Modality imbalances can also emerge due to the varying quality, availability, and robustness of
sensory data. This is particularly true in real-world scenarios, where conditions are not always ideal
for capturing every modality uniformly. It can result in a loss of valuable information, affect the
model’s adaptability, and lead to sub-optimal task performance.
Moreover, the rate at which each modality converges during the training phase can differ Peng et al.
(2022), leading to an additional layer of imbalance. This discrepancy may not only result in longer
training cycles but also compromise the fused features’ quality, thereby affecting the final decision-
making process.


              (a)                                 (b)                                  (c)

Figure 1: Performance of Transformer Backbone. (a) The figure displays the performance of audio-
only, visual-only, and audio-visual fusion models in the audio-visual emotion recognition task. Fu-
sion is achieved in a 1:1 ratio, meaning the dimensions of audio and image features are identical, and
thus both contribute equally to the task. (b) The figure shows the fusion effects in the audio-visual
emotion recognition task when the two modalities have varying contributions. The lengths of audio
and video features are in the ratios of 1:1, 1:2, and 2:1 respectively. (c) The figure illustrates the
fusion effects in the audio-visual lip-reading task under varying contribution levels from the two
modalities. Here, the lengths of audio and video features are also in the ratios of 1:1, 1:2, and 2:1.

To delve deeper into the issue of modality imbalance in multi-modal tasks, we employ a Transformer
architecture with a 6-layer configuration as our backbone for audio-only, visual-only, and audio-


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


visual fusion scenarios. In the visual modality, we initially utilize a pre-trained RetinaFace model
for face recognition and frame-wise cropping. Subsequently, facial image features are encoded using
a pre-trained VGGFace2 network, represented as Fv ∈ RNv ×Tv ×Lv . For the audio modality, a pre-
trained HuBERT model acts as the encoder, yielding features denoted by Fa ∈ RNa ×Ta ×La , where
N is the batch size, T represents the time steps, and L signifies the feature dimensions. To assess
the relative contributions of each modality and their subsequent impact on the fusion process, we
introduce variability in feature lengths during the fusion stage with a concatenation approach and
continuously monitor model performance.
As illustrated in Figure 1a, despite employing high-level semantic features encoded by deep net-
works, and an acoustic encoding network HuBERT based on Transformer architecture, it’s evident
that the convergence rates differ under the same learning rate for visual and audio modalities—they
converge at epoch 45 and epoch 69, respectively. In emotion recognition tasks, the visual modality
tends to outperform the audio modality and contributes more to the overall performance. Conversely,
in the lip-reading task, the audio modality significantly surpasses the visual one, suggesting that the
dominant modality varies across different multi-modal tasks and contributes more to the specific
task at hand.
Figure 1b displays varying lengths of modality inputs to balance the two modalities in emotion
recognition tasks. The model’s performance shows a minor improvement of approximately 1-2%
when the audio input length is twice that of the visual input (represented by the orange line) com-
pared to equal input lengths (the red line). Overscaling the audio input (blue line) may lead to a
decline in fusion model performance. Similar trends are observed in the lip-reading task as shown
in Figure 1c. However, in this case, increasing the visual input scale improves the model’s perfor-
mance.
These findings confirm the presence of modality imbalance in multi-modal tasks. In fusion networks,
dominant modalities can inadvertently impede the learning efficacy of subordinate modalities. We
seek to rigorously quantify these disparities by analyzing the input scales across modalities. For
example, in emotion recognition scenarios, enhancing the input dimension ratio between audio and
visual modalities to 1:2 leads to an improved performance of the fusion model. If the model attains
its optimal performance at a ratio x : y, we propose that their relative contributions to the task can
be approximated as x : y.
Addressing these imbalances necessitates the introduction of a dynamic mechanism capable of in-
dependently adjusting the contributions and objectives for each modality. This issue is not merely
pertinent to specific tasks but has broader implications in the field of multimodal machine learning.
This subject is a focal point in our work.


3.2   BALANCE MLA: M ODALITY BALANCE IN AUDIO -V ISUAL F USION

We present BalanceMLA, a balanced multi-task learning framework for audio-visual fusion, de-
signed with a specific focus on audio-visual emotion recognition and lip-reading tasks. As depicted
in Figure 2, the architecture comprises two foundational feature extraction modules for both visual
and acoustic modalities, in alignment with the techniques delineated in Section 3. These networks
independently extract high-level semantic features from raw speech data as well as lip motion or
facial expression images. The singular constraint imposed during this phase is that each time-step
feature must be encapsulated as a one-dimensional vector.
Our architecture is composed of two semi-independent modules, each tailored for the isolated learn-
ing and optimization of distinct modalities. Contrary to being completely disjoint, these modules are
interconnected through a sophisticated three-tier fusion mechanism. This mechanism encompasses
a novel bilateral residual feature fusion strategy, adaptive weight fusion, and category-level weight-
ing. This multi-faceted fusion scheme fosters effective inter-modality interaction, thereby enriching
the quality of the overall multi-modal representation.
Bilateral Residual Feature Fusion with Cross-Modal Attention (AttentionBRFF). As previously
established, the interplay between visual and acoustic modalities during training can adversely af-
fect the quality of the fused representations, particularly when compared against single-modality
benchmarks like speech recognition. Leveraging the simplified residual learning in ResNet He et al.
(2016), we introduce residual features as exogenous variables into the respective modality modules.


                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               Figure 2: Overview of the BalanceMLA


This allows us to decompose the fusion operation ffuse = funion (fa , fv ) into two sub-operations:
ffuse-a = AttentionBRFF(fa , res(fv )) and ffuse-v = AttentionBRFF(fv , res(fa )). Here, ffuse , fa , fv
denote the high-level features of the fused, acoustic, and visual modalities, respectively. ffuse-a cap-
tures the fusion where the acoustic modality serves as the invariant term, while ffuse-v operates anal-
ogously. This bifurcation approach ensures the retention of essential features from each modality
while streamlining the learning of robust fused representations, particularly in cases of low inter-
modal correlation. It offers a strategic advantage in mitigating issues related to modal imbalance.
Within the AttentionBRFF structure, extracted residual features are fed into the complementary
modality network. The fusion learning between the two modalities is accomplished using cross-
modal attention mechanisms found in Transformer architectures. This internal strategy enhances the
capability of our model to adaptively focus on salient features, thereby improving the efficacy of the
overall fusion process.
The frame-level residual learning function aims to learn auxiliary information that can fine-tune
the features of the basic modality on a frame-by-frame basis. However, acoustic and image features
often exhibit mismatched temporal lengths due to differing sampling rates and potential blanks at the
data’s beginning or end. This creates a challenge in manually establishing correspondence between
them. To tackle this issue, we utilize the attention-based method. Specifically, for each time step j in
the high-level feature of the basic modality fjbasic , the most relevant residual information is computed
using the attention mechanism as:
                                                        n
                                                        X
                                        res(fjaux ) =         βi fiaux                               (1)
                                                        i=1

where n is the length of the temporal dimension, and βi is the softmax-normalized similarity be-
tween fjbasic and fiaux , the feature from the other modality. The attention weights βi are calculated
as:
                                             exp (fiaux )⊤ W fjbasic

                                    βi = Pn              aux ⊤      basic
                                                                                                   (2)
                                            k=1 exp (fk ) W fj


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


This formulation enables the model to automatically pinpoint the most relevant features from the
auxiliary modality for each frame in the basic modality, thereby effectively solving the temporal
misalignment issue.
Adaptive decision fusion. In BalanceMLA, the fused representation obtained after AttentionBRFF
processing retains the same shape as its original representation. This compatibility enables the
feature to be directly input into the original single-modality model for prediction. At this stage,
we introduce a dynamic adaptive decision fusion process, which computes dynamic weights for the
features by re-fusing the two output features from the AttentionBRFF mechanism. This adaptivity
optimizes the model’s performance by selectively emphasizing relevant features, thus enhancing
prediction accuracy.
The softmax-normalized weight vector α is generated as:
                     α = softmax W M (f fuse-a ); M (f fuse-v ) + bias


where M is a function that computes the average along the temporal dimension. It enables dynamic
weighting of the fused features, allowing for more adaptive and robust decision-making.
Category level weighting. Directly weighting the predictions of both acoustic and visual modalities
at the model level is suboptimal, as their performances may vary across different categories. To
capture the category-specific discriminative capabilities, we concatenate the fused features based on
both modalities to dynamically generate weights at the category level. The final fused prediction is
then formulated as:
                            resultfuse = α ⊙ resultaudio + (1 − α) ⊙ resultvideo
where resultfuse , resultaudio , resultvideo are the prediction vectors for the fused, speech recognition,
and image classification models, respectively, and ⊙ represents the Hadamard product. We further
compute dynamic weights at the category level, grounded on the existing fusion features, to refine the
prediction process. This enables the model to seamlessly switch between various fine-grained tasks
with enhanced robustness. Additionally, it effectively mitigates the challenges posed by category
imbalance.

4     E XPERIMENT
In this section, we comprehensively evaluate our proposed BalanceMLA framework, targeting its
performance in sentiment analysis and lip-reading tasks. First, we detail the implementation set-
tings and compare our findings with current state-of-the-art approaches. Following this, we conduct
ablation studies to validate the efficacy and underlying design principles of BalanceMLA. During
this stage, we perform an in-depth analysis of key components and hyper-parameters to assess their
individual contributions to the overall system performance.

4.1     E XPERIMENT S ETUP

4.1.1    DATASET
In this experiment, we utilize two lip-reading datasets: LRW and LRW1000, and the emotion recog-
nition dataset IEMOCAP.
LRW: Yang et al. (2019) The LRW dataset is a large, publicly available English lip-reading corpus
featuring short video segments (1.16 seconds) sourced from BBC programs. It encompasses 500
classes with contributions from over 1000 speakers.
LRW1000: Yang et al. (2019) The LRW1000 dataset focuses on Mandarin and consists of more
than 2000 speakers across 1000 classes. The tasks in LRW1000 present higher complexity than
those in LRW due to the larger number of classes and variable video durations, ranging from 0.01
seconds to 2.25 seconds.
IEMOCAP: Busso et al. (2008) For emotion recognition, we employ the IEMOCAP dataset, which
categorizes emotions into nine types: excitement, happiness, anger, sadness, frustration, neutral,
fear, surprise, and other states. In our work, we focus on a four-class benchmark derived from this
dataset, featuring a total of 5531 samples. The dataset is partitioned into training, development, and
test sets, containing 3871, 553, and 1107 samples, respectively.


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.1.2    I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

For the visual modality, mouth regions are isolated from video frames using the Dlib library King
(2009). These extracted mouth images are converted to grayscale and resized to 80x80 pixels, serv-
ing as the input for the lip-reading model. For the emotion recognition task, images are processed
through the RetinaFace network for facial region extraction. The cropped images are subsequently
resized to 128x128 pixels. These processed images are then encoded via a VGG network, yield-
ing high-level image representations with a 1024-dimensional feature space. These features are
subsequently transformed to the desired dimensions through a fully connected layer. The same
preprocessing is applied to both training and test datasets.
For the acoustic modality, features encoded via HuBERT have a dimensionality of 768. The input
speech feature map is constructed as a three-dimensional cube, encapsulating the log-spectrogram,
its first, and second-order derivatives. To assess the model’s noise resilience, we leverage a speech
enhancement technique described in Park et al. (2019), applying varying levels of frequency occlu-
sion, referred to as the mask factor, to the pristine acoustic data.
For the Transformer model employed in Section 3, we set the learning rate to 5 × 10−7 , utilize 8
attention heads, and construct the architecture with 6 layers. Experiments with 8 and 12 layers yield
consistent conclusions, the only difference being initial and final accuracies that deviate by 2% to
5% compared to the 6-layer model. The batch size is set to 16, and we apply a dropout rate of 0.1.
In the case of BalanceMLA, the training learning rate is configured at 3 × 10−4 and the fine-tuning
learning rate at 5 × 10−5 . The cross-modal attention mechanism is implemented with 3 layers. The
batch size is set to 32, and the entire experimental pipeline is conducted over 30 epochs. The first
25 epochs focus on training, while the remaining 5 epochs are allocated for fine-tuning the model.
We initially train the audio-only (BalanceMLA-AO) and visual-only (BalanceMLA-VO) models
independently, followed by fine-tuning the composite models with fusion modules, leveraging pre-
trained single-modality models. This process results in models with varied recognition performance,
providing insights into their feature representation capabilities.

4.2     E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

We evaluate the performance of our model against various baselines, segmented by the specific tasks
under consideration.
Lip-reading task. In our experiments, the architecture for the acoustic modality consists of three
main components: A spatio-temporal convolution layer with 64 3D convolution kernels of size
5 × 7 × 7, a feature extraction layer utilizing ResNet-34, augmented with a two-layer bi-directional
GRU Chung et al. (2014) where each GRU layer is composed of 1024 units, and finally, the 6-layer
audio-only transformer model detailed in Section 3. These models are benchmarked against our
BalanceMLA-AO framework.
For the visual modality, the experiments comprises the 6-layer visual-only transformer model out-
lined in Section 3. The model is benchmarked against our BalanceMLA-VO framework.
Based on these single-modal benchmarks, we construct three fusion models: Our proposed method
(BalancedMLA), a concatenation-based model inspired by previous work Petridis et al. (2018)
(Con), an audio-centric fusion model similar to Sterpu et al. (2018) (Single-Res), and the best-
performing fusion transformer discussed in Section 3.
Based on the experimental results in Table 1, the BalanceMLA architecture consistently outperforms
other models across both single-modal and multimodal scenarios. For instance, in the audio-only
modality on the LRW dataset, BalanceMLA-AO achieves an accuracy of 98.40% and an F 1 score of
98.33%, slightly surpassing the Transformer (audio-only) model, which scores 98.36% and 97.96%,
respectively. Similarly, on the LRW1000 dataset, BalanceMLA (Fusion) records the highest accu-
racy and F 1 score of 86.42% and 85.09%, outperforming the nearest competitor, the Transformer
(Fusion), with 85.50% and 84.18%. These numerical results affirm the efficacy of the BalanceMLA
methodology in handling both single-modal and multimodal tasks with superior performance.
Emotion recognition task. We selected AVHuBERT Shi et al. (2022), AVBERT Lee et al. (2021),
and MAViL Huang et al. (2023) as our baseline models for comparison.


                                                 7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 Table 1: Experimental Results on LRW and LRW1000 Datasets

                                                        LRW                 LRW1000
                      Model
                                               Accuracy   F1 Score     Accuracy    F1 Score
       spatio-temporal convolution layer        96.70         96.53      79.86      79.82
       2-layer BGRU Chung et al. (2014)         98.00           –          –          –
            Transformer(audio-only)             98.36         97.96      83.50      83.28
               BalanceMLA-AO                    98.40         98.33      84.32      84.05
            Transformer(visual-only)            91.58         90.36      65.50      66.74
               BalanceMLA-VO                    93.29         93.37      66.72      65.28
              Con (Concatenation)               97.59           –        83.45        –
           Single-Res (Audio-Centric)           97.59           –        83.96        –
              Transformer(Fusion)               98.40         98.36      85.50      84.18
             BalancedMLA (Fusion)               98.50         98.20      86.42      85.09

                Table 2: Comparison with Baseline Models on IEMOCAP Dataset

                                       Model              Accuracy (%)
                            AVHuBERT (audio-only)              58.54
                             AVBERT (audio-only)               60.94
                              MAViL (audio-only)               59.46
                            BalanceMLA (audio-only)            66.15
                           AVHuBERT (visual-only)              26.59
                            AVBERT (visual-only)               45.80
                             MAViL (visual-only)               43.03
                           BalanceMLA (visual-only)            68.73
                                  AVHuBERT                     46.45
                                    AVBERT                     61.87
                                     MAViL                     54.94
                              BalanceMLA (Fusion)              69.32


Based on the data presented in Table 2, our BalanceMLA model consistently outperforms baseline
models on the IEMOCAP dataset across all experimental settings. For instance, in the audio-only
domain, BalanceMLA achieves an accuracy of 66.15%, surpassing AVEBRT, the closest competitor,
by a substantial margin of over 5 percentage points. Similarly, BalanceMLA excels in the visual-
only scenario with an accuracy of 68.73%, a remarkable improvement over AVEBRT’s 45.80%. In
the fusion model setup, BalanceMLA further distinguishes itself by attaining an accuracy of 69.32%,
setting a new benchmark against all evaluated baselines. These quantitative findings validate the
superiority of the BalanceMLA model across distinct modalities.

4.3   A BLATION S TUDY AND A NTI -I NTERFERENCE A NALYSIS

In this section, we investigate the effectiveness of individual components of our proposed model:
Bilateral Residual Feature Fusion with Cross-Modal Attention (AttentionBRFF), Adaptive Decision
Fusion, and Category Level Weighting. The ablation study is conducted on two challenging datasets,
LRW1000 and IEMOCAP.
As shown in Table 3, removing AttentionBRFF leads to a decrease of 2.22% in accuracy, indicating
its importance in feature fusion. Omitting Adaptive Decision Fusion also results in a lower accuracy
of 83.50%. The importance of Category Level Weighting is also confirmed, as its removal decreases
the performance to 82.70%.
The observations from the IEMOCAP dataset, presented in Table 3, are consistent with those on the
LRW1000 dataset. The drop in accuracy without AttentionBRFF is 2.22%, demonstrating its signif-


                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


icance. Similarly, without Adaptive Decision Fusion and Category Level Weighting, the accuracy
drops to 65.80% and 64.90%, respectively.

                  Table 3: Ablation Study on LRW1000 and IEMOCAP Datasets

    Comp.                                                         LRW1000 (%)        IEMOCAP (%)
    BaseModel                                                           82.1               64.9
    BaseModel + AttentionBRFF                                           84.3               67.1
    BaseModel + AttentionBRFF + Adaptive Decision Fusion                85.2               68.0
    FullModel                                                           86.1               69.3


              (a) Results on LRW                                    (b) Results on LRW1000

                        Figure 3: Anti-interference test of our BalanceMLA


To assess the models’ robustness against noise interference, acoustic input was subjected to varying
levels of noise contamination. Figure 3 presents the ensuing experimental outcomes. It reveals
that, when benchmarked against identical models, the proposed approach demonstrates superior
stability across diverse noise environments. This advantage becomes increasingly pronounced as
noise levels escalate. Notably, within the LRW1000 dataset, the Single-Res and Concatenation
technique shows negligible enhancement in noise resilience, underscoring the imperative of our
proposed bilateral fusion strategy. When disparities between the two modalities are considered,
Figure 3 confirms that our method consistently outperforms the other fusion models. Furthermore,
a positive correlation is observed between the anti-interference capabilities of the fusion model and
the recognition performance of the employed benchmark models (like Transformer).
The ablation study and anti-interference analysis confirm the efficacy of each proposed element.
Particularly, our model’s resilience to acoustic noise highlights its robustness, making it a compelling
choice for real-world applications.


5     C ONCLUSION

In this work, we conducted an in-depth exploration of modality imbalance in the context of trans-
former architectures. We introduced BalanceMLA, a novel multimodal learning architecture specif-
ically designed for emotion and lip-reading recognition tasks. The architecture integrates three piv-
otal components: Bilateral Residual Feature Fusion with Cross-Modal Attention (AttentionBRFF),
Adaptive Decision Fusion, and Category Level Weighting. Through rigorous evaluation on the LRW,
LRW1000 and IEMOCAP datasets, our model consistently outperformed the state-of-the-art base-
line models in various experimental settings. The ablation study further reinforced the significance
of each integral component. Our future work will be geared towards further optimization of these
key elements and the extension of our model to a broader range of multimodal applications.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E THICS S TATEMENT
The focus of this paper is on enhancing the performance of imbalanced representation learning
through a novel method. This method and analysis do not raise any ethical issues within the domain
of representation learning, as our approach is entirely data-agnostic. However, we caution that
while our method improves model performance, it does not inherently mitigate biases present in
the training data. As with any representation learning model, BalanceMLA should be rigorously
evaluated for fairness and bias before deployment in non-research applications.

R EFERENCES
Triantafyllos Afouras, Joon Son Chung, and Andrew Zisserman. My lips are concealed: Audio-
  visual speech enhancement through obstructions. Interspeech, 2019.
Alexei Baevski, Yuhao Zhou, Abdelrahman Mohamed, and Michael Auli. wav2vec 2.0: A frame-
  work for self-supervised learning of speech representations. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 33:12449–12460, 2020.
Carlos Busso, Murtaza Bulut, Chi-Chun Lee, Abe Kazemzadeh, Emily Mower, Samuel Kim, Jean-
  nette N Chang, Sungbok Lee, and Shrikanth S Narayanan. Iemocap: Interactive emotional dyadic
  motion capture database. Language resources and evaluation, 42:335–359, 2008.
Haoyue Cheng, Zhaoyang Liu, Wayne Wu, and Limin Wang. Filter-recovery network for multi-
  speaker audio-visual speech separation. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2023.
Junyoung Chung, Caglar Gulcehre, KyungHyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Empirical evaluation of
  gated recurrent neural networks on sequence modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.3555, 2014.
J. Devlin, M. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers
   for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Samira Ebrahimi Kahou, Vincent Michalski, Kishore Konda, Roland Memisevic, and Christopher
  Pal. Recurrent neural networks for emotion recognition in video. In Proceedings of the 2015
  ACM on international conference on multimodal interaction, pp. 467–474, 2015.
L. Goncalves and C. Busso. Auxformer: Robust approach to audiovisual emotion recognition. In
  ICASSP 2022-2022 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
  (ICASSP), pp. 7357–7361. IEEE, 2022.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), June 2016.
Wei-Ning Hsu, Benjamin Bolte, Yao-Hung Hubert Tsai, Kushal Lakhotia, Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
 and Abdelrahman Mohamed. Hubert: Self-supervised speech representation learning by masked
 prediction of hidden units. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing,
 29:3451–3460, 2021.
Po-Yao Huang, Vasu Sharma, Hu Xu, Chaitanya Ryali, Haoqi Fan, Yanghao Li, Shang-Wen Li,
  Gargi Ghosh, Jitendra Malik, and Christoph Feichtenhofer. Mavil: Masked audio-video learners,
  2023.
Michael L Iuzzolino and Kazuhito Koishida. Av (se) 2: Audio-visual squeeze-excite speech en-
 hancement. In ICASSP 2020-2020 IEEE international conference on acoustics, speech and signal
 processing (ICASSP), pp. 7539–7543. IEEE, 2020.
Davis E. King. Dlib-ml: A machine learning toolkit. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 10:1755–1758, dec 2009.
  ISSN 1532-4435.
Alexander Kolesnikov, Alexey Dosovitskiy, Dirk Weissenborn, Georg Heigold, Jakob Uszkoreit,
  Lucas Beyer, Matthias Minderer, Mostafa Dehghani, Neil Houlsby, Sylvain Gelly, Thomas Un-
  terthiner, and Xiaohua Zhai. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition
  at scale. In International Conference on Learnin Representations, 2021.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sangho Lee, Youngjae Yu, Gunhee Kim, Thomas Breuel, Jan Kautz, and Yale Song. Parameter
  efficient multimodal transformers for video representation learning, 2021.
Chenda Li and Yanmin Qian. Deep audio-visual speech separation with attention mechanism. In
  ICASSP 2020-2020 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
  (ICASSP), pp. 7314–7318. IEEE, 2020.
Daniel S. Park, William Chan, Yu Zhang, Chung-Cheng Chiu, Barret Zoph, Ekin D. Cubuk, and
  Quoc V. Le. SpecAugment: A simple data augmentation method for automatic speech recogni-
  tion. In Interspeech 2019. ISCA, sep 2019.
Xiaokang Peng, Yake Wei, Andong Deng, Dong Wang, and Di Hu. Balanced multimodal learning
  via on-the-fly gradient modulation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8238–8247, 2022.
Stavros Petridis, Themos Stafylakis, Pingehuan Ma, Feipeng Cai, Georgios Tzimiropoulos, and
  Maja Pantic. End-to-end audiovisual speech recognition. In 2018 IEEE international conference
  on acoustics, speech and signal processing (ICASSP), pp. 6548–6552. IEEE, 2018.
Bowen Shi, Wei-Ning Hsu, Kushal Lakhotia, and Abdelrahman Mohamed. Learning audio-visual
  speech representation by masked multimodal cluster prediction, 2022.
George Sterpu, Christian Saam, and Naomi Harte. Attention-based audio-visual fusion for robust
  automatic speech recognition. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM International Conference on
  Multimodal Interaction, ICMI ’18, pp. 111–115, New York, NY, USA, 2018. Association for
  Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450356923.
Zhongbo Sun, Yannan Wang, and Li Cao. An attention based speaker-independent audio-visual
  deep learning model for speech enhancement. In MultiMedia Modeling: 26th International Con-
  ference, MMM 2020, Daejeon, South Korea, January 5–8, 2020, Proceedings, Part II 26, pp.
  722–728. Springer, 2020.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
Wupeng Wang, Chao Xing, Dong Wang, Xiao Chen, and Fengyu Sun. A robust audio-visual speech
 enhancement model. In ICASSP 2020-2020 IEEE international conference on acoustics, speech
 and signal processing (ICASSP), pp. 7529–7533. IEEE, 2020.
Zhen Xing, Qi Dai, Han Hu, Jingjing Chen, Zuxuan Wu, and Yu-Gang Jiang. Svformer: Semi-
  supervised video transformer for action recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 18816–18826, 2023.
Ruize Xu, Ruoxuan Feng, Shi-Xiong Zhang, and Di Hu. Mmcosine: Multi-modal cosine loss
  towards balanced audio-visual fine-grained learning. In ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE International
  Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 1–5. IEEE, 2023.
Shuang Yang, Yuanhang Zhang, Dalu Feng, Mingmin Yang, Chenhao Wang, Jingyun Xiao, Keyu
  Long, Shiguang Shan, and Xilin Chen. Lrw-1000: A naturally-distributed large-scale benchmark
  for lip reading in the wild. In 2019 14th IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face
  Gesture Recognition (FG 2019), pp. 1–8, 2019. doi: 10.1109/FG.2019.8756582.
Taojiannan Yang, Yi Zhu, Yusheng Xie, Aston Zhang, Chen Chen, and Mu Li. Aim: Adapting
  image models for efficient video understanding. In International Conference on Learnin Repre-
  sentations, 2023.
Ya Zhao, Rui Xu, Xinchao Wang, Peng Hou, Haihong Tang, and Mingli Song. Hearing lips: Im-
  proving lip reading by distilling speech recognizers. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence, volume 34, pp. 6917–6924, 2020.


                                              11
