Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


P ROXIMAL C URRICULUM WITH TASK C ORRELATIONS
FOR D EEP R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Curriculum design for reinforcement learning (RL) can speed up an agent’s
         learning process and help it learn to perform well on complex tasks. However,
         existing techniques typically require domain-specific hyperparameter tuning,
         involve expensive optimization procedures for task selection, or are suitable only
         for specific learning objectives. In this work, we consider curriculum design in
         contextual multi-task settings where the agent’s final performance is measured
         w.r.t. a target distribution over complex tasks. We base our curriculum design on
         the Zone of Proximal Development concept, which has proven to be effective in
         accelerating the learning process of RL agents for uniform distribution over all
         tasks. We propose a novel curriculum, ProxCoRL, that effectively balances the
         need for selecting tasks that are not too difficult for the agent while progressing
         the agent’s learning toward the target distribution via leveraging task correlations.
         We theoretically justify the task selection strategy of ProxCoRL by analyzing
         a simple learning setting with REINFORCE learner model. Our experimental
         results across various domains with challenging target task distributions affirm
         the effectiveness of our curriculum strategy over state-of-the-art baselines in
         accelerating the training process of deep RL agents.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has shown remarkable success in various fields such as games,
continuous control, and robotics, as evidenced by recent advances in the field (Mnih et al., 2015;
Lillicrap et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2017; Levine et al., 2016). However, despite these successes,
the broader application of RL in real-world domains is often very limited. Specifically, training RL
agents in complex environments, such as contextual multi-task settings and goal-based tasks with
sparse rewards, still presents significant challenges (Kirk et al., 2021; Andrychowicz et al., 2017;
Florensa et al., 2017; Riedmiller et al., 2018).
Curriculum learning has been extensively studied in the context of supervised learning (Weinshall
et al., 2018; Zhou & Bilmes, 2018; Elman, 1993; Bengio et al., 2009). Recent research has explored
the benefits of using curriculum learning in sequential decision making settings, such as reinforce-
ment learning and imitation learning (Florensa et al., 2017; Riedmiller et al., 2018; Wöhlke et al.,
2020; Florensa et al., 2018; Racanière et al., 2020; Klink et al., 2020a;b; Eimer et al., 2021; Ka-
malaruban et al., 2019; Yengera et al., 2021). The objective of curriculum design in RL is to speed
up an agent’s learning process and enable it to perform well on complex tasks by exposing it to a
personalized sequence of tasks (Narvekar et al., 2020; Portelas et al., 2021; Weng, 2020). To achieve
this objective, several works have proposed different curriculum strategies based on different design
principles, such as the Zone of Proximal Development (ZPD) (Vygotsky & Cole, 1978; Chaiklin,
2003) and Self-Paced Learning (SPL) (Kumar et al., 2010; Jiang et al., 2015). However, existing
techniques typically require domain-specific hyperparameter tuning, involve expensive optimization
procedures for task selection, or are suitable only for specific learning objectives, such as uniform
performance objectives.
In this work, we investigate curriculum design in contextual multi-task settings with varying degrees
of task similarity, where the agent’s final performance is measured w.r.t. a target distribution over
complex tasks. We base our curriculum design on the Zone of Proximal Development concept,
which has proven to be effective in accelerating the learning process of RL agents for uniform


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


distribution over all tasks (Florensa et al., 2017; Wöhlke et al., 2020; Florensa et al., 2018;
Tzannetos et al., 2023). We propose a novel curriculum strategy, P ROX C O RL, that effectively
balances the need for selecting tasks that are neither too hard nor too easy for the agent (according
to the ZPD concept) while still progressing its learning toward the target distribution via leveraging
task correlations. We have mathematically derived our curriculum strategy by analyzing a specific
learning setting. The strengths of our curriculum strategy include its broad applicability to
many domains with minimal hyperparameter tuning, computational and sample efficiency, easy
integration with deep RL algorithms, and applicability to any target distribution over tasks, not just
uniform distribution. Our main results and contributions are as follows:

      I. We propose a curriculum strategy, P ROX C O RL, that effectively trades off the suitable task
         difficulty level for the agent and the progression towards the target tasks (Section 3).
  II. We mathematically derive P ROX C O RL for the single target task setting with a discrete pool
      of tasks by analyzing the effect of picking a task on the agent’s learning progress in a specific
      learning scenario (Section 3.1).
 III. We propose an extension of P ROX C O RL that can be applied to a wide range of task spaces and
      target distributions. This extension can be seamlessly integrated with deep RL frameworks,
      making it easy to use and apply in various scenarios (Section 3.2).
  IV. We empirically demonstrate that the curricula generated with P ROX C O RL significantly im-
      prove the training process of deep RL agents in various environments, matching or outper-
      forming existing state-of-the-art baselines (Section 4).

1.1     R ELATED W ORK

Curriculum strategies based on Self-Paced Learning (SPL). In the realm of supervised learning,
curriculum strategies leveraging the SPL concept attempt to strike a balance between exposing the
learner to all available training examples and selecting examples in which it currently performs
well (Kumar et al., 2010; Jiang et al., 2015). In the context of RL, the SPL concept has been
adapted by researchers in SPDL (Klink et al., 2020a;b; 2021), SPACE (Eimer et al., 2021), and
CURROT (Klink et al., 2022) by controlling the intermediate task distribution with respect to
the learner’s current training progress. While both SPDL and CURROT involve a setting where
the learner’s performance is measured w.r.t. a target distribution over the task space (similar to
our objective), SPACE operates in a setting where the learner’s performance is measured w.r.t. a
uniform distribution over the task space. SPDL and CURROT serve as state-of-the-art baselines
in our experimental evaluation. The task selection mechanism varies across these methods. SPDL
and CURROT operate by solving an optimization problem at each step to select the most relevant
task (Klink et al., 2021; 2022). On the other hand, SPACE relies on ranking tasks based on the
magnitude of differences in current/previous critic values to choose the task for the next step (Eimer
et al., 2021). Furthermore, the work of CURROT Klink et al. (2022) showcase issues about using
KL divergence to measure the similarity between task distributions as used in SPDL – instead, they
introduce an alternative approach by posing the curriculum design as a constrained optimal transport
problem between task distributions. We provide more detailed information on the hyperparameters
used in these methods in the appendix.
Curriculum strategies based on Unsupervised Environment Design (UED). The UED problem
setting involves automatically designing a distribution of environments that adapts to the learning
agent (Dennis et al., 2020). UED represents a self-supervised RL paradigm in which an environment
generator evolves alongside a student policy to develop an adaptive curriculum learning approach.
This approach can be utilized to create increasingly complex environments for training a policy,
leading to the emergence of Unsupervised Curriculum Design. PAIRED (Dennis et al., 2020) is
an adversarial training technique that solves the problem of the adversary generating unsolvable
environments by introducing an antagonist who works with the environment-generating adversary to
design environments in which the protagonist receives a low reward. Furthermore, the connections
between UED and another related method called PLR (Jiang et al., 2021b) have been explored
in (Jiang et al., 2021a; Parker-Holder et al., 2022), resulting in demonstrated improvements over
PAIRED. PLR, originally designed for procedural content generation based environments, samples
tasks/levels by prioritizing those with higher estimated learning potential when revisited in the
future. TD errors are used to estimate a task’s future learning potential. Unlike (Jiang et al., 2021a;


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Parker-Holder et al., 2022), PLR does not assume control over the environment generation process,
requiring only a black box generation process that returns a task given an identifier.
Curriculum strategies based on ZPD concept. Effective teaching provides tasks of moderate
difficulty (neither too hard nor too easy) for the learner, as formalized by the Zone of Proximal De-
velopment (ZPD) concept (Vygotsky & Cole, 1978; Chaiklin, 2003; Oudeyer et al., 2007; Baranes
& Oudeyer, 2013; Zou et al., 2019). In the context of RL, several curriculum strategies are based
on the ZPD concept, such as selecting the next task randomly from a set of tasks with success rates
within a specific range Florensa et al. (2017; 2018). However, the threshold values for success rates
require tuning based on the learner’s progress and domain. A unified framework for performance-
based starting state curricula in RL is proposed by Wöhlke et al. (2020), while Tzannetos et al.
(2023) propose a broadly applicable ZPD-based curriculum strategy with minimal hyperparameter
tuning and theoretical justifications. Nonetheless, these techniques are generally suitable only for
settings where the learner’s performance is evaluated using a uniform distribution over all tasks.
Other automatic curriculum strategies. Various automatic curriculum generation approaches ex-
ist, including: (i) formulating the curriculum design problem as a meta-level Markov Decision Pro-
cess (Narvekar et al., 2017; Narvekar & Stone, 2019); (ii) learning to generate training tasks similar
to a teacher (Dendorfer et al., 2020; Such et al., 2020; Matiisen et al., 2019; Turchetta et al., 2020);
(iii) using self-play for curriculum generation (Sukhbaatar et al., 2018); (iv) leveraging disagreement
between different agents trained on the same tasks (Zhang et al., 2020); and (v) selecting starting
states based on a single demonstration (Salimans & Chen, 2018; Resnick et al., 2018). Interested
readers can refer to recent surveys on RL curriculum design (Narvekar et al., 2020; Portelas et al.,
2021; Weng, 2020).
Curriculum strategies based on domain knowledge. In supervised learning, early works involve
ordering examples by increasing difficulty (Elman, 1993; Bengio et al., 2009; Schmidhuber,
2013; Zaremba & Sutskever, 2014), which has been adapted in hand-crafted RL curriculum
approaches (Asada et al., 1996; Wu & Tian, 2016). Recent works on imitation learning have also
utilized iterative machine teaching framework to design greedy curriculum strategies (Kamalaruban
et al., 2019; Yengera et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2017; Yang et al., 2018; Zhu et al., 2018). However, all
these approaches require domain-specific expert knowledge for designing difficulty measures.


2   F ORMAL S ETUP

In this section, we formalize our problem setting based on prior work on teacher-student curriculum
learning (Matiisen et al., 2019).
Multi-task RL. We consider a multi-task RL setting with a task/context space C, in which each task
c ∈ C is associated with a learning environment  modeled as a contextual Markov Decision Process
(MDP), denoted by Mc := S, A, γ, Tc , Rc , Pc0 (Hallak et al., 2015; Modi et al., 2018). The state
space S and action space A are shared by all tasks in C, as well as the discount factor γ. Each
contextual MDP includes a contextual transition dynamics Tc : S × S × A → [0, 1], a contextual
reward function Rc : S × A → [−Rmax , Rmax ], where Rmax > 0, and a contextual initial state
distribution Pc0 : S → [0, 1]. We denote the space of environments by M = {Mc : c ∈ C}.
RL agent and training process. We consider an RL agent acting in any environment Mc ∈ M
via a contextual policy π : S × C × A → [0, 1] that is a contextual mapping from a state to
a probability distribution over actions. Given a task c ∈ C, the agent attempts the task via a
trajectory rollout obtained    by executing its policy π in the MDP Mc . The trajectory rollout
is denoted as ξ = (s(τ ) , a(τ ) ) τ =0,1,... with s(0) ∼ Pc0 . The agent’s performance on task c

                                                      P∞ τ
is measured by the value function V π (c) := E                              , a ) π, Mc . The agent
                                                                        (τ ) (τ )

                                                         τ =0 γ · Rc (s
training corresponds to finding a policy that performs well w.r.t. a target distribution µ over C, i.e.,
maxπ Vµπ where Vµπ := Ec∼µ [V π (c)]. The training process of the agent involves an interaction
between two components: a student component that is responsible for policy updates and a teacher
component that is responsible for task selection. The interaction happens in discrete steps indexed
by t = 1, 2, . . ., and is formally described in Algorithm 1. Let πend denote the agent’s final policy
at the end of teacher-student interaction. The training objective is to ensure that the performance of
the policy πend is ϵ-near-optimal, i.e., (maxπ Vµπ − Vµπend ) ≤ ϵ.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 RL Agent Training as Interaction between Teacher-Student Components
 1: Input: RL agent’s initial policy π1
 2: for t = 1, 2, . . . do
 3:     Teacher component picks a task ct ∈ C.
 4:     Student component attempts the task via a trajectory rollout ξt using the policy πt in Mct .
 5:     Student component updates the policy to πt+1 using the rollout ξt .
 6: Output: RL agent’s final policy πend ← πt+1 .


Student component. We consider a parametric representation for the RL agent, whose cur-
rent knowledge is parameterized by θ ∈ Θ ⊆ Rd , and each parameter θ is mapped to a
policy πθ : S × C × A → [0, 1]. At step t, the student component updates the knowledge
parameter based on the following quantities: the current knowledge
                                                         n             parameter
                                                                         o         θt , the task ct
                                                              (τ ) (τ )
picked by the teacher component, and the rollout ξt = (st , at ) . Then, the updated
                                                                          τ
knowledge parameter θt+1 is mapped to the agent’s policy given by πt+1 := πθt+1 . As a
concrete example, for the R EINFORCE agent (Sutton et al., 1999), the knowledge parameter
                                             P∞     (τ )  (τ )
is updated as follows: θt+1 ← θt + ηt · τ =0hGt · gt , where ηt iis the learning rate,
                 ′           ′    ′
  (τ )    ∞                (τ ) (τ )        (τ )               (τ ) (τ )
Gt = τ ′ =τ γ τ −τ · Rct (st , at ), and gt = ∇θ log πθ (at |st , ct )           .
        P
                                                                                     θ=θt

Teacher component. At time step t, the teacher component selects a task ct for the student
component to attempt via a trajectory rollout, as shown in line 3 in Algorithm 1. The sequence
of tasks, also known as the curriculum, that is chosen by the teacher component has a significant
impact on the performance improvement of the policy πt . The primary objective of this work is
to develop a teacher component to achieve the training objective in a computationally efficient and
sample-efficient manner.

3     O UR C URRICULUM S TRATEGY P ROX C O RL
In Section 3.1, we mathematically derive a curriculum strategy for the single target task setting with
a discrete pool of tasks by analyzing a specific learning scenario. Then, in Section 3.2, we present
our final curriculum strategy that is applicable in general learning settings.

3.1   C URRICULUM S TRATEGY FOR S INGLE TARGET TASK S ETTINGS

In this section, we present our curriculum strategy for a setting where the task space C is a discrete
set and the target distribution µ is a delta distribution concentrated on a single target task ctarg . To
design our curriculum strategy, we investigate the effect of selecting a task ct at time step t on the
                         π
agent’s performance Vµ θt and its convergence towards the target performance Vµ∗ := maxπ Vµπ .
Therefore, we define the training objective improvement at time step t and analyze this metric for
a specific learning scenario.
Expected improvement in the training objective. At time step t, given the current knowledge
parameter θt , the task ct picked by the teacher component, and the student component’s rollout ξt ,
we define the improvement in the training objective as follows:
                                                         π                πθ
                      ∆t (θt+1 θt , ct , ξt ) := (Vµ∗ − Vµ θt ) − (Vµ∗ − Vµ t+1 ).
Additionally, we define the expected improvement in the training objective at step t due to picking
the task ct as follows (Weinshall et al., 2018; Kamalaruban et al., 2019; Yengera et al., 2021; Graves
et al., 2017):
                                 It (ct ) := Eξt |ct [∆t (θt+1 |θt , ct , ξt )] .
Based on the above measure, a natural greedy curriculum strategy for selecting the next task ct
is given by: ct ← arg maxc∈C It (c). We aim to approximate such a curriculum strategy without
computing the updated policy πθt+1 . To this end, we analyze the function It (·) for R EINFORCE
learner model under a specific learning setting. This analysis enables us to develop an intuitive
curriculum strategy by effectively combining three fundamental factors: (i) the learning potential
inherent in the source task, (ii) the transfer potential between the source and target tasks, i.e., their


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


similarity, and (iii) the potential for performance improvement in the target task. Looking ahead, it
is indeed captivating to extend our investigations to more complex learning settings, where we can
explore the potential for devising more sophisticated curriculum strategies.
Intuitive form of It (·). We define gt : C → Rd as gt (c) := [∇θ V πθ (c)]θ=θt , and ψt : C → Rd
as ψt (c) := ∥ggtt (c)
                   (c)∥ . By applying the first-order Taylor approximation of V
                                                                                      πθt+1
                                                                                             (ctarg ) at θt , we
approximate the improvement in the training objective as follows:
           ∆t (θt+1 θt , ct , ξt ) = V πθt+1 (ctarg ) − V πθt (ctarg ) ≈ ⟨θt+1 − θt , gt (ctarg )⟩ .
The knowledge
           h parameter
                    i  update for the R EINFORCE agent can be written as: θt+1 ← θt +ηt ·g\
                                                                                          t (ct ),
where Eξ |c gt (ct ) = gt (ct ). Then, for the R EINFORCE agent, we approximate the expected
          t
            \
              t

improvement in the training objective as follows:
     It (ct ) ≈ Eξt |ct [θt+1 − θt ], gt (ctarg ) = ηt · ∥gt (ct )∥ · ∥gt (ctarg )∥ · ⟨ψt (ct ), ψt (ctarg )⟩ .
In the above, the term ∥gt (ct )∥ corresponds to the learning potential inherent in the source task,
the term ∥gt (ctarg )∥ corresponds to the learning potential inherent in the target task, and the term
⟨ψt (ct ), ψt (ctarg )⟩ corresponds to the transfer potential between the source and target tasks. In the
subsequent discussion, we analyze the function It (·) under a contextual bandit setting.
Contextual bandit setting. We consider the R EINFORCE learner model with the following policy
parameterization: given a feature mapping ϕ : S × C × A → Rd , for any θ ∈ Rd , we parameterize
the policy as πθ (a|s, c) = P exp(⟨θ,ϕ(s,c,a)⟩)   ′    , ∀s ∈ S, c ∈ C, a ∈ A. In the following, we
                                 a′ exp(⟨θ,ϕ(s,c,a )⟩)
consider a specific problem instance of contextual MDP setting. Let Mc be a contextual MDP
with a singleton state space S = {s}, and an action space A = {a1 , a2 }. Any action a ∈ A taken
from the initial state s ∈ S always leads to a terminal state. Let r : C → [0, 1] be a mapping
from task/context space C to the interval [0, 1]. For any context c ∈ C, we denote the optimal and
non-optimal actions for that context as aopt             non
                                             c and ac , respectively. The contextual reward function
                                 opt
is defined as follows: Rc (s, ac ) = 1, and Rc (s, anon      c ) = 0, for all c ∈ C. Further, we define
ψ : C → Rd as ψ(c) := (ϕ(s, c, aopt                        non
                                       c ) − ϕ(s, c, ac )). Subsequently, for the R EINFORCE agent
operating under the above setting, the following theorem quantifies the expected improvement in
the training objective at time step t:
Theorem 1. For the R EINFORCE agent with softmax policy parameterization under the contextual
bandit setting described above, we have:
              V πθt (c)                         V πθt (ctarg )
                        · V ∗ (c) − V πθt (c) ·                 · V ∗ (ctarg ) − V πθt (ctarg ) · ⟨ψ(c), ψ(ctarg )⟩ ,

It (c) ≈ ηt ·    ∗                                     ∗
               V (c)                                V (ctarg )
where V ∗ (c) = maxπ V π (c), and ηt is the learning of the R EINFORCE agent.
A detailed proof of Theorem 1 can be found in Appendix C.1. As a more general result, we
conducted an analysis of the gradient function gt (·) within the context of a tree-structured contex-
tual MDP setting, as described in Appendix C.2. This analysis establishes a connection between
                         πθ
∥gt (c)∥1 and the term VV ∗ (c)
                            t (c)
                                  · V ∗ (c) − V πθt (c) .


Curriculum strategy. Inspired by the above analysis, we propose the following curriculum strategy:
                 V πθt (c)
                           · V ∗ (c) − V πθt (c) · V ∗ (ctarg ) − V πθt (ctarg ) · ⟨ψ(c), ψ(ctarg )⟩, (1)

  ct ← arg max ∗
          c∈C     V   (c)   |        {z         } |             {z              } |      {z        }
                                     ⃝2                         ⃝3                       ⃝4
                 | {z }
                    ⃝1
where V ∗ (c) = maxπ V π (c) and ψ : C → Rd is a context representation mapping. Given that the
        π
      V θt (c )
term V ∗ (ctargtarg) tends to have a significantly low value, we omit its inclusion in the above proposal
for the sake of numerical stability. At time step t, the teacher component picks a task ct according
to the above equation. The curriculum strategy involves the following quantities: ⃝         1 the agent’s
relative performance on the task c, ⃝    2 the expected regret of the agent on the task c, ⃝
                                                                                           3 the expected
regret of the agent on the target task ctarg , and ⃝  4 the correlation between the tasks c and ctarg . The
product of the terms ⃝     1 and ⃝2 enforces picking tasks that are neither too hard nor too easy for the
current policy (corresponding to the ZPD principle). The product of the terms ⃝        3 and ⃝ 4 enforces
picking tasks that are highly correlated with the target task. The curriculum strategy effectively
balances these two objectives.


                                                        5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    SGR       P OINT M ASS - S :2G   P OINT M ASS - S :1T   B IPEDALWALKER
        Reward      binary          binary                 binary                dense
       Context          R3            R3                     R3                   R2
          State         R4            R4                     R4                  R24
         Action         R2            R2                     R2                   R4
                                Double-Mode                                  Uniform with
    Target Dist.   R Plane
                    2
                                                        Single Task
                                 Gaussian                                     trivial tasks


                   (a) Complexity of environments                                             (b) Illustration of the environments

Figure 1: (a) provides a comprehensive overview of the complexity of the environments based on
the reward signals, context space, state space, action space, and target distribution. (b) showcases
the environments by providing an illustrative visualization of each environment (from left to right):
SGR, P OINT M ASS - S and B IPEDALWALKER.


3.2       C URRICULUM S TRATEGY FOR G ENERAL S ETTINGS

In this section, we extend the curriculum strategy in Eq. (1) to practical settings of interest, i.e., a
general task space C, a general target distribution µ, and V ∗ (c) values being unknown. We begin
by constructing two large discrete sets, Cbunif and Cbtarg , which are subsets of the original task space
C. Cbunif is obtained by sampling contexts from C according to uniform distribution, while Cbtarg is
obtained by sampling contexts from C according to the target distribution µ. For the general setting,
we consider the following curriculum strategy:
                                                  V πθt (c)
(cttarg , ct ) ←                                            · V ∗ (c) − V πθt (c) · V ∗ (ctarg ) − V πθt (ctarg ) · ⟨ψ(c), ψ(ctarg )⟩ .

                             arg max                 ∗ (c)
                        (ctarg ,c)∈Cbtarg ×Cbunif
                                                   V
                                                                                                                                     (2)

Next, we replace V ∗ (·) with Vmax , i.e., the maximum possible value that can be achieved for any
task in the task space – this value can typically be obtained for a given domain. Further, when
training deep RL agents, allowing some stochasticity in task selection is useful. In particular, the
arg max selection in Eq. (2) can be problematic in the presence of any approximation errors while
computing V πθt (·) values. To make the selection more robust, we replace arg max selection in
Eq. (2) with softmax selection and sample (cttarg , ct ) from the distribution given below:
                                      V t (c)
P (cttarg , ct ) = (ctarg , c) ∝ exp β ·      · Vmax − V t (c) · Vmax − V t (ctarg ) · ⟨ψ(c), ψ(ctarg )⟩ ,

                                         Vmax
                                                                                                   (3)
where β is a hyperparameter and V t (·) values are obtained from the critic network of the RL agent to
estimate V πθt (·). Finally, the teacher component samples (cttarg , ct ) from the above distribution and
provides the task ct to the student component – we refer to this selection strategy as P ROX C O RL.

4       E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION
In this section, we validate the effectiveness of our curriculum strategy by conducting experiments
in environments selected from the state-of-the-art works of Klink et al. (2022) and Romac et al.
(2021). Throughout the experiments, we utilize the PPO method from the Stable-Baselines3 library
for policy optimization (Schulman et al., 2017; Raffin et al., 2021).

4.1       E NVIRONMENTS

In our evaluation, we examine three distinct environments detailed in the following paragraphs.
These environments are selected to showcase the effectiveness of our curriculum strategy in
handling target distributions with varying characteristics within the context space C. The first
environment, Sparse Goal Reaching (SGR), features target distributions with uniform coverage
over specific dimensions of the context space and concentrated on one dimension. For the second
environment, Point Mass Sparse (P OINT M ASS - S) we consider two settings. In one setting, the
target distribution exhibits multiple modalities. In the second setting, the target is concentrated on


                                                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


a single context c ∈ C. Lastly, the third environment has a uniform target distribution spanning the
entirety of the context space. A summary and illustration of these environments are presented in
Figure 1. For additional details about each environment, please refer to Appendix D.1.
Sparse Goal Reaching (SGR). Based on the work of Klink et al. (2022), we consider a sparse-
reward, goal-reaching environment in which an agent needs to reach a desired position with high
precision. Such environments have previously been studied by Florensa et al. (2018). Within this
environment, the contexts, denoted as c ∈ C ⊆ R3 , encode both the desired 2D goal position and
the acceptable tolerance for reaching that goal. Our primary objective centers around achieving as
many goals as possible with high precision, indicated by a low tolerance threshold. In this regard,
the target distribution µ takes the form of a uniform distribution, but it is restricted to a specific 2D
region within C where the tolerance (C-Tolerance) for each context is set at a minimal value of 0.05.
Additionally, the presence of walls within the environment renders many of the tasks specified by
C infeasible, necessitating the identification of a feasible task subspace. We generate our training
tasks by randomly selecting 9900 contexts from C using uniform distribution to create Cbunif , and
by selecting 100 contexts according to the target distribution µ to form Cbtarg . For the purpose of
evaluation, we employ a separate held-out set sampled from the target distribution µ.
Point Mass Sparse (P OINT M ASS - S). Based on the work of Klink et al. (2020b), we consider a
 contextual P OINT M ASS - S environment where an agent navigates a point mass through a gate of
 a given size towards a goal in a two-dimensional space. To heighten the challenge, we replace the
 original dense reward function with a sparse one, a strategy also considered in Tzannetos et al.
 (2023). Specifically, in the P OINT M ASS - S environment, the agent operates within a goal-based
reward setting where the reward is binary and sparse, i.e., the agent receives a reward of 1 only upon
 successfully moving the point mass to the goal position. The parameters governing this environment,
 such as the gate’s position, width, and the ground’s friction coefficient, are controlled by a contextual
 variable c ∈ C ⊆ R3 . This variable comprises C-GatePosition, C-GateWidth, and C-Friction. Our
 experimental section explores two distinct P OINT M ASS - S environment settings. In the first setting,
denoted as P OINT M ASS - S :2G, the target distribution µ  takes the form of a bimodal  Gaussian
 distribution.  Here,
                     the means       of the contextual variables C-GatePosition, C-GateWidth are set to
  −3.9, 0.5 and 3.9, 0.5 for the two modes, respectively. In the second setting, P OINT M ASS - S :1T,

the target  distribution µ is concentrated on a single context     c ∈ C. More precisely,  the contextual
variables C-GatePosition, C-GateWidth, C-Friction take on the following values: 0.9, 0.5, 3.5 .

To construct our training tasks, we draw 20000 contexts from C using a uniform distribution, form-
ing Cbunif . The set Cbtarg is created by sampling 400 contexts from C according to the target distribution
 µ. We employ a held-out set sampled from the target distribution µ for evaluation purposes.
Bipedal Walker Stump Tracks (B IPEDALWALKER). We conduct additional experiments within the
TeachMyAgent benchmark for curriculum techniques, as introduced in Romac et al. (2021). In this
context, we chose a bipedal agent tasked with walking in the Stump Tracks environment, which is an
extension of the environment initially proposed in Portelas et al. (2019). The state space comprises
lidar sensors, head position, and joint positions. The action space is continuous, and the goal is
to learn a policy that controls the torque of the agent’s motors. The walker is rewarded for going
forward and penalized for torque usage. An episode lasts 2000 steps and is terminated if the agent
reaches the end of the track or if its head collides with the environment (in which case a reward of
−100 is received). Within this environment, the contextual variables c ∈ C ⊆ R2 control the height
(C-StumpHeight) and spacing (C-StumpSpacing) of stumps placed along the track for each task.
Our experimental setup is equivalent to the bipedal walker stump track environment with mostly
trivial tasks,
             as described    in Romac et al. (2021). In this  setup,   C-StumpHeight is constrained to
the range −3; 3 , while C-StumpSpacing remains within 0; 6 . Notably, the environment enforces

the clipping of negative values for C-StumpHeight, setting them to 0. Consequently, half of the
tasks have a mean stump height of 0, introducing a significant proportion of trivial tasks (50%).
To address the procedural task generation, we randomly draw 1000 tasks from C to construct the
training task set, denoted as Cbunif . Additionally, every four epochs, we resample 1000 tasks and
update the training set Cbunif . The set Cbtarg is obtained by sampling 500 tasks from C according to the
target distribution µ, which is uniform in C.


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                        P ROX C O RL              CURROT                            P ROX C O RL         CURROT                            P ROX C O RL         CURROT                              P ROX C O RL         CURROT
                        P ROX C O RL- UN          SPDL                              P ROX C O RL- UN     SPDL                              P ROX C O RL- UN     SPDL                                P ROX C O RL- UN     SPDL
                        IID                       PLR                               IID                  PLR                               IID                  PLR                                 IID/TARGET           G RADIENT
                        TARGET                    G RADIENT                         TARGET               G RADIENT                         TARGET               G RADIENT
              1.0                                                           1.0                                                    1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                           100


                                                                                                                                                                            Performance
Performance   0.8                                                           0.8                                                    0.8


                                                              Performance


                                                                                                                     Performance
                                                                                                                                                                                            50
              0.6                                                           0.6                                                    0.6
                                                                            0.4                                                                                                              0
              0.4                                                                                                                  0.4
              0.2                                                           0.2                                                    0.2                                                     −50

              0.0                                                           0.0                                                    0.0                                                    −100
                 0.0     0.2      0.4      0.6   0.8    1.0                   0.0     0.5         1.0   1.5      2.0                 0.0     0.5         1.0   1.5      2.0                   0.0     0.5        1.0   1.5     2.0
                                     Steps             ×106                                     Steps         ×106                                     Steps         ×106                                      Steps          ×107


                           (a) SGR                                          (b) P OINT M ASS - S :2G                               (c) P OINT M ASS - S :1T                               (d) B IPEDALWALKER

Figure 2: Performance comparison of RL agents trained using different curriculum strategies. The
performance is measured as the mean return (±1 standard error) on the test pool of tasks. The
results are averaged over 10 random seeds for SGR, 15 random seeds for P OINT M ASS - S :2G, 15
random seeds for P OINT M ASS - S :1T and 10 random seeds for B IPEDALWALKER. The plots are
smoothed across 2 evaluation snapshots that occur over 25000 training steps.
4.2                    C URRICULUM S TRATEGIES E VALUATED

Variants of our curriculum strategy. We consider two curriculum strategies as described
next. First, P ROX C O RL is based on Eq. (3). Throughout all the experiments, we use the fol-
lowing choice to compute similarity between ψ(s) and ψ(ctarg ): exp(−||c − ctarg ||2 ). Second,
P ROX C O RL- UN is a variant of it that does not take into account the target distribution µ and
hence ignores the correlations. Specifically, P ROX C O RL- UN drops the target task-related terms
⃝3 and ⃝ 4 derived in Eq.(1), and selects the next task according to the following distribution:
                        t
P ct = c ∝ exp β · VVmax  (c)
                              · (Vmax − V t (c)) . We note that this strategy is similar to a ZPD-based


curriculum strategy proposed in Tzannetos et al. (2023) for uniform performance objective.
State-of-the-art baselines. SPDL (Klink et al., 2020b), CURROT (Klink et al., 2022), PLR (Jiang
et al., 2021b), and G RADIENT (Huang et al., 2022) are state-of-the-art curriculum strategies for
contextual RL. We adapt the implementation of an improved version of SPDL, presented in Klink
et al. (2021), to work with a discrete pool of contextual tasks. PLR (Jiang et al., 2021b) was orig-
inally designed for procedurally generated content settings, but we have adapted its implementation
for the contextual RL setting operating on a discrete pool of tasks.
Prototypical baselines. We consider two prototypical baselines: IID and TARGET. The IID
strategy samples the next task from C with a uniform distribution, while the TARGET strategy
samples according to the target distribution µ.

4.3                    R ESULTS

Convergence behavior. As illustrated in Figure 2, the RL agents trained using our curriculum
strategy, P ROX C O RL, perform competitively w.r.t. those trained with state-of-the-art and proto-
typical baselines. In Figure 2a for SGR, P ROX C O RL outperforms all the other techniques by
a large margin. P ROX C O RL selects tasks that are neither too hard nor too easy for the agent’s
current policy and are also correlated with the target distribution. CURROT stands out among
other strategies due to its ability to gradually choose tasks from the target distribution. Importantly,
solely selecting target contexts for training is inadequate, as evidenced by the underperformance
of TARGET compared to all other techniques. The results for P OINT M ASS - S :2G are presented in
Figure 2b, where we can observe that P ROX C O RL, P ROX C O RL- UN, and CURROT outperform
the other strategies. P ROX C O RL demonstrates success in handling bimodal target distributions
by alternating the selection between the modes of the target distribution. Although it initially
has a slower performance than P ROX C O RL- UN and CURROT, it eventually matches/surpasses
their performance. Despite P ROX C O RL- UN not explicitly considering the target distribution in
its formulation, it progressively selects more challenging contexts and effectively encompasses the
tasks from the target distribution in this scenario. For P OINT M ASS - S :1T, in Figure 2c, we observe
that P ROX C O RL quickly succeeds in the single target task compared to the other techniques.
Although CURROT converges slower, it finally performs similarly to the proposed technique. For
B IPEDALWALKER, Figure 2d, where the target distribution is uniform, P ROX C O RL- UN achieves
the best performance. This technique, by definition, considers a uniform performance objective.
P ROX C O RL is able to handle a uniform target distribution better than CURROT for this setting.


                                                                                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           P ROX C O RL         TARGET                                                                 P ROX C O RL         TARGET                                                                P ROX C O RL                       TARGET
                           IID                  CURROT                                                                 IID                  CURROT                                                                IID                                CURROT
                                                                                             2.5
               14.00                                                                                                                                                                                5
               12.00                                                                         2.0


                                                                            C-GatePosition
                                                                                                                                                                                                    4


                                                                                                                                                                                      C-GateWidth
 C-Tolerance
               10.00
                                                                                             1.5
                8.00                                                                                                                                                                                3
                6.00                                                                         1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                    2
                4.00
                                                                                             0.5                                                                                                    1
                2.00
                0.05                                                                         0.0                                                                                                    0
                       0    2000      4000    6000     8000                                        0                   5000     10000    15000       20000                                              0         5000       10000                15000   20000
                                   Episodes                                                                                   Episodes                                                                                    Episodes


       (a) SGR: C-Tolerance                                      (b) P OINT M ASS - S :2G: C-GatePosition                                                             (c) P OINT M ASS - S :2G: C-GateWidth
                                                     C-GateWidth                                                                                                        C-StumpSpacing
                                                                            11000                                                                                                                                     14800
                                                                                                                                                                            6


                                                                                                   Training Episodes


                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Training Episodes
                                                       7
                                                                            8250                                                                                                                                      11100
                                                                                                                                                                            4
                                                       4                    5500                                                                                                                                      7400

                                                                                                                                                                            2
                                                                            2750                                                                                                                                      3700
                                                       1

                                              −3.9         0.0      3.9
                                                                            0                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                     −3.0       0.0                         3.0
                                                           C-GatePosition                                                                                                       C-StumpHeight

                           (d) P OINT M ASS - S :2G: 2D context space                                                                                        (e) B IPEDALWALKER: 2D context space

Figure 3: (a) presents the average C-Tolerance of the selected tasks during different curricu-
lum strategies for SGR. (b-c) present the average distance between the selected contexts C-
GatePosition and C-GateWidth and the target distribution for P OINT M ASS - S :2G. (d) presents the
two-dimensional context space of P OINT M ASS - S :2G. The target distribution is depicted as a black
x and encodes the two gates with C-GateWidth = 0.5 at C-GatePosition = {−3.9, 3.9}. Each col-
ored dot represents the context/task selected by P ROX C O RL during training, where brighter colors
indicate later training stages. (e) presents the two-dimensional context space of B IPEDALWALKER.
The target distribution is uniform. Each colored dot represents the context/task selected by P ROX -
C O RL during training, where brighter colors indicate later training stages.



Curriculum plots. Figure 3a displays the average C-Tolerance of tasks selected from the proposed
curriculum (P ROX C O RL), CURROT, IID, and TARGET. Our observation reveals that both P ROX -
C O RL and CURROT manage to reduce the average C-Tolerance below that of IID, indicating
that both techniques gradually prioritize tasks that align with the target distribution. However, it is
noteworthy that CURROT continues to decrease the context values to reach the target distribution,
while P ROX C O RL does not necessarily converge to the target distribution. This trend is similarly
evident in Figures 3b and 3c, where P ROX C O RL after succeeding on the target distribution
returns to sampling closer to IID. Conversely, CURROT persists in reducing the context values
to attain convergence with the target distribution. Figure 3d provides a visual representation of the
two-dimensional context space for the P OINT M ASS - S :2G setting. The curriculum initially starts
from larger C-GateWidth values and centered C-GatePosition values, gradually shifting towards
the two modes of the target distribution in the later stages of training. In Figure 3e, we depict the
two-dimensional context space for the B IPEDALWALKER setting. Despite the uniformity of the
target distribution of contexts, we observe that in the later stages of training, P ROX C O RL disregards
trivial tasks characterized by C-StumpHeight values smaller than 0. Instead, it focuses on tasks
from the remaining task space.

5                  C ONCLUDING D ISCUSSIONS
We proposed a novel curriculum strategy that strikes a balance between selecting tasks that are
neither too hard nor too easy for the agent while also progressing the agent’s learning toward the
target distribution by utilizing task correlation. We mathematically derived our curriculum strategy
through an analysis of a specific learning scenario and demonstrated its effectiveness in various
environments through empirical evaluations. Here, we discuss a few limitations of our work and
outline a plan on how to address them in future work. First, it would be interesting to extend our
curriculum strategy to high-dimensional context spaces in sparse reward environments. However,
sampling new tasks in such environments poses a significant challenge due to the estimation of
the value of all tasks in the discrete sets Cbunif and Cbtarg . Second, while our curriculum strategy uses
a simple distance measure to capture task correlation, it would be worthwhile to investigate the
effects of employing different distance metrics over the context space on curriculum design.


                                                                                                                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Marcin Andrychowicz, Filip Wolski, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Rachel Fong, Peter Welinder, Bob
 McGrew, Josh Tobin, Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. Hindsight Experience Replay. In
 NeurIPS, 2017.
Minoru Asada, Shoichi Noda, Sukoya Tawaratsumida, and Koh Hosoda. Purposive Behavior Ac-
 quisition for a Real Robot by Vision-based Reinforcement Learning. Machine learning, 23(2-3):
 279–303, 1996.
Adrien Baranes and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. Active Learning of Inverse Models with Intrinsically
  Motivated Goal Exploration in Robots. Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 61(1):49–73, 2013.
Yoshua Bengio, Jérôme Louradour, Ronan Collobert, and Jason Weston. Curriculum Learning. In
  ICML, 2009.
Seth Chaiklin. The Zone of Proximal Development in Vygotsky’s Analysis of Learning and Instruc-
  tion. Vygotsky’s Educational Theory in Cultural Context, pp. 39, 2003.
Patrick Dendorfer, Aljosa Osep, and Laura Leal-Taixé. Goal-GAN: Multimodal Trajectory Predic-
  tion based on Goal Position Estimation. In ACCV, 2020.
Michael Dennis, Natasha Jaques, Eugene Vinitsky, Alexandre Bayen, Stuart Russell, Andrew Critch,
 and Sergey Levine. Emergent Complexity and Zero-shot Transfer via Unsupervised Environment
 Design. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Theresa Eimer, André Biedenkapp, Frank Hutter, and Marius Lindauer. Self-Paced Context Evalu-
  ation for Contextual Reinforcement Learning. In ICML, 2021.
Jeffrey L Elman. Learning and Development in Neural Networks: The Importance of Starting Small.
   Cognition, 48(1):71–99, 1993.
Carlos Florensa, David Held, Markus Wulfmeier, Michael Zhang, and Pieter Abbeel. Reverse Cur-
  riculum Generation for Reinforcement Learning. In CORL, 2017.
Carlos Florensa, David Held, Xinyang Geng, and Pieter Abbeel. Automatic Goal Generation for
  Reinforcement Learning Agents. In ICML, 2018.
Alex Graves, Marc G Bellemare, Jacob Menick, Rémi Munos, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Automated
  Curriculum Learning for Neural Networks. In ICML, 2017.
Assaf Hallak, Dotan Di Castro, and Shie Mannor. Contextual Markov Decision Processes. CoRR,
  abs/1502.02259, 2015.
Peide Huang, Mengdi Xu, Jiacheng Zhu, Laixi Shi, Fei Fang, and Ding Zhao. Curriculum Rein-
  forcement Learning using Optimal Transport via Gradual Domain Adaptation. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Lu Jiang, Deyu Meng, Qian Zhao, Shiguang Shan, and Alexander G Hauptmann. Self-Paced Cur-
  riculum Learning. In AAAI, 2015.
Minqi Jiang, Michael Dennis, Jack Parker-Holder, Jakob Foerster, Edward Grefenstette, and Tim
 Rocktäschel. Replay-Guided Adversarial Environment Design. In NeurIPS, 2021a.
Minqi Jiang, Edward Grefenstette, and Tim Rocktäschel. Prioritized Level Replay. In ICML, 2021b.
Parameswaran Kamalaruban, Rati Devidze, Volkan Cevher, and Adish Singla. Interactive Teaching
  Algorithms for Inverse Reinforcement Learning. In IJCAI, 2019.
Robert Kirk, Amy Zhang, Edward Grefenstette, and Tim Rocktäschel. A Survey of Generalisation
  in Deep Reinforcement Learning. CoRR, abs/2111.09794, 2021.
Pascal Klink, Hany Abdulsamad, Boris Belousov, and Jan Peters. Self-Paced Contextual Reinforce-
  ment Learning. In CORL, 2020a.
Pascal Klink, Carlo D’Eramo, Jan R Peters, and Joni Pajarinen. Self-Paced Deep Reinforcement
  Learning. In NeurIPS, 2020b.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Pascal Klink, Hany Abdulsamad, Boris Belousov, Carlo D’Eramo, Jan Peters, and Joni Pajarinen. A
  Probabilistic Interpretation of Self-Paced Learning with Applications to Reinforcement Learning.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22:182–1, 2021.
Pascal Klink, Haoyi Yang, Carlo D’Eramo, Jan Peters, and Joni Pajarinen. Curriculum Reinforce-
  ment Learning via Constrained Optimal Transport. In ICML, 2022.
M Pawan Kumar, Benjamin Packer, and Daphne Koller. Self-Paced Learning for Latent Variable
 Models. In NeurIPS, 2010.
Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn, Trevor Darrell, and Pieter Abbeel. End-to-end Training of Deep
  Visuomotor Policies. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(1):1334–1373, 2016.
Timothy P Lillicrap, Jonathan J Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa,
  David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous Control with Deep Reinforcement Learning. CoRR,
  abs/1509.02971, 2015.
Weiyang Liu, Bo Dai, Ahmad Humayun, Charlene Tay, Chen Yu, Linda B Smith, James M Rehg,
 and Le Song. Iterative Machine Teaching. In ICML, 2017.
Tambet Matiisen, Avital Oliver, Taco Cohen, and John Schulman. Teacher–Student Curriculum
  Learning. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 31(9):3732–3740, 2019.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, and Georg Ostrovski. Human-Level
  Control Through Deep Reinforcement Learning. Nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
Aditya Modi, Nan Jiang, Satinder Singh, and Ambuj Tewari. Markov Decision Processes with
  Continuous Side Information. In ALT, 2018.
Sanmit Narvekar and Peter Stone. Learning Curriculum Policies for Reinforcement Learning. In
  AAMAS, 2019.
Sanmit Narvekar, Jivko Sinapov, and Peter Stone. Autonomous Task Sequencing for Customized
  Curriculum Design in Reinforcement Learning. In IJCAI, 2017.
Sanmit Narvekar, Bei Peng, Matteo Leonetti, Jivko Sinapov, Matthew E Taylor, and Peter Stone.
  Curriculum Learning for Reinforcement Learning Domains: A Framework and Survey. Journal
  of Machine Learning Research, 21:1–50, 2020.
Pierre-Yves Oudeyer, Frdric Kaplan, and Verena V Hafner. Intrinsic Motivation Systems for Au-
  tonomous Mental Development. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 11(2):265–
  286, 2007.
Jack Parker-Holder, Minqi Jiang, Michael Dennis, Mikayel Samvelyan, Jakob Foerster, Edward
  Grefenstette, and Tim Rocktäschel. Evolving Curricula with Regret-Based Environment Design.
  CoRR, abs/2203.01302, 2022.
Rémy Portelas, Cédric Colas, Katja Hofmann, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. Teacher algorithms for
   curriculum learning of Deep RL in continuously parameterized environments. In CoRL, 2019.
Rémy Portelas, Cédric Colas, Lilian Weng, Katja Hofmann, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. Automatic
   Curriculum Learning for Deep RL: A Short Survey. In IJCAI, 2021.
Sébastien Racanière, Andrew K Lampinen, Adam Santoro, David P Reichert, Vlad Firoiu, and
   Timothy P Lillicrap. Automated Curricula Through Setter-Solver Interactions. In ICLR, 2020.
Antonin Raffin, Ashley Hill, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Maximilian Ernestus, and Noah Dor-
  mann. Stable-Baselines3: Reliable Reinforcement Learning Implementations. Journal of Ma-
  chine Learning Research, 22(268):1–8, 2021.
Cinjon Resnick, Roberta Raileanu, Sanyam Kapoor, Alexander Peysakhovich, Kyunghyun Cho, and
  Joan Bruna. Backplay:“ Man muss immer umkehren”. CoRR, abs/1807.06919, 2018.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Martin A Riedmiller, Roland Hafner, Thomas Lampe, Michael Neunert, Jonas Degrave, Tom Van de
 Wiele, Vlad Mnih, Nicolas Heess, and Jost Tobias Springenberg. Learning by Playing Solving
 Sparse Reward Tasks from Scratch. In ICML, 2018.
Clément Romac, Rémy Portelas, Katja Hofmann, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. Teachmyagent: a
  Benchmark for Automatic Curriculum Learning in Deep RL. In ICML, 2021.
Tim Salimans and Richard Chen. Learning Montezuma’s Revenge from a Single Demonstration.
  CoRR, abs/1812.03381, 2018.
Jürgen Schmidhuber. Powerplay: Training an Increasingly General Problem Solver by Continually
   Searching for the Simplest Still Unsolvable Problem. Frontiers in Psychology, 4:313, 2013.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal Policy
  Optimization Algorithms. CoRR, abs/1707.06347, 2017.
David Silver, Julian Schrittwieser, Karen Simonyan, Ioannis Antonoglou, Aja Huang, Arthur Guez,
  Thomas Hubert, Lucas Baker, Matthew Lai, and Adrian Bolton. Mastering the Game of Go
  Without Human Knowledge. Nature, 550(7676):354–359, 2017.
Felipe Petroski Such, Aditya Rawal, Joel Lehman, Kenneth Stanley, and Jeffrey Clune. Generative
  Teaching Networks: Accelerating Neural Architecture Search by Learning to Generate Synthetic
  Training Data. In ICML, 2020.
Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Zeming Lin, Ilya Kostrikov, Gabriel Synnaeve, Arthur Szlam, and Robert
  Fergus. Intrinsic Motivation and Automatic Curricula via Asymmetric Self-Play. In ICLR, 2018.
Richard S Sutton, David McAllester, Satinder Singh, and Yishay Mansour. Policy Gradient Methods
  for Reinforcement Learning with Function Approximation. In NeurIPS, 1999.
Matteo Turchetta, Andrey Kolobov, Shital Shah, Andreas Krause, and Alekh Agarwal. Safe Rein-
 forcement Learning via Curriculum Induction. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Georgios Tzannetos, Bárbara Gomes Ribeiro, Parameswaran Kamalaruban, and Adish Singla. Prox-
  imal Curriculum for Reinforcement Learning Agents. In TMLR, 2023.
Lev Semenovich Vygotsky and Michael Cole. Mind in Society: Development of Higher Psycholog-
  ical Processes. Harvard University Press, 1978.
Daphna Weinshall, Gad Cohen, and Dan Amir. Curriculum Learning by Transfer Learning: Theory
  and Experiments with Deep Networks. In ICML, 2018.
Lilian Weng. Curriculum for Reinforcement Learning. lilianweng.github.io, 2020. URL https:
  //lilianweng.github.io/posts/2020-01-29-curriculum-rl/.
Jan Wöhlke, Felix Schmitt, and Herke van Hoof. A Performance-Based Start State Curriculum
  Framework for Reinforcement Learning. In AAMAS, 2020.
Yuxin Wu and Yuandong Tian. Training Agent for First-Person Shooter Game with Actor-Critic
  Curriculum Learning. In ICLR, 2016.
Scott Cheng-Hsin Yang, Yue Yu, arash Givchi, Pei Wang, Wai Keen Vong, and Patrick Shafto.
  Optimal Cooperative Inference. In AISTATS, 2018.
Gaurav Raju Yengera, Rati Devidze, Parameswaran Kamalaruban, and Adish Singla. Curriculum
  Design for Teaching via Demonstrations: Theory and Applications. In NeurIPS, 2021.
Wojciech Zaremba and Ilya Sutskever. Learning to Execute. CoRR, abs/1410.4615, 2014.
Yunzhi Zhang, Pieter Abbeel, and Lerrel Pinto. Automatic Curriculum Learning Through Value
  Disagreement. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Tianyi Zhou and Jeff Bilmes. Minimax Curriculum Learning: Machine Teaching with Desirable
  Difficulties and Scheduled Diversity. In ICLR, 2018.


                                              12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xiaojin Zhu, Adish Singla, Sandra Zilles, and Anna N. Rafferty. An Overview of Machine Teaching.
  CoRR, abs/1801.05927, 2018.
Xiaotian Zou, Wei Ma, Zhenjun Ma, and Ryan S Baker. Towards Helping Teachers Select Optimal
  Content for Students. In AIED, 2019.


                                              13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     TABLE OF C ONTENTS
In this section, we briefly describe the content provided in the paper’s appendices.

• Appendix B provides a discussion of the broader impact of our work and compute resources used.
• Appendix C provides a proof for Theorem 1 and an additional theoretical justification for our
  curriculum strategy. (Section 3.1)
• Appendix D provides additional details for experimental evaluation. (Section 4)

B     D ISCUSSIONS
Broader impact. This work presents a novel curriculum strategy for contextual multi-task settings
where the agent’s final performance is measured w.r.t. a target distribution over the context space.
Given the algorithmic and empirical nature of our work applied to learning agents, we do not foresee
any direct negative societal impacts of our work in the present form.
Compute resources. The experiments for SGR and P OINT M ASS - S were conducted on a cluster
of machines equipped with Intel Xeon Gold 6134M CPUs running at a frequency of 3.20GHz. The
experiments for B IPEDALWALKER were conducted on machines equipped with Tesla V100 GPUs.

C     J USTIFICATIONS FOR THE C URRICULUM S TRATEGY
In this section, we provide some insights into the proposed curriculum strategy by analyzing two
specific learning settings. For both settings, we consider the R EINFORCE learner model with the
following policy parameterization: given a feature mapping ϕ : S × C × A → Rd , for any θ ∈ Rd ,
we parameterize the policy as πθ (a|s, c) = P exp(⟨θ,ϕ(s,c,a)⟩) ′
                                                ′ exp(⟨θ,ϕ(s,c,a )⟩)
                                                                     , ∀s ∈ S, c ∈ C, a ∈ A.
                                                     a



C.1   C ONTEXTUAL BANDIT S ETTING

Let Mc be a contextual MDP with a singleton state space S = {s}, and an action space A =
{a1 , a2 }. Any action a ∈ A taken from the initial state s ∈ S always leads to a terminal state. Let
r : C → [0, 1] be a mapping from task/context space C to the interval [0, 1]. For any context c ∈ C,
we denote the optimal and non-optimal actions for that context as aopt          non
                                                                      c and ac , respectively. The
                                                          opt                  non
contextual reward function is defined as follows: Rc (s, ac ) = 1, and Rc (s, ac ) = 0, for all c ∈ C.
Further, we define ψ : C → Rd as ψ(c) := (ϕ(s, c, aopt              non
                                                     c ) − ϕ(s, c, ac )).
Theorem 1. For the R EINFORCE agent with softmax policy parameterization under the contextual
bandit setting described above, we have:
                V πθt (c)     ∗
                                                  V πθt (ctarg )
                                        π θt
                                                                 · V ∗ (ctarg ) − V πθt (ctarg ) · ⟨ψ(c), ψ(ctarg )⟩ ,

It (c) ≈ ηt ·             · V   (c) − V      (c) ·
                 V ∗ (c)                           V ∗ (ctarg )
where V ∗ (c) = maxπ V π (c), and ηt is the learning of the R EINFORCE agent.

Proof. For the R EINFORCE agent, the expected improvement in the training objective can be ap-
proximated as follows:
                     It (c) = Eξt |ct [∆t (θt+1 |θt , ct , ξt )] ≈ ηt · ⟨gt (c), gt (ctarg )⟩ .
For the contextual bandit setting described above, we simplify the gradient gt (c) as follows:
      gt (c) = [∇θ V πθ (c)]θ=θt

             = Ea∼πθt (·|s,c) Rc (s, a) · [∇θ log πθ (a|s, c)]θ=θt
             = πθt (aopt                opt                 opt

                     c |s, c) · Rc (s, ac ) · ∇θ log πθ (ac |s, c) θ=θt

             = πθt (aopt                opt             opt                             ′
                     c |s, c) · Rc (s, ac ) · ϕ(s, c, ac ) − Ea′ ∼πθt (·|s,c) [ϕ(s, c, a )]

             = πθt (aopt                opt              opt                   opt            non
                     c |s, c) · Rc (s, ac ) · (1 − πθt (ac |s, c)) · (ϕ(s, c, ac ) − ϕ(s, c, ac ))


                                                         14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              = πθt (aopt                opt              opt
                      c |s, c) · Rc (s, ac ) · (1 − πθt (ac |s, c)) · ψ(c)
                πθt (aopt                 opt
                       c |s, c) · Rc (s, ac )
              =                               · (Rc (s, aopt         opt                opt
                                                         c ) − πθt (ac |s, c) · Rc (s, ac )) · ψ(c)
                         Rc (s, aopt
                                  c )
                V πθt (c)
                          · V ∗ (c) − V πθt (c) · ψ(c),

              =    ∗
                 V (c)
where we used the facts that V πθt (c) = πθt (aopt                 opt                     opt
                                                c |s, c) · Rc (s, ac ) and V (c) = Rc (s, ac ). Based
                                                                            ∗

on the above simplification of gt (c), we have:
    It (c)
  ≈ ηt · ⟨gt (c), gt (ctarg )⟩
         V πθt (c)         ∗
                                               V πθt (ctarg )
                                     πθt
                                                              · V ∗ (ctarg ) − V πθt (ctarg ) · ⟨ψ(c), ψ(ctarg )⟩ .

  = ηt ·             ·  V    (c) − V     (c)  ·
           V ∗ (c)                              V ∗ (ctarg )



C.2    T REE -S TRUCTURED MDP S ETTING

Let M denote a collection of contextual MDPs sharing a deterministic tree structure. In this struc-
ture, the state space S encompasses all nodes in the tree, the action space A = {a1 , . . . , aN } is
defined such that taking an action from any non-leaf node deterministically transitions to a node in
the subsequent level, while taking any action from a leaf node leads to a terminal state. The initial
state is consistently set as the top node. Each MDP Mc ∈ M is associated with a distinct leaf node
Lc serving as the goal state. Notably, we operate within a sparse reward setting, wherein taking
any action from a goal state yields a reward of 1, while all other scenarios result in a reward of
0. Then, for the R EINFORCE agent under the above setting, the following proposition provides an
upper bound on the quantity ∥gt (c)∥1 :
Proposition 1. For the R EINFORCE agent with softmax policy parameterization under the contex-
tual MDP setting described above, we have:
                                        ∥gt (c)∥1 ≤ 2 · ϕmax · U πθt (c),
where ϕmax = max(s,c,a)∈S×C×A ∥ϕ(s, c, a)∥1 , and
                  V πθt (c)
                            · (V ∗ (c) − V πθt (c)) ≤ U πθt (c) ≤ (V ∗ (c) − V πθt (c)).
                   V ∗ (c)

Proof. For the R EINFORCE agent under the contextual MDP setting, we write gt (c) as follows:
                                             "                                           #
                                                      Xh                          i
                     πθ                                               (τ ) (τ )
      gt (c) = [∇θ V (c)]θ=θt = Eξ∼Prπθt Rc (ξ) ·         ∇θ log πθ (a |s , c)             ,
                                                     c                                                            θ=θt
                                                                     τ
                                 π
where ξ = (s(τ ) , a(τ ) ) τ , Prc θt (ξ) = τ πθt (a(τ ) |s(τ ) , c), and Rc (ξ) = τ γ τ · Rc (s(τ ) , a(τ ) ).
                                           Q                                      P
             n                 o
               (τ )     (τ )
Let ξopt,c = (sopt,c , aopt,c ) be the unique optimal trajectory for the MDP Mc . Then, using the
                                    τ
softmax policy parameterization, we can write gt (c) as follows:
                     "                                                                                  #
                                                Xh                             i
    gt (c) = Eξ∼Prπθt 1[ξ = ξopt,c ] · Rc (ξ) ·    ∇θ log πθ (a(τ ) |s(τ ) , c)
                      c                                                                        θ=θt
                                                         τ
               π
                                               Xh            (τ )    (τ )
                                                                               i
           = Prc θt (ξopt,c ) · Rc (ξopt,c ) ·   ∇θ log πθ (aopt,c |sopt,c , c)
                                                                                       θ=θt
                                                 τ
                                                                                                        h                   i
                                π                        (τ )     (τ )                                         (τ )
                                                 X
           = Rc (ξopt,c ) · Prc θt (ξopt,c ) ·       ϕ(sopt,c , c, aopt,c ) − Ea∼π          (τ )            ϕ(sopt,c , c, a) .
                                                                                     θt (·|sopt,c ,c)
                                                 τ

Then, we bound the ℓ1 -norm of gt (c) as follows:
                                                                                                            h                i
                             π                     (τ )        (τ )                                             (τ )
                                              X
∥gt (c)∥1 ≤ Rc (ξopt,c ) · Prc θt (ξopt,c ) ·   ϕ(sopt,c , c, aopt,c ) − Ea∼π                  (τ )          ϕ(sopt,c , c, a)
                                                                                        θt (·|sopt,c ,c)                         1
                                                 τ


                                                          15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 π
                                                       X                                (τ )      (τ )                     (τ )            (τ )
           ≤    Rc (ξopt,c ) · Prc θt (ξopt,c ) ·                 (1 − πθt (aopt,c |sopt,c , c)) · ϕ(sopt,c , c, aopt,c )
                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                         τ

                                                                                                (τ )                   (τ )
                                                                         X
                                                               +                     πθt (a|sopt,c , c) · ϕ(sopt,c , c, a)
                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                          (τ )
                                                                   a̸=aopt,c

                                 π
                                                       X                     (τ )    (τ )
                                                                                                                       X                  (τ )

           ≤    Rc (ξopt,c ) · Prc θt (ξopt,c ) ·                 (1 − πθt (aopt,c |sopt,c , c)) +                                πθt (a|sopt,c , c)       · ϕmax
                                                         τ                                                                 (τ )
                                                                                                                     a̸=aopt,c
                                                 π                                                     (τ )   (τ )
                                                                          X
           = 2 · ϕmax · Rc (ξopt,c ) · Prc θt (ξopt,c ) ·                         (1 − πθt (aopt,c |sopt,c , c)).
                                                                              τ
                                    π                             (τ )    (τ )
We lower and upper bound the term Prc θt (ξopt,c ) · τ (1 − πθt (aopt,c |sopt,c , c)) as follows:
                                                    P

                      π                            π
                 Prc θt (ξopt,c ) · (1 − Prc θt (ξopt,c ))
                                        ( −1                          )
                   π θt
                                    X τY              (τ ′ ) (τ ′ )                 (τ )    (τ )
               = Prc (ξopt,c ) ·              πθt (aopt,c |sopt,c , c) · (1 − πθt (aopt,c |sopt,c , c))
                                        τ       τ ′ =0
                     π                                            (τ )        (τ )
                                        X
               ≤   Prc θt (ξopt,c ) ·        (1 − πθt (aopt,c |sopt,c , c)),
                                        τ

and
                                                ( τ −1                                           )
                π                                                   (τ ′ ) (τ ′ )                                         (τ )      (τ )
                                            X     Y
         (1 − Prc θt (ξopt,c ))     =                         πθt (aopt,c |sopt,c , c)                 · (1 − πθt (aopt,c |sopt,c , c))
                                            τ      τ ′ =0
                                             (                                                  )
                                                                   (τ ′ ) (τ ′ )                                         (τ )     (τ )
                                            X Y
                                    ≥                        πθt (aopt,c |sopt,c , c)               · (1 − πθt (aopt,c |sopt,c , c))
                                            τ  τ
                                          π θt                     (τ )    (τ )
                                                      X
                                    =   Prc (ξopt,c )   (1 − πθt (aopt,c |sopt,c , c)),
                                                      τ
                                                                                                                     π
respectively. Further, by using the fact that V πθt (c) = Rc (ξopt,c ) · Prc θt (ξopt,c ) and V ∗ (c) =
Rc (ξopt,c ), we have:
                             π                                π                                V πθt (c)
         Rc (ξopt,c ) · Prc θt (ξopt,c ) · (1 − Prc θt (ξopt,c )) =                                      · (V ∗ (c) − V πθt (c)),
                                                                                                V ∗ (c)
and
                                                         π
                     Rc (ξopt,c ) · (1 − Prc θt (ξopt,c )) = (V ∗ (c) − V πθt (c)).
Finally, by combining these results, we have the following:
                                            ∥gt (c)∥1 ≤ 2 · ϕmax · U πθt (c),
where
                   V πθt (c)
                             · (V ∗ (c) − V πθt (c)) ≤ U πθt (c) ≤ (V ∗ (c) − V πθt (c)).
                    V ∗ (c)



D     E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION – A DDITIONAL D ETAILS
D.1     E NVIRONMENTS

Sparse Goal Reaching (SGR (Klink et al., 2022)). In this environment, the state consists of the
agent’s position, denoted as s = [x y]. The action corresponds to the agent’s displacement in a 2D
space, represented as a = [dx dy ]. The contextual variable c = [c1 c2 c3 ] ∈ C ⊆ R3 comprises
the following elements: C-GoalPositionX, C-GoalPositionY, and C-Tolerance. The bounds for each
contextual variable are [−9, 9] for C-GoalPositionX, [−9, 9] for C-GoalPositionY, and [0.05, 18] for
C-Tolerance. The reward in this environment is sparse, meaning the agent receives a reward of


                                                                         16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


1 only when it reaches the goal. An episode is considered successful if the distance between the
agent’s position and the goal is below the tolerance, i.e., ∥s − [c1 , c2 ]∥2 ≤ c3 . If the agent exceeds
the limit of 200 steps per episode before reaching the goal, the episode terminates with a reward of 0.
The presence of walls in the environment creates situations where certain combinations of contexts
[c1 c2 c3 ] are unsolvable by the agent, as it is unable to get close enough to the goal to satisfy the
tolerance condition. This suggests that a successful curriculum technique should also be able to
identify the feasible subspace of contexts to accelerate the training process. The target context
distribution consists of tasks that are uniformly distributed w.r.t. the contexts c1 (C-GoalPositionX)
and c2 (C-GoalPositionY). However, it is concentrated in the minimal C-Tolerance, where c3 is set
to 0.05. In other words, the target distribution comprises only high-precision tasks.
In this environment, we employ Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) with 5120 steps per policy
update and a batch size of 256. The MLP policy consists of a shared layer with 64 units, followed
by a second separate layer with 32 units for the policy network, and an additional 32 units for the
value network. All the remaining parameters of PPO adopt the default settings of Stable Base-
lines 3 (Schulman et al., 2017; Raffin et al., 2021). Furthermore, all the hyperparameters remain
consistent across all the curriculum strategies evaluated.
Point Mass Sparse (P OINT M ASS - S (Klink et al., 2020b)). In this environment, the state consists
of the position and velocity of the point-mass, denoted as s = [x ẋ y ẏ]. The action corresponds
to the force applied to the point-mass in a 2D space, represented as a = [Fx Fy ]. The contextual
variable c = [c1 c2 c3 ] ∈ C ⊆ R3 comprises the following elements: C-GatePosition, C-GateWidth,
and C-Friction. The bounds for each contextual variable are [−4, 4] for C-GatePosition, [0.5, 8] for
C-GateWidth, and [0, 4] for C-Friction. At the beginning of each episode, the agent’s initial state is
set to s0 = [0 0 3 0], and the objective is to approach the goal located at position g = [x y] = [0 − 3]
with sufficient proximity. If the agent collides with a wall or if the episode exceeds 100 steps,
the episode is terminated, and the agent receives a reward of 0. On the other hand, if the agent
reaches the goal within a predefined threshold, specifically when ∥g − [x y]∥2 < 0.30, the episode
is considered successful, and the agent receives a reward of 1. The target distribution µ is represented
by a bimodal Gaussian distribution, with the means of the contexts [C-GatePosition C-GateWidth]
set as [−3.9 0.5] and [3.9 0.5] for the two modes, respectively. This choice of target distribution
presents a challenging scenario, as it includes contexts where the gate’s position is in proximity to
the edges of the environment and the gate’s width is relatively small.
In this environment, we employ Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) with 5120 steps per policy
update. The batch size used for each update is set to 128, and an entropy coefficient of 0.01 is
applied. The MLP policy consists of a shared layer with 64 units, followed by a second separate
layer with 64 units for the policy network, and an additional 64 units for the value network. All
the remaining parameters of PPO adopt the default settings of Stable Baselines 3 (Schulman et al.,
2017; Raffin et al., 2021). Furthermore, all the hyperparameters remain consistent across all the
curriculum strategies evaluated.
Bipedal Walker Stump Tracks B IPEDALWALKER (Romac et al., 2021)). The experiment with
B IPEDALWALKER is based on the stump tracks environment with a classic bipedal walker embodi-
ment, as can be found in TeachMyAgent benchmark (Romac et al., 2021). The experimental setting
is considered a mostly trivial task space, and the curriculum technique (teacher component) has no
prior knowledge. Namely, in this setting, no reward mastery range, no prior knowledge concerning
the task space, i.e., regions containing trivial tasks, and no subspace of test tasks are given. The
learned policy that controls the walker agent with motor torque is trained with the Soft Actor Critic
(SAC) algorithm for 20 million steps.

D.2   C URRICULUM S TRATEGIES E VALUATED

Variants of our curriculum strategy. Below, we report the hyperparameters and implementation
details of the variants of our curriculum strategies used in the experiments (for each environment):

      1. For both P ROX C O RL and P ROX C O RL- UN:
          (a) β parameter controls the softmax selection’s stochasticity: we set β = 50 for the
              SGR and the B IPEDALWALKER environment, and β = 70 for P OINT M ASS - S :2G
              and P OINT M ASS - S :1T.


                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         (b) Vmax normalization parameter: we set Vmax = 1 for all environments. Since B IPEDAL -
             WALKER is a dense reward environment, the reward is scaled with the upper and lower
             bound rewards as provided by Romac et al. (2021).
         (c) Npos parameter that controls the frequency at which V t (·) is updated: we set Npos =
             5120 for SGR, P OINT M ASS - S :2G and P OINT M ASS - S :1T environments, which is
             equivalent to the PPO update frequency. For B IPEDALWALKER, the frequency of
             updates is after each episode.

State-of-the-art baselines. Below, we report the hyperparameters and implementation details of the
state-of-the-art curriculum strategies used in the experiments (for each environment):

     1. For SPDL (Klink et al., 2020b):
         (a) VLB performance threshold: we set VLB = 0.5 for SGR, P OINT M ASS - S :2G, and
              P OINT M ASS - S :1T environment.
         (b) Npos parameter that controls the frequency of performing the optimization step to up-
              date the distribution for selecting tasks: we set Npos = 5120 for SGR, P OINT M ASS -
              S :2G, and P OINT M ASS - S :1T environment.
         (c) For B IPEDALWALKER, we perform the experiments provided in Romac et al. (2021)
              for the Self-Paced teacher, which is equivalent to SPDL technique.
     2. For CURROT (Klink et al., 2022):
         (a) VLB performance threshold: we set VLB = 0.4 for SGR, VLB = 0.6 for P OINT M ASS -
              S :2G and P OINT M ASS - S :1T, and VLB = 180 for B IPEDALWALKER .
         (b) ϵ distance threshold between subsequent distributions: we set ϵ = 1.5 for SGR,
              ϵ = 0.05 for P OINT M ASS - S :2G and P OINT M ASS - S :1T, and ϵ = 0.5 for B IPEDAL -
              WALKER.
         (c) We choose the best-performing pair (VLB , ϵ) for each environment from the set
              {0.4, 0.5, 0.6} × {0.05, 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0}. For B IPEDALWALKER, we use the hyper-
              parameters provided in Klink et al. (2022).
         (d) Npos parameter that controls the frequency of performing the optimization step to
              update the distribution for selecting tasks: we set Npos = 5120 for all environments.
         (e) The implementation in this paper incorporates all the original components of the strat-
              egy, including the update of the success buffer, the computation of the updated context
              distribution, and the utilization of a Gaussian mixture model to search for contexts that
              meet the performance threshold.
          (f) At the beginning of the training process, the initial contexts are uniformly sampled
              from the context space C, following the same approach utilized in all other techniques.
     3. For PLR (Jiang et al., 2021b):
         (a) ρ staleness coefficient: we set ρ = 0.5 for the SGR, P OINT M ASS - S :2G and
              P OINT M ASS - S :1T environment.
         (b) βPLR temperature parameter for score prioritization: we set βPLR = 0.1 for all the
              environments.
         (c) Npos parameter that controls the frequency at which V t (·) is updated: we set Npos =
              5120 for all the environments.
         (d) The technique has been adapted to operate with a pool of tasks. By employing a
              binomial decision parameter d, a new, unseen task is randomly selected from the task
              pool and added to the set of previously seen tasks. The seen tasks are prioritized and
              chosen based on their learning potential upon revisiting, aligning with the approach
              utilized in the original strategy. As more unseen tasks are sampled from the pool, the
              binomial decision parameter d is gradually annealed until all tasks are seen. Once
              this occurs, only the seen tasks are sampled from the replay distribution, taking into
              account their learning potential.
     4. For G RADIENT (Huang et al., 2022):
         (a) Number of stages Nstage : we set 5 stages for SGR, and 10 stages for P OINT M ASS -
              S :2G, P OINT M ASS - S :1T, and B IPEDALWALKER . We selected the number of stages
              based on the original paper experiments and a value search in the set {3, 5, 7, 10}.


                                                 18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         (b) Maximum number of steps per stage: we select 100000 steps as the maximum number
             of training steps before switching to the next stage.
         (c) ∆αGRADIENT per stage: we set ∆α = 0.2 for SGR, and ∆α = 0.1 for B IPEDAL -
             WALKER. For P OINT M ASS - S :2G and P OINT M ASS - S :1T, we choose the next α
             based on α(i) = Nstage  1
                                       −i . These selections are based on the experimental section
             and the provided implementation from Huang et al. (2022).
         (d) Reward threshold per stage is set to 0.8 for all the experiments. If the policy achieves
             this threshold, it switches to the next stage before reaching the maximum number of
             steps.

Our curriculum strategy only requires forward-pass operation on the critic-model to obtain value
estimates for a subset of tasks c and ctarg in C, followed by an arg max operation over this subset.
We note that the computational overhead of our curriculum strategy is minimal compared to the
baselines. In particular, SPDL and CURROT require the same forward-pass operations and perform
an additional optimization step to obtain the next task distribution. CURROT relies on solving an
Optimal Transport problem requiring a high computational cost. Even when reducing the Optimal
Transport problem to a linear assignment problem, as done in practice, the complexity is O(n3 ). As
for PLR, it has an additional computational overhead for scoring the sampled tasks.


                                                19
