Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E XPLAINING E MERGENT I N -C ONTEXT L EARNING AS
K ERNEL R EGRESSION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         Large language models (LLMs) have initiated a paradigm shift in transfer learning.
         In contrast to the classic pretraining-then-finetuning procedure, in order to use
         LLMs for downstream prediction tasks, one only needs to provide a few demon-
         strations, known as in-context examples, without adding more or updating existing
         model parameters. This in-context learning (ICL) capability of LLMs is intriguing,
         and it is not yet fully understood how pretrained LLMs acquire such capabilities.
         In this paper, we investigate the reason why a transformer-based language model
         can accomplish in-context learning after pre-training on a general language corpus
         by proposing a kernel-regression perspective of undertanding LLMs’ ICL bahav-
         iors when faced with in-context examples. More concretely, we first prove that
         Bayesian inference onP    in-context prompts
                                                   P can be asymptotically understood as
         kernel regression ŷ = i yi K(x, xi )/ i K(x, xi ) as the number of in-context
         demonstrations grows. Then, we empirically investigate the in-context behaviors
         of language models. We find that during ICL, the attention and hidden features
         in LLMs match the behaviors of a kernel regression. Finally, our theory provides
         insights into multiple phenomena observed in the ICL field: why retrieving demon-
         strative samples similar to test samples can help, why ICL performance is sensitive
         to the output formats, and why ICL accuracy benefits from selecting in-distribution
         and representative samples.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Pre-trained large language models (LLMs) have emerged as powerful tools in the field of natural lan-
guage processing, demonstrating remarkable performance across a broad range of applications (Wei
et al., 2022a; Kojima et al., 2023; Wei et al., 2022b; Brown et al., 2020; Li et al., 2023). They have
been used to tackle diverse tasks such as text summarization, sentiment analysis, schema induction
and translation, among others (Brown et al., 2020; Radford et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023). One of the
most fascinating capabilities of LLMs is their ability to perform in-context learning (ICL), a process
in which a language model can make predictions on a test sample based on a few demonstrative
examples provided in the input context (Logan IV et al., 2022). This feature makes LLMs particularly
versatile and adaptive to different tasks. Studies have found ICL to emerge especially when the size
of LLM is large enough and pre-trained over a massive corpus (Wei et al., 2023).
Although intuitive for human learners, ICL poses a mystery for optimization theories because of
the significant format shift between ICL prompts and pre-training corpus. There have been lots
of efforts to provide a theoretical understanding of how LLMs implement ICL. Some work (Xie
et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023) approaches this problem from a data perspective: they claim that
ICL is possible if a model masters Bayesian inference on pre-training distribution. However, they
fail to explain how such inference is feasibly implemented in practical language models, nor does
their theory provide insights into ICL behaviors. Another stream of work conjectures that under
a simple linear setting: [x, y] where y = w> x and the input sequence x only has length 1, they
can construct a Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) to implement gradient descent (GD) algorithm
over ICL prompt (Akyürek et al., 2023; von Oswald et al., 2022; Garg et al., 2023). However, this
constrained setting diverges from the most interesting part of ICL, as state-of-the-art LLMs work
with linguistic tasks where the sequential textual inputs have complex semantic structures, and ICL
emerges from pre-training on general-purpose corpus instead of explicit ICL training.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                    x                                                 y
demonstrative Input: moving and important.                                                    Output: Positive.
samples       Input: excruciatingly unfunny and pitifully unromantic.                         Output: Negative.
                  Input: the plot is nothing but boilerplate clichés from start to nish.      Output: Negative.
                  …
test input        Input: intelligent and moving                                               Output: ________

                                                                          ∑i K(xi, xtest)yi
                                                                                                 70%: “Positive”
                           K(xi, xtest)                            ŷ =
                      (similarity kernel)                    ∑i K(xi, xtest)
                                                              fi


 Figure 1: Our results suggests that LLMs might be conducting kernel regression on ICL prompts.

In this work, we delve deeper into the question of how to understand the mechanism that enables
Transformer-based pre-trained LLMs to accomplish in-context learning on sequential data. We
specifically explore the hypothesis that LLMs employ a kernel regression algorithm when confronted
with in-context prompts. Kernel regression adopts a non-parametric form
                                              P
                                                  yi K(x, xi )
                                          ŷ = Pi                                              (1)
                                                  i K(x, xi )

when making predictions, where K(x, xi ) is a kernel that measures the similarity between inputs x
and xi . In plain words, it estimates the output ŷ on x by drawing information from similar other data
points xi and taking a weighted sum on their yi .
We first provide a theoretical analysis demonstrating that Bayesian inference predictions on in-context
prompts converge to a kernel regression in Section 4. In Section 4.2, our results also shed light on
numerous phenomena observed in previous empirical studies, such as the advantage of retrieving
in-context examples that are similar to the test sample, the sensitivity of ICL performance to the
output formats, and why using a group of in-distribution and representative samples improves ICL
accuracy.
Following our theoretical investigation, in Section 5 we conduct empirical studies to verify our
explanation of in-context learning of LLMs in more detail. Our results reveal that during LLM ICL,
the attention map used by the last token to predict the next token is allocated in accordance with
our explanation. By plugging attention values into our equation, we are also able to reconstruct the
model’s output with over 80% accuracy. Moreover, we are able to reveal how information necessary
to kernel regression is computed in intermediate LLM layers. In conclusion, we make the following
contributions to this work:

       • We provide a kernel-regression perspective of understanding how LLMs tackle the ICL
         problem.
       • We conduct empirical analysis to verify that the LLM’s attention maps and hidden features
         match our understanding.
       • Out theory provides insights and heuristics to multiple phenomena observed in ICL practice
         by previous studies and also sheds light on new findings, such as the effect of OOD inputs.


2     R ELATED W ORK
2.1   I N -C ONTEXT L EARNING

As an intriguing property of large language models, in-context learning has attracted high attention
in the research community. There have been numerous studies on empirical analysis of in-context
learning, including format and effects of in-context samples (Min et al., 2022b;a; Zhao et al., 2021),
selection of in-context samples (Liu et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2022), characteristics of in-context learning
behaviors (Zhao et al., 2021; Lu et al., 2022; Khashabi et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2023), and the relation
between ICL and pre-training dataset (Wu et al., 2022; Chan et al., 2022).
Going deeper, researchers have also been interested in building a theoretical understanding of why
ICL works. One branch of studies investigates ICL from a data perspective: (Xie, 2021; Wang


                                                        2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


et al., 2023) demonstrate that a good enough Bayesian inference on pre-training data might cause
the emergence of ICL ability. However, they fail to explain if such Bayesian inference is computa-
tionally feasible in practical language models, as such Bayesian inference involves unbounded depth
computational graphs as the number of samples increases. Our study builds on top of some similar
assumptions but goes further to explain how ICL can be accomplished with attention-mechanism in
Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017).
Another angle of explanation is analyzing what algorithms might be implemented in LLMs for ICL,
which is closely related to our study. Representative studies include (Akyürek et al., 2023; Garg
et al., 2023; von Oswald et al., 2022; Dai et al., 2022), with the majority of them proposing gradient
descent (GD) algorithm as a promising candidate answer. However, attempts in explicit construction
of GD algorithm in Transformers (Akyürek et al., 2023; von Oswald et al., 2022) mostly assume an
oversimplified setting of linear tasks with input length equal to 1, and evaluate Transformers after
training on a synthetic dataset (including (Akyürek et al., 2023; Garg et al., 2023)). This is different
from ICL’s main advantage as an emergent ability on language pre-training, and LLMs are able to
work on textual data which involves more complex syntactic and semantic structures.

2.2   E MERGENT A BILITY OF LLM S

This is a larger topic that in-context learning is also highly related to. (Wei et al., 2022a; Brown et al.,
2020; Kojima et al., 2023; Wei et al., 2022b) showed that abilities including reasoning, in-context
learning, few-shot learning, instruction understanding, and multilingualism emerge in large language
models after pre-training on massive language data. These impressive and mysterious capacities have
boosted significant progress in natural language processing as well as artificial intelligence, but still
baffle theoretical analysis. In this work, we make a preliminary step towards understanding ICL as a
special case of LM capacity emergence.

2.3   A SSOCIATING ATTENTION WITH K ERNEL R EGRESSION

Chen & Li (2023) presents a related view of associating self-attention with kernel ridge regressions.
They focus on a different problem and propose to substitute attention mechanisms with a kernel to
tackle the uncertainty calibration problem. Another blog, Olsson et al. (2022), also relates attention
to kernel regression but actually defines ICL as “decreasing loss at increasing token indices”, rather
than the more widely-adopted definition of learning from in-context demonstrations as in ours.


3     F ORMULATION

3.1   P RELIMINARIES : H IDDEN M ARKOV M ODELS

Following the setting of (Xie et al., 2022), we assume that the pre-training corpus can be modeled
by a mixture of HMMs. Each HMM corresponds to a certain task θ ∈ Θ. Assuming a large finite
number of tasks, one can include all task-specific HMMs into one single HMM. In this unified
HMM, let S be the set of states, and O be the set of observations where |O| = m. At each time
step, state st randomly emits one observation ot and then transits to the next state st+1 . ppre-train ,
P (st+1 = s0 |st = s) and P (ot = o|st = s) denote the pre-training initial distribution, transition
distribution and emission distribution respectively. Under an arbitrary ordering of S and O, we can
define the transition matrix T : T (s, s0 ) = P (s0 |s), and emission matrix B : B(s, o) = P (o|s),
respectively. We also let o = (o0 , · · · ) be the full observation sequence, and o[0:l] denote its first l
tokens.

3.2   I N -C ONTEXT L EARNING

In this work, we consider the following formulation of in-context learning (ICL). Let Θ be the set of
tasks. The distribution of sequences generated by each individual task in the HMM together composes
the pre-training distribution. Specifically, each task θ ∈ Θ is associated with a distinct initial state
sθ ∈ S with transition rate lower bound  d , and the set of all such initial states Sstart = {sθ |θ ∈ Θ}
forms the support of ppre-train .


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Following the ICL prompt formulation in (Xie et al., 2022), for a test task θ? , the in-context learning
prompt follows the format:

                   [Sn , xtest ] = [x1 , y1 , odelim , x2 , y2 , odelim , · · · , xn , yn , odelim , xtest ],        (2)
                                                                                                              ? delim
where the input-output pairs [xi , yi ] are i.i.d. demonstrate samples sampled from θ , and o                         is
the delimiter token with emission rate lower bound  r . We further make some connections between
in-context learning and the HMM model. Note that the probability of generating a sequence from the
initial distribution p0 can be expressed as follows(Jaeger, 2000):
                                                        l−1
                                                                               !
                                                        Y
                                                  >
                            P (o[0:l] |p0 ) = vp0            diag(poi )T diag(pol )1,                                (3)
                                                       i=0

where po is vector of emission probabilities P (o|s ∈ S) for o. We denote the intermediate matrices
                           Ql−1
as one operator To[0:l−1] = i=0 diag(poi )T . We use a matrix Σp,l to denote the covariance between
all of its d2 elements of vec(To[0:l−1] ) when o[0:l−1] is generated from initial distribution p. For
each individual task, we also have  θ = inf l ρ(Σ−1                 −1
                                                   ppre-train ,l − Σsθ ,l ) to quantify the difference between
sequences generated by sθ and those from pre-training distribution, where ρ denotes the spectral
radius of a matrix. Let η = supo[0:l−1] kTo[0:l] kF be the upper bound of To[0:l] ’s Frobenius-norm.

3.3    A SSUMPTIONS

We go on and present the assumptions we borrow from Xie et al. (2022).
Assumption 1. (Delimiter Tokens) The delimiter token indicates the start of sampling of new
sequences:
                             P (st+1 = s | odelim ) > 0 → s ∈ Sstart

Remark: this means that the delimiter tokens are indicative enough, such as the start of a new line
before the beginning of a paragraph.
Assumption 2. (Task Distinguishability) The Kullback–Leibler divergence (KL divergence) between
the first l tokens between two distinct tasks θ 6= θ0 is lower-bounded by:
                                                                             1
                        inf DKL P (o[0:l] |θ0 ) k P (o[0:l] |θ) =  KL > ln

                                                                                 .
                        θ,θ 0                                               r  d

Remark: this requires that tasks are distinguishable from each other. As KL-divergence is non-
decreasing with length l, it suffices to increase the length l to provide sufficient task information.

4     T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS
4.1    E XPLAINING ICL AS K ERNEL R EGRESSION

Within the framework presented in Section 3, we pose the following result. The basic idea is that,
as the number of samples n increases, inference on the in-context learning prompt converges to a
kernel-regression form.
Theorem 1. Let us denote a kernel
                                    K(x, x0 ) = vec(Tx )> Σ−1
                                                           ppre-train , vec(Tx0 ).                                  (4)
Let e(y) be the one-hot vector for index y. Then the difference between the following logit vector in
the form of kernel regression:             Pn
                                                    e(y )K(xtest , xi )
                                     ŷ = i=1   Pn i                                              (5)
                                                   i=1 K(xtest , xi )
and the Bayesian posterior converges polynomially with probability 1 − δ:
                                                                       r        !
                                                         2               1 4m
                       kŷ − P (y | [Sn , xtest ])k∞ = η  θ + O            ln                     (6)
                                                                         n    δ


                                                             4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Equation 5 can be interpreted as follows: it calculates the semantic similarity between the test input
xtest and each sample xi and aggregates their outputs to compute a most likely prediction for the
test sample. This is natural to the motivation of ICL: we encourage the LLM to leverage the pattern
provided in demonstrative samples and mimic the pattern to predict the test input. Equation 5 is also
similar to the form of attention mechanism used in Transformer decoder models:
                                                               vi ehq,ki i
                                                           P
                                              >      >
                               h = softmax(q K)V = Pi hq,k i                                       (7)
                                                              ie
                                                                      i



where q is the query vector corresponding to the last token, k, K are the key vectors and matrix,
and v, V are the value vectors and matrix used in the Transformer, respectively. The only difference
is that e<q,ki > is replaced with a dot product in Equation 5, which can be regarded as a kernel
trick. We assume that previously hidden layers are responsible for learning the semantic vectors of
sample inputs vec(Tx ). We can then make the following loose analogy between our kernel regression
explanation (Equation 5) and the attention mechanism (Equation 7):

       • Label information e(yi ) corresponds with the value vector vi
       • The similarity kernel vec(Tx )> Σ−1
                                          ppre-train , vec(Tx0 ) loosely corresponds to the attention value
           hq,ki i
         e         , where:
       • the semantic information vec(Txi ) corresponds to the key vectors ki and query vectors qi
         for samples [x, y].

Here we further explain how the kernel is effected by the LLM. Equation 5 measures similarity
between x and x0 on the space of vec(Tx ) and vec(Tx0 ). This flattened vector of Tx defines the
“belief state” in HMMs, which determines the conditional probability P (·|x) after prefix x. This is
the pre-training objective functionality of LLMs. Therefore, if xi and xtest have similar follow-up
conditional probabilities under the LLM, their similarity value will be larger, and vice versa.
One might argue that it is also theoretically possible to directly infer the next token in matrix form
p>pre-train T[Sn ,xtest ] . However, this form involves 2n consecutive matrix multiplications. When n
increases, this is infeasible for a practical Transformer architecture which is composed of a fixed
number of layers. In comparison, Equation 5 only requires semantic information for each sample x
to be provided beforehand, and then applies kernel regression (which can be done by one attention
layer) to get the answer. Learning to represent Tx is probable for preceding layers, as it is also used
for ordinary inference P (y | x) = p>       pre-train Tx . In experiments in Section 5 we demonstrate that this
analogy can explain the ICL behaviors of LLMs to an extent.

4.2   I NSIGHTS P ROVIDED BY THE E XPLANATION

Theorem 1 can provide insights into multiple phenomena in the ICL field observed by previous studies.
This is helpful for understanding and predicting the behaviors of ICL, and providing heuristics for
future development.
Retrieving Similar Samples It is empirically observed (Rubin et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022) that
retrieving demonstrative samples xi that is similar to the test input xtest can benefit ICL performance.
This phenomenon is understandable from our explanation. Encouraging the selection of similar
samples can be understood as limiting the cosine distance between demonstrative samples xi and
test sample xtest in sentence embedding space. This is similar to selecting a smaller “bandwidth” in
kernel regression and sampling only from a local window, which reduces the bias in kernel regression.
Therefore, devising better retrieval techniques for selecting samples, especially those with similar
representations as LLMs, is a promising direction for further boosting ICL scores.
Sensitivity to Label Format (Min et al., 2022b) also observes that the ICL performance relies on
the label format. Replacing the label set with another random set will reduce the performance of
ordinary auto-regressive LLMs. This can be explained in our theory that the model’s output comes
from a weighted voting of demonstrative sample labels {yi }. If the label space is changed, the next
token will also be misled to a different output space. So it is generally beneficial for ICL to ensure
the demonstrative samples and test samples share an aligned label space and output format.



                                                      5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                          head 1
layer 1                                                                                                   head 2
layer 2                                                                                                   head 3
layer 3                                                                                                   head 4
layer 4                                                                                                   head 5
layer 5                                                                                                   head 6
layer 6                                                                                                   …
layer 7                                                                                                   head 16
layer 8
layer 9
layer 10
layer 11
layer 12
layer 13
layer 14
layer 15
layer 16
layer 17
layer 18
layer 19
layer 20
layer 21
layer 22
layer 23
layer 24
layer 25
layer 26
layer 27
layer 28
           x1     y1   x2    y2   x3    y3   x4     y4   x5       y5   x6    y6       xn     yn   xtest
                                                                                  …
           sample 1    sample 2   sample 3   sample 4    sample 5      sample 6       sample n

Figure 2: Averaged attention map over GLUE-sst2 test set. A portion of attention on demonstrative
samples is generally focused on label positions yi . This conforms to the intuition in Theorem 1 that
the inference on in-context learning prompts is a weighted average over sample labels.

Table 1: Effect of OOD inputs on ICL on SST2 dataset.        Sample Selection In Equation 6, the
                                                             existence of the η 2  θ term implies that
   OOD-type None rare word complex typo                      the demonstrations [xi , yi ] should be
                                                             sampled in a way close to ppre-train . To
   accuracy      0.805     0.677        0.788      0.534     verify this, we conduct an experiment
                                                             by converting test inputs to semantically
similar but rarer sentences. Specifically, on the SST2 dataset, we prompt GPT-3.5-turbo to generate
semantically similar while rarer (i.e. OOD) expressions of inputs and use them to substitute the
original dataset inputs. We consider three types of OOD types. “Rare word“ is where words are
substituted with rare synonyms. “Complex“ is to express the original sentence in a more complex
structure. “Typo“ is where we require adding typos to the original input. The results are listed below.
We see that compared with original scores (“None“ ), these OOD types more or less decrease the ICL
accuracy, with “typo“ having the largest effect, dropping the accuracy to near random.

Bias from Pre-training Data Theorem 1 implies that the final prediction depends both on in-
context examples and prior knowledge from pre-training. This can be seen from the η 2  θ term in
Equation 6, which comes from the pre-training information in Equation 16 in Appendix A. Specifically,
this term describes how the pre-training distribution’s bias affects the ICL prediction. This partially
elucidates Kossen et al. (2023)’s finding that “ICL cannot overcome prediction preferences from
pre-training.”

Remaining Challenges However, we need to point out that there are still phenomena not explain-
able by our framework, as well as most previous explanations. One most mysterious one is the
sensitivity to sample ordering (Lu et al., 2022) as a kernel regression should be order-ignorant, which
no existing explanations (including (Xie et al., 2022; Akyürek et al., 2023)) take into account. An-
other intriguing question is that some work finds LLMs robust to perturbed or random labels(Kossen
et al., 2023) while others find the opposite (Min et al., 2022b). We attribute such phenomena to the
fact that LLMs also rely on a large portion of implicit reasoning in text generation and might benefit


                                                              6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                               Head Index
Head Index


                                                                                  Layer Index

                               Layer Index
                                                               (b) Accuracy compared with ground truth label
             (a) Accuracy compared with model output ŷ.       ytest .
Figure 3: We use each head’s attention weights on demonstrative samples to manually average sample
labels yi . These figures show that “reconstructed” outputs in some heads from layers 16∼21 matches
LLM prediction with as high as 89.2% accuracy, and matches ground truth with 86.4% accuracy.

from linguistic cues in text prompts. Our theory provides a partial explanation, which needs to be
combined with this implicit ability of LLMs to form a more comprehensive understanding of ICL.



5              E MPIRICAL A NALYSIS

In this section, we conduct empirical analysis on LLMs in order to verify our hypothesis. Because
Equation 5 is only one special solution among infinitely many of its equivalent forms, and it also
relies on the unknown HMM structure, it is infeasible to directly evaluate it on data. However, we
can verify if it can predict observable behaviors on LLMs in experiments. Limited by computation
resources in an academic lab, we analyze the GPT-J 6B model(Wang & Komatsuzaki, 2021) on one
Tesla V100. It employs a decoder-only Transformer architecture. In this section, we use the validation
set of the sst2 dataset as a case study, while results on more tasks can be found in Appendix B.
We investigate the ICL behavior of LLMs from shallow to deep levels, and sequentially ask the
following 4 questions: Do the attention heads collect label information e(yi ) as predicted? Does the
attention-kernel analogy explain LLM’s prediction? Can we actually explain the attention values as
a kind of similarity? Can we find where algorithmic features e(yi ), Txi are stored? The following
sections answer these questions one by one.


5.1              W HERE A RE ATTENTIONS D ISTRIBUTED D URING ICL?

First, we notice that Equation 2 implies that the LLM takes a weighted average over sample labels yi
in ICL. Figure 2 shows how attention weights are distributed on in-context learning inputs [Sn , xtest ].
On each test point, we sample one ICL prompt and collect the attention map over previous tokens for
predicting the next token. After getting the attention maps, as ICL samples xi may have varied lengths,
we re-scale the attentions on each x from |x| to a fixed 30-token length with linear interpolation.
After aligning the attention lengths, we average all attention maps. The horizontal axis is the aligned
positions on prompt [Sn , xtest ]. Each bar corresponds to one of 28 Transformer layers. Within each
bar, each thin line is 1 out of 16 attention heads. Darker (blue) areas mean smaller averaged attention,
while brighter areas indicate high attention.
In Figure 2, there are three major locations of attention masses. First, a majority of attention is
focused on the final few tokens in xtest , especially in the first 3 layers. This accords with previous
observations that Transformer attentions tend to locate in a local window to construct local semantic
feature for xtest . Secondly, as also observed in previous studies, LLMs tend to allocate much attention
on the first few tokens in a sequence to collect starter information. Finally and most intriguingly,
we observe concentrated attention on each sample label tokens {yi }. This phenomenon confirms an
aggregation of label information in LLM ICL, in line with the prediction by Equation 5. Note that our
explanation does not specify or limit the model from implementing kernel regression in a particular
layer. In fact, an equivalent mechanism can occur in one or more layers as long as these (possibly
redundant) results can be passed with skip connections to the final layer and aggregated.


                                                           7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5.2   C AN ATTENTIONS B E I NTERPRETED AS K ERNEL F UNCTIONS ?

Now that we observe expected locations of attention weights on labels, we go on to verify if the LLM
really predicts by averaging on labels as suggested by Theorem 1. We iterate over 16 heads and 28
layers, and insert their attention weights into Equation 5 to manually average the label distribution.
This is similar in concept to a mind-reading experiment to predict one’s next word using brain waves
only (Wang & Ji, 2022). Specifically, for each attention head, we use the maximal attention value
ai within the range of [xi , yi ] as the kernel weight. Then on the ICL samples, we reconstruct the
prediction as follows:                               Pn
                                                            e(y )a
                                       ỹ = arg max i=1 Pn i i
                                                           i=1 ai
The resulting “reconstructed output” ỹ is compared for both LLM’s actual prediction ŷ and ground
truth label ytest to calculate its accuracy. Figure 3a and 3b plot the accuracy between ỹ and ŷ and
between ỹ and ytest respectively. Interestingly, we spot the existence of several heads in layers 18∼21
which demonstrate high accuracy in reconstruction. The highest of them (layer 17, head 10) achieves
89.2% accuracy on ŷ and 86.4% accuracy on ytest . This result validates our hypothesis that some
components in Transformer-based LLMs implement kernel regression. Note that this phenomenon
happens within a few adjacent layers in the middle of the model. This is similar to our prediction
in Section 4.1: not many attention layers are needed for kernel regression, as long as the required
features have been computed by preceding layers. It is enough for the higher layers to only pass on
the computed results.

5.3   W HICH S AMPLES R ECEIVE H IGH ATTENTION ?

                                                         We go on and ask the question: if the LLMs
                                                         use attention to implement kernel regression,
                                                         what kind of similarity does this kernel func-
                                                         tion evaluate? From Equation 5, we see that
                                                         the dot product is measuring similarity between
                                                         Tx , which encodes information necessary for
                                                         HMM inference: p(o|x) = p>    pre-train Tx B. There-
                                                         fore, we conjecture that the attention value ai
                                                         between xtest and xi correlates with their pre-
                                                         diction similarity. Specifically, we define the
Figure 4: Pearson correlation between sample’s at- prediction similarity as follows:
tentions and prediction similarity simpred (xtest , xi )        sim(x1 , x2 ) = P (o|x1 )> P (o|x2 ), (8)
(Equation 8). x-axis are layers and y-axis are heads
in each layer. Note the resemblence between this which is measured by applying LLMs on these
heatmap and Figure 3.                                    texts alone, rather than in ICL prompt. Finally,
                                                         we compute the Pearson correlation coefficient
between sim(xtes , xi ) and each attention values on samples for each attention head. The results are
shown in Figure 4. The absolute value of correlation is not high, as P (o|x) is a dimension reduction
to Tx and can lose and mix information. However, we can still note a striking similarity between
it and Figure 3. This means that the heads responsible for ICL mostly attend to prediction-similar
samples.

5.4   D O I NTERMEDIATE F EATURES S TORE I NFORMATION U SEFUL FOR K ERNEL R EGRESSION ?

In this section, we go into a more detailed level, and investigate the question: where do Transformer-
based LMs store the algorithmic information needed by kernel regression? To this end, we take out
the intermediate key and value features in all layer heads and see if the correct information is stored
in the correct locations. Note in Section 5.1, we observe that a major part of attention weights are
located at the label position, so we focus on positions within [−1, 3] relative to this position. Noticing
the analogy we made at Section 4.1 that ki ∼ vec(Txj ) and vj ∼ yj , we study two sub-questions:
(1) whether value vectors encode label information yi ; and (2) whether key vectors encode LLM
prediction information P (o|xi ). For each head, we conduct Ridge regression with λ = 0.01 to fit
the task in these 2 questions. Results are presented in Figure 5. We can observe that, generally the
high-attention position (y-axis = 0) indeed achieves the best accuracy. Figure 5b is intuitive, as tokens


                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Accuracy                                                             Accuracy


                                                                                                                                        on
                                                                                                                                     iti
                                                                                                                                os
                                                        ion                                                                   eP
                                                  Posit                                                                   tiv
                Layer Number                 tive                                                                    la
                                        Rela                                            Layer Number               Re

(a) Predicting arg maxo P (o|xi ) with key vectors.                             (b) Predicting yi with value vectors.
Figure 5: Key and value vectors encode label and LLM prediction information at high-attention
position. Here y-axis denotes the relative position to the high-attention position in each sample. Each
sphere is an attention head. The curve shows average accuracy within each layer.
    Table 2: Performance of explicit kernel regression (KR) and LLM ICL on downstream tasks.
                                                               rotten-          tweet_eval      tweet_eval     tweet_eval
 Method                                sst2          mnli
                                                              tomatoes            (hate)          (irony)      (offensive)
 GPT-J-6B ICL                         0.805         0.383         0.671            0.539               0.519     0.542
 ICL output reconstruction            0.797         0.597         0.683            0.713               0.722     0.753
 Reconstructed performance            0.750         0.360         0.527            0.587               0.522     0.513
 all-MiniLM-L6-v2                     0.503         0.321         0.478            0.548               0.491     0.588
 bert-base-nli-mean-tokens KR         0.523         0.325         0.502            0.545               0.479     0.597

at a position later than the label token yi can easily access the information of yi by self-attention. The
slight drop at position +3 means that a longer distance introduces more noise to this information flow.
Results in Figure 5a tell us that, although sentence xi ’s starting position in ICL prompt is shifted and
different from 0, ki is still strongly correlated with P (o|xi ), which indicates a sense of translation
invariance. Overall, the results mean that, with the attention map distributed in Figure 2, LLM is
able to use the attention mechanism to extract information regarding Txi and yi from key and value
vectors effectively just as we described.

5.5        H OW W ELL C AN O UR E XPLANATION R ECONSTRUCT ICL P REDICTION ?

Finally, we numerically evaluate our explanation on its ability to reconstruct the ICL predictions and
tasks. We uniformly use 700 data in each validation set to represent tasks in a balanced way. We
select the attention head that has the highest correlation with model predictions. This head is then
evaluated on ICL prediction reconstruction and task performance on a held-out set of 300 data per
task. In Table 2 we see that the ICL output reconstruction has an accuracy from 68% to 80% except
for the harder task of MNLI. The task performance of reconstructed outputs matches the model’s
performance level. It also achieves similar or superior performance than kernel regression on sentence
encoders such as all-MiniLM-L6-v2 and bert-base-nli-mean-tokens (Reimers & Gurevych, 2019).

6     C ONCLUSIONS AND F UTURE W ORK

In conclusion, our work provides a novel theoretical view to understand the intriguing in-context
learning (ICL) capabilities of Transformer-based large language models (LLMs). We propose that
LLMs ICL can be understood as kernel regression. Our empirical investigations into the in-context
behaviors of LLMs reveal that the model’s attention and hidden features during ICL are congruent
with the behaviors of kernel regression. Furthermore, our theory also explains several observable
phenomena in the field of ICL: why the retrieval of demonstrations similar to the test sample can
enhance performance, the sensitivity of ICL to output formats, and the benefit from selecting in-
distribution and representative samples. There are still remaining challenges in this topic, such as
understanding the effect of sample orderings and the robustness to perturbed labels. These questions,
along with understanding other perspectives of LLMs, are exciting questions for future research.


                                                              9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Ekin Akyürek, Dale Schuurmans, Jacob Andreas, Tengyu Ma, and Denny Zhou. What learning
  algorithm is in-context learning? investigations with linear models. In The Eleventh International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=0g0X4H8yN4I.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Stephanie Chan, Adam Santoro, Andrew Lampinen, Jane Wang, Aaditya Singh, Pierre Richemond,
  James McClelland, and Felix Hill. Data distributional properties drive emergent in-context learning
  in transformers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:18878–18891, 2022.
Wenlong Chen and Yingzhen Li. Calibrating transformers via sparse gaussian processes. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2303.02444, 2023.
Damai Dai, Yutao Sun, Li Dong, Yaru Hao, Shuming Ma, Zhifang Sui, and Furu Wei. Why can gpt
  learn in-context? language models implicitly perform gradient descent as meta-optimizers. In
  ICLR 2023 Workshop on Mathematical and Empirical Understanding of Foundation Models, 2022.
Shivam Garg, Dimitris Tsipras, Percy Liang, and Gregory Valiant. What can transformers learn
  in-context? a case study of simple function classes. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2023.
Herbert Jaeger. Observable operator models for discrete stochastic time series. Neural computation,
 12(6):1371–1398, 2000.
Daniel Khashabi, Chitta Baral, Yejin Choi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Reframing instructional prompts
  to gptk’s language. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2022, pp.
  589–612, 2022.
Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large
  language models are zero-shot reasoners. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2023.
Jannik Kossen, Tom Rainforth, and Yarin Gal. In-context learning in large language models learns
  label relationships but is not conventional learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.12375, 2023.
Sha Li, Ruining Zhao, Manling Li, Heng Ji, Chris Callison-Burch, and Jiawei Han. Open-domain
  hierarchical event schema induction by incremental prompting and verification. In Proc. The 61st
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL2023), 2023.
Jiachang Liu, Dinghan Shen, Yizhe Zhang, William B Dolan, Lawrence Carin, and Weizhu Chen.
   What makes good in-context examples for gpt-3? In Proceedings of Deep Learning Inside Out
   (DeeLIO 2022): The 3rd Workshop on Knowledge Extraction and Integration for Deep Learning
   Architectures, pp. 100–114, 2022.
Robert Logan IV, Ivana Balažević, Eric Wallace, Fabio Petroni, Sameer Singh, and Sebastian Riedel.
  Cutting down on prompts and parameters: Simple few-shot learning with language models. In
  Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2022, pp. 2824–2835, 2022.
Yao Lu, Max Bartolo, Alastair Moore, Sebastian Riedel, and Pontus Stenetorp. Fantastically ordered
  prompts and where to find them: Overcoming few-shot prompt order sensitivity. In Proceedings
  of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
  Papers), pp. 8086–8098, 2022.
Sewon Min, Mike Lewis, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Noisy channel language
  model prompting for few-shot text classification. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 5316–5330, 2022a.
Sewon Min, Xinxi Lyu, Ari Holtzman, Mikel Artetxe, Mike Lewis, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Luke
  Zettlemoyer. Rethinking the role of demonstrations: What makes in-context learning work? arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2202.12837, 2022b.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Catherine Olsson, Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Nicholas Joseph, Nova DasSarma, Tom Henighan,
  Ben Mann, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, et al. In-context learning and induction heads.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.11895, 2022.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. 2023.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-networks.
  In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.
  Association for Computational Linguistics, 11 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1908.
  10084.
Ohad Rubin, Jonathan Herzig, and Jonathan Berant. Learning to retrieve prompts for in-context
  learning. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 2655–2671, 2022.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
  Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open foundation
  and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.
Johannes von Oswald, Eyvind Niklasson, Ettore Randazzo, João Sacramento, Alexander Mordvintsev,
  Andrey Zhmoginov, and Max Vladymyrov. Transformers learn in-context by gradient descent.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.07677, 2022.
Ben Wang and Aran Komatsuzaki. GPT-J-6B: A 6 Billion Parameter Autoregressive Language Model.
  https://github.com/kingoflolz/mesh-transformer-jax, May 2021.
Xinyi Wang, Wanrong Zhu, and William Yang Wang. Large language models are implicitly topic
  models: Explaining and finding good demonstrations for in-context learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2301.11916, 2023.
Zhenhailong Wang and Heng Ji. Open vocabulary electroencephalography-to-text decoding and
  zero-shot sentiment classification. In Proc. Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  (AAAI2022), 2022.
Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama,
  Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, et al. Emergent abilities of large language models.
  Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2022a.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed H Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022b.
Jerry Wei, Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Dustin Tran, Albert Webson, Yifeng Lu, Xinyun Chen, Hanxiao Liu,
  Da Huang, Denny Zhou, et al. Larger language models do in-context learning differently. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2303.03846, 2023.
Yuhuai Wu, Felix Li, and Percy S Liang. Insights into pre-training via simpler synthetic tasks.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:21844–21857, 2022.
Sang Michael Xie, Aditi Raghunathan, Percy Liang, and Tengyu Ma. An explanation of in-context
  learning as implicit bayesian inference. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2022.
Wanying Xie. Gx at semeval-2021 task 2: Bert with lemma information for mcl-wic task. In
 Proceedings of the 15th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval-2021), pp.
 706–712, 2021.
Zihao Zhao, Eric Wallace, Shi Feng, Dan Klein, and Sameer Singh. Calibrate before use: Improving
  few-shot performance of language models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  12697–12706. PMLR, 2021.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     P ROOFS
Proof. First, we denote the kernel regression function
                                    n
                                1X
                           ŷ =         vec(Txtest ), Σ−1
                                                       p0 vec(Txi ) e(yi ),                                                   (9)
                                n i=1

In expectation,


Exi vec(Txtest ), Σ−1                     >              > −1                        >              >
                   pθ? vec(Txi ) vec(Txi ) = vec(Txtest ) Σpθ? Exi vec(Txi )vec(Txi ) = vec(Txtest ) .
                                                                                            (10)
As vec(·) is a linear function, if we replace vec(Txi )> with Txi :
                                 Exi vec(Txtest ), Σ−1
                                                    pθ? vec(Txi ) Txi = Txtest                                              (11)
and then


                             Exi vec(Txtest ), Σ−1
                                                pθ? vec(Txi ) P (y = Y |xi , pθ ? )                                         (12)
                       =P (y = Y |S)> Exi vec(Txtest ), Σ−1
                                                         pθ? vec(Txi ) Txi pθ ?                                             (13)
                                            >
                       =P (y = Y |S) Txtest pθ?                                                                             (14)
                       =P (y = Y |xtest , θ? )                                                                              (15)

As (xi , e(yi )) can be seen as independent samples from P (y = Y |xi , pθ? ), we can use Hoeffding’s
inequality and bound that, with 1 − 2δ probability,
                                                                                                    r
                                                                                                         1    4m
             kŷ − Exi   vec(Txtest ), Σ−1
                                        pθ? vec(Txi )          P (y = Y |xi , pθ? )k∞ ≤                    ln
                                                                                                        2n     δ
Considering the difference between Σpθ? and Σp0 , we see that
                       | vec(Txtest ), Σ−1                             −1
                                        pθ? vec(Txi ) − vec(Txtest ), Σp0 vec(Txi ) |                                       (16)
                                      >
                     =|vec(Txtest )       (Σ−1     −1
                                            pθ? − Σp0 )vec(Txi )|                                                           (17)
                         2
                     ≤η  θ                                                                                                  (18)

Therefore,                                                              r
                                                          ?                  1    4m
                             kŷ − P (y = Y |xtest , θ )k∞ ≤                   ln    + η 2  θ
                                                                            2n     δ
Next we bridge P (y = Y |xtest , θ? ) with P (y = Y |[Sn , xtest ], ppre-train ). Let stest be the hidden state
corresponding to first token of xtest , i.e., xtest,0 . We see that, the likelihood of stest = sθ? is lower
bounded by:
                                    X
P (stest = sθ? , Sn |ppre-train ) =   P (stest = sθ? |Sn , sθ )P (Sn |sθ )P (sθ |ppre-train )              (19)
                                     θ∈Θ
                                 = P (stest = sθ? |Sn , sθ? )P (Sn |sθ? )P (sθ? |ppre-train )                               (20)
                                 ≥ P (Sn |sθ? )P (sθ? |ppre-train ) r                                                       (21)
                                      n
                                                                                                             !
                                      Y
                                                          delim                               delim
        (Markov property) ≥                 P ([xi , yi , o        ]|sθ? )P (sθ? |[xi , yi , o        ], sθ? ) P (sθ? |ppre-train ) r
                                      i=1
                                                                                                                            (22)
                                      n
                                                                       !
                                      Y
        (by Assumption 1) ≥                 P ([xi , yi ]|sθ? ) d  r       P (sθ? |ppre-train ) r                           (23)
                                      i=1
                                       n
                                                               !
                                      Y
                                 ≥          P ([xi , yi ]|sθ? ) P (sθ? |ppre-train ) n+1
                                                                                     r    nd                                (24)
                                      i=1


                                                              12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For another task θ0 , stest is unlikely to be sθ0 because:

                                                 X
           P (stest = sθ0 , Sn |ppre-train ) =         P (stest = sθ0 |Sn , sθ )P (Sn |sθ )P (sθ |ppre-train )   (25)
                                                 θ∈Θ
                                     = P (stest = sθ0 |Sn , sθ0 )P (Sn |sθ0 )P (sθ0 |ppre-train )                (26)
                                          n
                                                                       !
                                         Y
                                                            delim    0
                   (by Assumption 1) ≤       P ([xi , yi , o      ]|θ ) P (sθ0 |ppre-train )                     (27)
                                                  i=1
                                                   n
                                                                           !
                                                  Y
                                                                       0
                                           ≤            P ([xi , yi ]|θ ) P (sθ0 |ppre-train )                   (28)
                                                  i=1
                                                                                                                 (29)


Therefore, the Bayesian inference over stest , is:



                      P (stest = sθ? |[Sn , xtest ], ppre-train )                                                (30)
                      P (stest = sθ? , Sn |ppre-train )
                    =                                                                                            (31)
                             P (Sn |ppre-train )
                        P (stest = sθ? , Sn |ppre-train )
                    =P                                                                                           (32)
                         θ P (stest = sθ , Sn |ppre-train )
                                                                       !−1
                        X (Qn P ([xi , yi ]|θ0 )) P (sθ0 |ppre-train )
                                 i=1
                    =                                                                                            (33)
                                        P (sθ? , Sn |ppre-train )
                           θ
                                            n
                                                                                                !!−1
                                       P ([xi , yi ]|θ)
                                            X                    1              1          1
                ≥ 1 + min? exp     ln                    + n ln    + (n + 1) ln + ln
                       θ6=θ
                               i=1
                                      P ([xi , yi ]|θ? )         d               r     kp0 k−∞
                                                                                           (34)
                                           r                                                    !!−1
        δ                                      1 4              1              1          1
(with1 − prob.) ≥ 1 + min? exp −n KL +           ln + n ln         + (n + 1) ln + ln
        2              θ6=θ                   n δ               d               r     kp0 k−∞
                                                                                           (35)
                                  r                                                     !
                                      1 4                1              1           1
                ≥1 − exp −n KL +        ln + n ln          + (n + 1) ln + ln
                                      n δ                d               r      kp0 k−∞
                                                                                           (36)


So that



              kŷ − P (y = Y |[Sn , xtest ], ppre-train )k∞                                                      (37)
              r                                                                 r     !
                 1 4m         2              1                                    1 4
            ≤      ln      + η  θ +                   exp −n( KL + ln( d  r ) +    ln                            (38)
                 n     δ              r kp0 k−∞                                   n δ
                      r          !
                         1 4m
               =O          ln        + η 2  θ                                                                    (39)
                         n     δ


                                                            13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B       R ESULTS ON MORE TASKS
Besides the case study on SST2 dataset in Section 5, in this section we also provide experiment results
on other tasks. In specific, we experiment on Rotten Tomatoes1 , Tweet Eval2 ’s (hate, irony and
offensive subtasks) and MNLI3 . The results are as follows.

B.1     ROTTEN T OMATOES


                  Figure 6: Averaged attention map over Rotten Tomatoes test set.


    1
      https://huggingface.co/datasets/rotten_tomatoes/
    2
      https://huggingface.co/datasets/tweet_eval/
    3
      https://huggingface.co/datasets/glue/viewer/mnli_matched/test


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(a) Accuracy on reconstruction of ŷ by interpreting        (b) Pearson correlation between attention and logit
attention as kernel weights.                                similarity.

Figure 7: Interpreting attention values from kernerl regression perspective on Rotten Tomatoes
dataset.


(a) Predicting arg maxo P (o|xi ) with key vectors.                (b) Predicting yi with value vectors.

     Figure 8: Investigating information in key and value vectors on Rotten Tomatoes dataset.


                                                       15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.2   T WEET E VAL (H ATE )


               Figure 9: Averaged attention map over Tweet Eval (Hate) test set.


                                              16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(a) Accuracy on reconstruction of ŷ by interpreting        (b) Pearson correlation between attention and logit
attention as kernel weights.                                similarity.

Figure 10: Interpreting attention values from kernerl regression perspective on Tweet Eval (Hate)
dataset.


(a) Predicting arg maxo P (o|xi ) with key vectors.                (b) Predicting yi with value vectors.

    Figure 11: Investigating information in key and value vectors on Tweet Eval (Hate) dataset.


                                                       17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.3   T WEET E VAL (I RONY )


              Figure 12: Averaged attention map over Tweet Eval (Irony) test set.


                                              18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(a) Accuracy on reconstruction of ŷ by interpreting        (b) Pearson correlation between attention and logit
attention as kernel weights.                                similarity.

Figure 13: Interpreting attention values from kernerl regression perspective on Tweet Eval (Irony)
dataset.


(a) Predicting arg maxo P (o|xi ) with key vectors.                (b) Predicting yi with value vectors.

    Figure 14: Investigating information in key and value vectors on Tweet Eval (Irony) dataset.


                                                       19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.4   T WEET E VAL (O FFENSIVE )


            Figure 15: Averaged attention map over Tweet Eval (Offensive) test set.


                                              20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(a) Accuracy on reconstruction of ŷ by interpreting        (b) Pearson correlation between attention and logit
attention as kernel weights.                                similarity.

Figure 16: Interpreting attention values from kernerl regression perspective on Tweet Eval (Offensive)
dataset.


(a) Predicting arg maxo P (o|xi ) with key vectors.                (b) Predicting yi with value vectors.

 Figure 17: Investigating information in key and value vectors on Tweet Eval (Offensive) dataset.


                                                       21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.5   MNLI


                    Figure 18: Averaged attention map over MNLI test set.


                                             22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(a) Accuracy on reconstruction of ŷ by interpreting        (b) Pearson correlation between attention and logit
attention as kernel weights.                                similarity.

   Figure 19: Interpreting attention values from kernerl regression perspective on MNLI dataset.


(a) Predicting arg maxo P (o|xi ) with key vectors.                (b) Predicting yi with value vectors.

           Figure 20: Investigating information in key and value vectors on MNLI dataset.


                                                       23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C    S YNTHETIC V ERIFICATION
To verify the theoretical results, we conduct experiments on a synthetic HMM. We experimented on
randomly parameterized synthetic HMMs with 8 tasks, 80 states, and 100 observations. We vary
the number of samples and evaluate the proposed kernel regression on fitting the Bayesian posterior,
which is the intuition in Theorem 1. Results are listed in the Table 3. We indeed see a decreasing loss
and increasing accuracy with more demonstrative examples. The loss also converges to a non-zero
value according to Equation 6.

Table 3: Accuracy and distance of predicting the Bayesian posterior on a synthetic HMM with
Equation 5.

          #samples       1        2        4        8       16       32       64      128
          distance     1.322    0.942    0.519    0.218   0.163    0.085    0.093    0.083
          accuracy     0.337    0.532    0.745    0.901   0.926    0.968    0.961    0.964


                                                  24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D    R ESULTS ON L LAMA -2
To demonstrate the generality of our conclusions across model architectures, we also conduct analysis
on Llama-2 model (Touvron et al., 2023). The experiment setting is similar to Section 5.1 and 5.2.
Visualizations are as follows. They generally show similar trends with Section 5.


             Figure 21: Averaged attention map over SST2 dataset on Llama-2 model.


                                                 25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(a) Accuracy on reconstruction of ŷ by interpreting        (b) Pearson correlation between attention and logit
attention as kernel weights.                                similarity.

    Figure 22: Interpreting attention values from kernerl regression perspective on Llama-2 model


E     S INGLE DATUM V ISUALIZATION
We also plot the visualization on a single datum as follows. It shows a similar but slightly sparser
pattern to Section 5.1.


                                                       26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       Figure 23: The attention map on a single datum.


                                             27
