Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A LIGNING T EXT- TO -I MAGE D IFFUSION M ODELS WITH
R EWARD BACKPROPAGATION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review


    Epoch 0          Epoch 2      Epoch 5     Epoch 10       Epoch 0     Epoch 2      Epoch 5     Epoch 10


Figure 1: We present a direct backpropagation-based approach to adapt text-to-image diffusion
models for desired reward function. The above examples showcase the adaptation of diffusion model
output (epoch 0) through a sequence of adaptation steps (epoch 1-10) to different reward functions.
The reward function in the left two examples is that of concept removal trained to disregard the
concept of "books," despite the prompt explicitly mentioning "fruits and books." The reward function
for the adaptation on the right is that of human-preference alignment crafted from human rankings
of image-text pairs. As shown in all the examples, the proposed approach can effectively align the
diffusion model with the reward function.

                                                 A BSTRACT

              Text-to-image diffusion models have recently emerged at the forefront of image
              generation, powered by very large-scale unsupervised or weakly supervised text-
              to-image training datasets. Due to their unsupervised training, controlling their
              behavior in downstream tasks, such as maximizing human-perceived image quality,
              image-text alignment, or ethical image generation, is difficult. Recent works fine-
              tune diffusion models to downstream reward functions using vanilla reinforcement
              learning, notorious for the high variance of the gradient estimators. In this paper,
              we propose AlignProp, a method that aligns diffusion models to downstream re-
              ward functions using end-to-end backpropagation of the reward gradient through
              the denoising process. While naive implementation of such backpropagation would
              require prohibitive memory resources for storing the partial derivatives of modern
              text-to-image models, AlignProp finetunes low-rank adapter weight modules and
              uses gradient checkpointing, to render its memory usage viable. We test AlignProp
              in finetuning diffusion models to various objectives, such as image-text semantic
              alignment, aesthetics, compressibility and controllability of the number of objects
              present, as well as their combinations. We show AlignProp achieves higher rewards
              in fewer training steps than alternatives, while being conceptually simpler, making
              it a straightforward choice for optimizing diffusion models for differentiable reward
              functions of interest.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Diffusion probabilistic models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Goyal et al., 2017; Ho et al., 2020a)
are currently the de facto standard for generative modeling in continuous domains. Text-to-image
diffusion models such as DALLE (Ramesh et al., 2022), Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022), and Latent
Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) are at the forefront of image generation by training on web-scale
data. However, most use cases of diffusion models are related to downstream objectives such as


                                                         1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


aesthetics, fairness, text-to-image alignment, or robot task achievement, which may be not well
aligned with maximizing likelihood in the training dataset. For example, while the training images
may contain unusual camera and object viewpoints with objects half-visible or truncated at the image
border, human users usually prefer image samples of standardized viewpoints, beautifully centered
content with key elements in focus. Additionally, because of the noise present in pre-training datasets,
there is frequently a misalignment between the semantics of the generated images and the associated
text prompts. This occurs because the models tend to adopt the noise, biases, and peculiarities
inherent in the training data. In this paper, we consider the problem of training diffusion models to
optimize downstream objectives directly, as opposed to matching a data distribution.
The most straightforward approach to aligning pre-trained models to downstream objectives is
supervised fine-tuning on a small-scale human-curated dataset of high-quality model responses
(Ouyang et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2023). Unfortunately, this is mostly not a feasible option. It is not
only difficult to collect data on samples that display desired properties like aesthetics, fairness, and
text-to-image alignment, but such data can easily be biased. On the other hand, it is much easier to
ask humans for relative feedback by showing two or more samples. Hence, as a result, the common
practice is to train a reward model by explicitly collecting data of human preferences by asking a
human subject to rank a number of examples as per the desired metric. However, in the case of
diffusion models, this leads to a unique challenge: given such a reward function, how does one update
the weights of the diffusion model?
The core architecture of diffusion models operates by iteratively refining a data sample through a
sequence of stochastic transformations. Even though the learned reward function is differentiable, it
is non-trivial to update the diffusion model through the long chain of diffusion sampling as it would
require prohibitive memory resources to store the partial derivatives of all neural layers and denoising
steps. This can easily be on the order of several terabytes of GPU memory (Wallace et al., 2023)
for the scale of modern text-to-image diffusion models. As a result, the typical alternative is to use
reinforcement learning and directly update the diffusion weights via REINFORCE. This is the most
common approach today to align diffusion models with a reward function (Black et al., 2023; Lee
et al., 2023; Ziegler et al., 2020; Stiennon et al., 2020). However, RL methods are notorious for high
variance gradients and hence often result in poor sample efficiency.
In this paper, we revisit the idea of direct end-to-end backpropagation of the gradients of a differen-
tiable reward function through the diffusion chain, and device practical ways to get around the issue
of using exponential memory and compute. We propose Alignment by Backpropagation (AlignProp),
a model that casts denoising inference of text-to-image diffusion models as a differentiable recur-
rent policy. This policy effectively maps conditioning input prompts and sampled noise to output
images, and fine-tunes the weights of the denoising model using end-to-end backpropagation through
differentiable reward functions applied to the output-generated image.
We fine-tune low-rank adapter weights (Hu et al., 2021), added to the original denoising U-Net,
instead of the original weights, and we use gradient checkpointing (Gruslys et al., 2016; Chen et al.,
2016) to compute partial derivatives on demand, as opposed to storing them all at once. In this
way, AlignProp incurs reasonable memory cost while only doubling the processing cost per training
step, which gets compensated due to the fact that direct backdrop needs less number of steps to
optimize. However, end-to-end backdrop quickly tends to over-optimize the model to excessively
maximize the reward model leading to collapse. We address the over-optimization (Gao et al., 2022)
with randomized truncated backpropagation (Tallec & Ollivier, 2017), i.e., randomly sampling the
denoising step up to which we back-propagate the reward.
We test AlignProp in finetuning StableDiffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) to maximize objectives of
aesthetic quality, text-to-image semantic alignment, and modulating object presence, as we show in
Figure 1. We show it achieves higher rewards and is more preferred by human users than reinforcement
learning alternatives of (Black et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2023). We ablate design choices of the proposed
model and show the importance of backpropagating through the denoising chain for variable number
of steps. We show adapted layers in early denoising steps align the semantic content while adapted
layers in later denoising steps adapt the high frequency details to the downstream objective. Last,
we show convex combinations of weights of the finetuned models maximize combinations of the
corresponding reward functions.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2    R ELATED WORK

Denoising diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Goyal et al., 2017; Ho et al., 2020a) have
emerged as an effective class of generative models for modalities including images (Ramesh et al.,
2021; Rombach et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022), videos (Singer et al., 2022; Ho et al., 2022a;b),
3D shapes (Zeng et al., 2022) and robot or vehicle trajectories (Ajay et al., 2023; Pearce et al., 2023;
Chi et al., 2023; Tan et al., 2023). Remarkably, they have also been adapted for text generation
(Lovelace et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2023) and have demonstrated utility in discriminative tasks like
Image Classification (Li et al., 2023; Prabhudesai et al., 2023). Diffusion models are often pre-trained
in large usupervised or very weakly supervised datasets, and adapted to improve their performance
in downstream tasks, as well as their alignment with user intent. Some forms of adaptation do not
alter the parameters of the diffusion model. Instead, they optimize conditional input prompts (Hao
et al., 2022; Gal et al., 2022; Kumari et al., 2023), manipulate the text-image cross attention layers
(Feng et al., 2023) to improve text-to-image alignment, guide sampling during inference using the
gradients of a pre-trained classifier (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021), or use classifier-free (Ho & Salimans,
2021) guidance by combining conditional and unconditional diffusion models. Other adaptation
methods finetune the model’s parameters using small-scale human-curated datasets, or human labels
of absolute or relative quality of model’s responses (Lee et al., 2023; Black et al., 2023; Wu et al.,
2023b; Dong et al., 2023). These methods first fit a neural network reward function using human
scores or relative preferences, and then finetune the diffusion model using reward-weighted likelihood
(Lee et al., 2023), reward-filtered likelihood (Dong et al., 2023) or reinforcement learning (Black
et al., 2023), such as PPO (Schulman et al., 2017). In this paper, we show how diffusion models can
be finetuned directly for downstream differentiable reward models using end-to-end backpropagation.
Our formulation resembles deep deterministic policy gradients (Silver et al., 2014), a reinforcement
learning method that trains a deterministic policy through end-to-end differentiation of a concurrently
trained Q function. Work of (Xu et al., 2023) also consider backpropagating through a differentiable
reward function but only backpropagates through a single step of the sampling process. We show that
AlignProp outperforms it by backpropagating gradients through the entire sampling chain. Work of
(Wallace et al., 2023) also backpropagates through the sampling process of the diffusion chain but
instead of optimizing the weights of the diffusion model, it optimizes the starting noise. This process
is expensive, as it needs to be performed for each prompt separately.


3    BACKGROUND

We first discuss background material in Section 3 and present details of our method in Section 4.

Diffusion Models A diffusion model learns to model a probability distribution p(x) by inverting a
process that gradually adds noise to a sample x, which is known as forward diffusion process. The
amount of noise added varies according to the diffusion timestep t following a√     variance√schedule
of {βt ∈ (0, 1)}Tt=1 . Forward diffusion process adds noise to x following xt = ᾱt x + 1 − ᾱt ϵ
where ϵ ∼ N (0, 1), is a sample from a Gaussian distribution (with the same dimensionality as x),
                         Qt
αt = 1 − βt , and ᾱt = i=1 αi . It then learns a reverse diffusion process that predicts the noise ϵ̂
given xt and t as input The denoising process is modeled by a neural network ϵ̂ = ϵθ (xt ; t) that takes
as input the noisy sample xt and the noise level t and tries to predict the noise component ϵ.
Diffusion models can be easily extended to model p(x|c), where c is the conditioning signal, such as
image caption, image category or semantic maps etc. . This is done by adding an additional input
to the denoising neural network ϵθ . For this work we consider text-conditioned image diffusion
models such as Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022), which are trained using a large collection of
image-text pairs D′ = {(xi , ci )}N
                                  i=1 using the following objective:

                                              X                 √        √
                  Ldiff (θ; D′ ) = |D1′ |                 ||ϵθ ( ᾱt xi + 1 − ᾱt ϵ, ci , t) − ϵ||2 .
                                            xi ,ci ∈D ′


This loss corresponds to a reweighted form of the variational lower bound for log p(x|c) (Ho et al.,
2020b).


                                                               3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In order to draw a sample from the learned distribution pθ (x|c), we start by drawing a sample
xT ∼ N (0, 1). Then, we progressively denoise the sample by iterated application of ϵθ according to
a specified sampling schedule (Ho et al., 2020b; Song et al., 2020), which terminates with x0 sampled
from pθ (x):

                                        βt
               xt−1 = √       xt − √          ϵθ (xt , t, c) + σt z, where z ∼ N (0, 1)
                         at           1 − ᾱt

In denoising diffusion implicit models (DDIMs) (Song et al., 2022), there is no added noise in
intermediate steps, and the only stochasticity in sampling comes from the initially sampled noise
xT ∼ N (0, 1):
                                                    βt
                            xt−1 = √       xt − √          ϵθ (xt , t, c) .                   (1)
                                      at           1 − ᾱt

4     A LIGN P ROP

            Randomly Truncate

              Backpropogate            Backpropogate                 Backpropogate


                                                                                          Reward
                                                                                          Model
             DDIM Sampling                DDIM                       DDIM Sampling                 R   Loss
                                         Sampling


      xT                        xt                         xt−1                      x0

Figure 2: Given a batch of prompts, denoted as P, AlignProp generates images from noise xT through
DDIM Sampling. Subsequently, these generated images undergo evaluation by the Reward model
Rϕ to acquire a corresponding reward score. The optimization process involves updating the weights
in the diffusion process by minimizing the negative of the obtained reward through gradient descent.
To mitigate overfitting, we randomize the number of time-steps we backpropagate gradients to.

The architecture for AlignProp is illustrated in Figure 2 We introduce a method that transforms
denoising inference within text-to-image diffusion models into a differentiable recurrent policy, which
adeptly correlates conditioning input prompts and sampled noise to produce output images. This
approach facilitates fine-tuning of the denoising model’s weights through end-to-end backpropagation,
guided by differentiable reward functions applied to the generated output image.
The proposed model casts conditional image denoising as a single step MDP with states S =
{(xT , c), xT ∼ N (0, 1)}, actions are the generated image samples, and the whole DDIM denoising
chain of Eq. 1 corresponds to a differentiable policy that maps states to image samples: A = {x0 :
x0 ∼ πθ (·|xT , c), xT ∼ N (0, 1) }. The reward function is a differentiable function of parameters ϕ
that depends only on generated images Rϕ (x0 ), x0 ∈ A. Given a dataset of prompts input P, our
loss function reads:                               X
                                                1
                             Lalign (θ; P) = − |P|     Rϕ (πθ (xT , ci ))                         (2)
                                                       ci ∈P
We update the parameters of the diffusion model using gradient descent on Lalign . The policy π is
recurrent and training it is reminiscent of backpropagation through time used for training recurrent
networks. The gradient through update the parameters of diffusion model w.r.t downstream object
(i.e., differentiable reward function) looks like:

                                                        T
                                              ∂Lalign X ∂Lalign ∂xt
                                ∇θ Lalign =          +         ·     .                                 (3)
                                               ∂θ      t=0
                                                           ∂xt   ∂θ
                                                       |    {z     }
                                                            “memory inefficient”


4.1    R EDUCING M EMORY OVERHEAD

Naively optimizing Eq. 2 with backpropagation requires to store the intermediate activations for each
neural layer and denoising timestep of πθ in the GPU VRAM. As can be seen in Eq. 1, the number


                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


of activations to store for πθ scale linearly with the number of diffusion timesteps. Therefore, our
alignment finetuning would cost T times more memory than training the diffusion model ϵθ with
diffusion loss of Eq. 1. For instance, training StableDiffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) using a batch
size of 1 takes about 20GBs of GPU RAM, therefore training our policy πθ comprised of T chained
denoising models with end-to-end backpropagation would require about 1TB of GPU RAM, which is
infeasible. We use two design choice to enable full backpropagation through the denoising chain:
1. Finetuning low-rank adapter (LoRA) modules (Hu et al., 2021) in place of the original diffusion
weights, and 2. Gradient checkpointing for computing partial derivatives on demand (Gruslys et al.,
2016; Chen et al., 2016).
Finetuning LoRA weights: Instead of fine-tuning the weights θ of the original diffusion model ϵθ ,
we add low-rank weight kernels in each of its linear neural layers, and only finetune these weights, as
proposed in (Hu et al., 2021). Specifically, each linear layer of the Unet of StableDiffusion is modified
from h = W x into h = W x + BAx, where W ∈ Rm×m , A ∈ Rm×k , B ∈ Rk×m , where k << m.
LoRA weights are initialized at 0 and do not affect the performance of the pre-trained model initially.
Effectively, this means we finetune 800K parameters instead of 800M , which reduces our GPU
RAM usage by 2X to about 500GBs.
Gradient Checkpointing: Gradient checkpointing is a well known technique used to reduce the
memory footprint of training neural networks (Gruslys et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2016). Instead
of storing all intermediate activations in memory for backpropagation, we only store a subset and
recompute the rest on-the-fly during the backward pass. This allows for training deeper networks
with limited memory at the cost of increased computation time. We find that gradient checkpointing
significantly reduces our memory usage from 512 GBs to 15GBs, thus making it feasible to do full
backpropogation on a single GPU.
All LoRA Disable   0-10 timesteps      10-20 timesteps   20-30 timesteps 30-40 timesteps   40-50 timesteps   No LoRA Disable


Figure 3: We illustrate the impact of deactivating finetuned LoRA weights across varying ranges of
diffusion timesteps during inference. The visualization highlights that earlier timesteps predominantly
contribute to semantic aspects, whereas the later timesteps are instrumental in capturing fine-grained
details.


4.2   R ANDOMIZED T RUNCATED BACKPROPAGATION
During our experimentation, we encountered a significant issue with full backpropagation through
time (BPTT) - it led to mode collapse within just two training epochs. Irrespective of the input
conditioning prompt, we observed that the model consistently generated the same image. To address
this challenge, we explored truncated backpropagation through time (TBTT) as an alternative strategy.
However, TBTT introduces a bias towards short-term dependencies, as it restricts the backpropagation
to a fixed number of steps, denoted as K (a hyperparameter). This bias can affect gradient estimates
and hinder the model’s ability to capture long-range dependencies effectively. (Tallec & Ollivier,
2017) demonstrated that the bias introduced by truncation in the backpropagation through time
algorithm can be mitigated by randomizing the truncation lengths, i.e., varying the number of
time-steps for which backpropagation occurs.
Our human evaluation experiments, detailed in Section 5, provided valuable insights. It was observed
that setting K ∼ Uniform(0, 50) yielded the most promising results in terms of aligned image
generation. To delve deeper into the impact of different values of K on alignment and image
generation, we conducted a comprehensive investigation, the results of which are presented in Figure
3. Finally, the loss which we optimize is:

                                                                    K
                                    b θ LTBTT-align = ∂Lalign +       ∂Lalign          ∂xk
                                                                    X
                                    ∇                                              ·       .                             (4)
                                                       ∂θ                  ∂xk         ∂θ
                                                                    k=0



                                                              5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5     E XPERIMENTS
In this study, we subject AlignProp to rigorous evaluation by employing it to fine-tune pre-trained
text-to-image diffusion models across a diverse spectrum of downstream reward functions. For
all our experimental scenarios, we utilize StableDiffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) a state-of-the-art
pre-trained model. Our investigation is motivated by the pursuit of answers to the following questions:

       • How does AlignProp compare with existing state-of-the-art alignment methods concerning
         ability to optimize downstream reward, data and compute efficiency?
       • To what extent does the fine-tuned model exhibit generalization capabilities when presented
         with novel prompts?
       • How does AlignProp measure up against existing state-of-the-art alignment methods in
         terms of human evaluations assessing the quality of the generated images?

Baselines. We compare against the following methods: (a) Stable Diffusion, the pre-trained
diffusion model without any finetuning. We use Stable Diffusion v1.5 for all our experiments, (b)
Reward Weighted Regression (RWR) (Lee et al., 2023), which uses Reward weighted negative
likelihood for finetuning. Specifically, they weigh the diffusion loss with the corresponding reward
for each example. Unlike AlignProp, they do not use gradients from the reward model, (c) Denoising
Diffusion Policy Optimization (DDPO) (Black et al., 2023) current state-of-the-art method for
fine-tuning text-to-image models using reinforcement learning (PPO). We use their official pytorch
codebase for reproducing results, (d) ReFL, which is a finetuning method proposed in ImageRewards
(Xu et al., 2023). where instead of doing all the denoising steps (which is about 50 for us), they do
a small number of denoising steps (30-40) using DDPM scheduler. Then they do a single step of
backpropogation (K=1) to update the diffusion U-Net weights. We instead do all the sampling steps
as reducing the number of denoising steps reduces the fidelity of the image. Further instead of doing
a single backpropogation step (K=1), we use randomized TBTT where K ∼ Uniform(0, 50), we
find this to significantly improve the generation quality as shown in Table 3 and Figure 5.

Reward models. For aligning text-to-image diffusion models, we explore various reward functions
to guide the training process. These reward functions encompass
(i) Aesthetics Reward. We employ the LAION aesthetic predictor V2 (Schuhmann, 2022), which
leverages a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) architecture trained atop CLIP embeddings. This model’s
training data consists of 176,000 human image ratings, spanning a range from 1 to 10, with images
achieving a score of 10 being considered art pieces. To ensure consistency with previous research,
our training procedure closely follows the approach utilized in DDPO, which employs 50 animal
names as prompts.
(ii) Human Preference Reward. We use Human Preference v2 (Wu et al., 2023a), where CLIP
model is fine-tuned using an extensive dataset comprising 798,090 human ranking choices across
433,760 pairs of images. Notably, this dataset stands as one of the largest of its kind, facilitating
robust image-text alignment. For our training regimen, we draw from the 2400 prompts introduced in
the HPS v2 dataset.
(iii) Concept Removal. This is focused on the removal of specified object categories from generated
images. This task holds the potential for curbing the generation of abusive or harmful content by
text-to-image models. In this instance, we address a simplified version of the task, instructing the
text-to-image model to generate images containing "<Concept Name> and Books." To facilitate
this task, we enlist the aid of OwlViT (Minderer et al.), an open vocabulary object detector capable
of identifying "books" within images. As our reward function, we adopt a confidence score-based
approach, specifically (1.0 - c), where c represents the confidence score assigned by OwlViT to its
"books" detection.

5.1   S AMPLE AND DATA E FFICIENCY IN R EWARD F INETUNING

The task of pre-training foundation models, such as Stable Diffusion, on large-scale training datasets is
currently within the reach of only a select few entities with access to substantial computing resources.
However, the subsequent fine-tuning of these foundation models towards downstream objectives
should ideally be accessible to a broader range of entities, including academic institutions with more


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                            DDPO               AlignProp (Ours)

Figure 4: Reward finetuning results on multiple reward functions. In the top half of the figure, we
compare the data efficiency of AlignProp and DDPO. In the bottom half of the figure we compare the
convergence speed of AlignProp and DDPO. As seen AlignProp outperforms DDPO on both metrics.


limited computational capabilities. To enable such accessibility, it is imperative that an effective
fine-tuning method for foundation models be both sample-efficient and incur low computational
costs.
In this section, we undertake a comprehensive comparison between AlignProp and DDPO () across
various reward functions, examining the achieved rewards and the computational and data efficiency.
Our results are visually presented in Figure 4. Notably, our method demonstrates superior performance
in terms of rewards while simultaneously exhibiting remarkable data efficiency, being 25 times more
data-efficient than DDPO.
To further emphasize the efficiency of our ap-
proach, we conduct a comparative analysis of                                Animals            HPS v2
wall-clock times for DDPO and AlignProp on          Method
identical computational resources, which in-                             Train.    Test.    Train.   Test.
clude 4 A100 GPUs and the same batch size.          Stable Diffusion        5.73    5.64    2.74     2.86
As illustrated in the HPS v2 dataset scenario,      RWR                     6.21    6.04    2.81     2.91
AlignProp achieves a score of 2.8 in just 48 min-   DDPO                    7.18    6.82    2.87     2.93
utes, whereas DDPO requires approximately 23        AlignProp (Ours)        8.94    8.71    3.30     3.32
hours, highlighting a substantial 25-fold accel-
eration in convergence speed. Additionally, we      Table 1: Reward on novel text prompts (higher is
provide qualitative results in Figure 5, offering   better). We split the class names in these datasets
a visual representation of the outputs generated    into train and test split such that there is no overlap
by both AlignProp and DDPO. Notably, our            in them. The proposed method AlignProp achieves
method excels in generating significantly more      higher reward compared to all other baselines.
artistic images when compared to DDPO.

5.2   G ENERALIZATION TO NEW TEXT PROMPTS
One pivotal consideration favoring model finetuning, as opposed to prompt finetuning () or initial
noise xT finetuning (), is the model’s potential for generalization to new prompts. Here, we evaluate
the finetuned models stemming from AlignProp and baseline approaches, specifically assessing their
capacity for generalization.
Here, we consider two different prompt datasets, each with a different type of split: (a) Animals: We
start with a dataset encompassing a curated list of 50 animals, mirroring the training set configuration
employed in DDPO. However, in the test set, we introduce a novel set of animals as prompts that
were not encountered during the training phase. The training process in this scenario is conducted
using the Aesthetic reward model, (b) HPS v2: The Human Preference dataset () offers a diverse
array of 3200 prompts, categorized into four different styles. Each style comprises roughly 800


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



            Crocodile   Octopus   Hippopotamus   Snail       Cheetah   Lobster


 Stable
Diffusion


  ReFL


 DDPO


AlignProp
  (K=1)


AlignProp
 (Ours)


Figure 5: Qualitative comparison with baselines is conducted on novel animals that were not
encountered during the training phase. In this scenario, both AlignProp and the baselines are trained
using an Aesthetic reward model.


prompts. To establish a train-test split, we adopt a random selection approach, allocating 600 prompts
for training and reserving 200 for testing. In this case, we utilize the HPS-v2 reward model for the
training regimen.
In Table 1, we present the average rewards achieved by the models on both the train and test splits
after 100 epochs of training. Notably, AlignProp consistently outperforms the baseline methods in
terms of the generalization exhibited by the resulting fine-tuned models.

5.3      H UMAN E VALUATIONS FOR F IDELITY AND I MAGE -T EXT A LIGNMENT
We conducted a human preference study using Amazon Mechanical Turk, performing a paired
comparison test between the proposed method and different baselines such as ReFL, DDPO, and
Stable Diffusion. In this evaluation, we employed the HPS reward function. For the assessment of
image-text alignment, we presented two image generations from each method (ours and the baseline)
using the same prompt, accompanied by the question: ‘Which image is more consistent with the
text?’ In terms of fidelity, we displayed two samples for a specific prompt from both the baselines and
AlignProp, with the question: ‘Which image quality appears better?’ We collected 500 responses for
each task. As depicted in Table 2, the proposed method is preferred over the baselines. For additional
qualitative results on HPS reward function and prompts, please refer to Appendix Figure 7

5.4      M IXING WEIGHTS
In this context, we demonstrate the ability of AlignProp to interpolate between different reward
functions during the inference phase. We draw inspiration from the concept presented in ModelSoup
(Wortsman et al., 2022), which showcases how averaging the weights of multiple fine-tuned models
can enhance image classification accuracy. Expanding upon this idea, we extend it to the domain of
image editing, revealing that averaging the LoRA weights of diffusion models trained with distinct
reward functions can yield images that satisfy multiple reward criteria.
To achieve this, we employ a straightforward approach: suppose θ1 and θ2 represent the LoRA
weights trained using reward functions R1 and R2 respectively. In this parameter space, we perform
interpolation by computing a weighted average as θmod = α · θ1 + (1 − α) · θ2 where α is a scalar
ranging from 0 to 1.


                                                         8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To better understand the effect of mixing we consider two complementary reward functions specif-
ically compressibility and aesthetics. For compressiblity we finetune CLIP supervised using the
JPEG compression reward from (Black et al., 2023). As illustrated in Appendix Table 4 and Figure
6, AlignProp adeptly demonstrates its capacity to interpolate between distinct reward functions,
achieving the highest overall reward when the mixing coefficient is set to 0.5.

                                                              Aesthetic Model   Mixing 0.5   Compression Model
 Method             Fidelity   Image-text Alignment
 Stable Diffusion   20.8%             34.4%
 AlignProp (Ours)   79.2%             65.6%
 ReFL               28.8%             35.0%
 AlignProp (Ours)   71.2%             65.0%
 DDPO               17.6%             36.4%
 AlignProp (Ours)   82.4%             63.6%

Table 2: We showcase Human Evaluation
Scores, with the percentage indicating the fre-
quency with which humans preferred the gener-         Figure 6: Here, we depict the image generations
ated images from AlignProp over the baselines         produced by the Aesthetic Model, Compression
                                                      Model, and a hybrid model formed by averaging
                                                      the parameters of both. The mixing coefficient for
                                                      this combined model is set at 0.5
Ablations: In Table 3, we analyze various design choices made throughout our experiments. We
do our ablations while using HPSv2 as our reward function. Firstly, we explore different choices for
‘K’ in truncated backpropagation. Subsequently, we investigate the impact of using EDICT affine
coupling layers to reduce computational memory. EDICT, as described in (Wallace et al., 2023),
revises the forward and backward diffusion processes through affine coupling layers. However, we
observed that EDICT layers significantly slow down the process (by a factor of 2) compared to simple
gradient checkpointing and also yield subpar performance. Additionally, we evaluate the choice
between LoRA and the complete UNet fine-tuning strategy. Finally, we assess different scheduling
methods, comparing DDIM with Ancestral sampling.

6    L IMITATIONS
AlignProp leverages gradients derived from the reward                                 Avg. Reward
function to finetune diffusion models enhancing both sam-
pling efficiency and computational efficacy. However, this       AlignProp (Ours)        3.30
reliance on a differentiable reward function introduces a              with K=1          2.91
                                                                       with K=10         3.14
caveat. In instances where the reward function is imper-               with EDICT        2.95
fect, the fine-tuning process may lead to over-optimization,           w/o LoRA          3.09
deviating from the intended outcome. Addressing and mit-               w/o DDIM          2.97
igating this risk of over-optimization stands as a direct
                                                             Table 3: We compute the average reward
focus for future research.
                                                             for both the proposed method, Align-
                                                             Prop, and the baseline models after com-
7 C ONCLUSION                                                pleting 100 training epochs. The table
We have introduced AlignProp, a differentiable framework demonstrates that the proposed method
for fine-tuning pre-trained diffusion models, optimizing consistently outperforms all other base-
directly across a spectrum of diverse reward functions. lines in terms of achieved rewards.
By conceptualizing the denoising process as a recurrent,
differentiable policy responsible for mapping noise and
prompt-conditioning information to output images, we
have introduced a class of pathwise gradient algorithms that surpass existing reinforcement methods.
To address concerns related to over-optimization, AlignProp incorporates truncated backpropagation
and manages memory requirements through low-rank adapter modules and gradient checkpointing.
Our experiments consistently highlight AlignProp’s efficacy in optimizing diverse reward functions,
even for tasks that prove challenging to specify through prompts alone. Looking ahead, future
research avenues may explore the extension of these concepts to diffusion-based language models,
with the aim of enhancing their alignment with human feedback.



                                                      9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Anurag Ajay, Yilun Du, Abhi Gupta, Joshua Tenenbaum, Tommi Jaakkola, and Pulkit Agrawal. Is
  conditional generative modeling all you need for decision-making?, 2023.
Kevin Black, Michael Janner, Yilun Du, Ilya Kostrikov, and Sergey Levine. Training diffusion models
  with reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13301, 2023.
Tianqi Chen, Bing Xu, Chiyuan Zhang, and Carlos Guestrin. Training deep nets with sublinear
  memory cost. CoRR, abs/1604.06174, 2016. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1604.06174.
Cheng Chi, Siyuan Feng, Yilun Du, Zhenjia Xu, Eric Cousineau, Benjamin Burchfiel, and Shuran
  Song. Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion, 2023.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. In
  M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 8780–8794. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
  2021/file/49ad23d1ec9fa4bd8d77d02681df5cfa-Paper.pdf.
Hanze Dong, Wei Xiong, Deepanshu Goyal, Yihan Zhang, Winnie Chow, Rui Pan, Shizhe Diao,
  Jipeng Zhang, Kashun Shum, and Tong Zhang. Raft: Reward ranked finetuning for generative
  foundation model alignment, 2023.
Weixi Feng, Xuehai He, Tsu-Jui Fu, Varun Jampani, Arjun Akula, Pradyumna Narayana, Sugato
 Basu, Xin Eric Wang, and William Yang Wang. Training-free structured diffusion guidance for
 compositional text-to-image synthesis, 2023.
Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit H. Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel
  Cohen-Or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using textual
  inversion, 2022.
Leo Gao, John Schulman, and Jacob Hilton. Scaling laws for reward model overoptimization, 2022.
Anirudh Goyal, Nan Rosemary Ke, Surya Ganguli, and Yoshua Bengio. Variational walkback:
  Learning a transition operator as a stochastic recurrent net. Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
Audrunas Gruslys, Rémi Munos, Ivo Danihelka, Marc Lanctot, and Alex Graves. Memory-efficient
  backpropagation through time. CoRR, abs/1606.03401, 2016. URL http://arxiv.org/
  abs/1606.03401.
Yaru Hao, Zewen Chi, Li Dong, and Furu Wei. Optimizing prompts for text-to-image generation,
  2022.
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. In NeurIPS 2021 Workshop on
  Deep Generative Models and Downstream Applications, 2021. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=qw8AKxfYbI.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. CoRR,
  abs/2006.11239, 2020a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.11239.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020b.
Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Chitwan Saharia, Jay Whang, Ruiqi Gao, Alexey Gritsenko, Diederik P.
  Kingma, Ben Poole, Mohammad Norouzi, David J. Fleet, and Tim Salimans. Imagen video: High
  definition video generation with diffusion models, 2022a.
Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, Alexey Gritsenko, William Chan, Mohammad Norouzi, and David J.
  Fleet. Video diffusion models, 2022b.
Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models, 2021.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Nupur Kumari, Bingliang Zhang, Richard Zhang, Eli Shechtman, and Jun-Yan Zhu. Multi-concept
  customization of text-to-image diffusion, 2023.
Kimin Lee, Hao Liu, Moonkyung Ryu, Olivia Watkins, Yuqing Du, Craig Boutilier, Pieter Abbeel,
  Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, and Shixiang Shane Gu. Aligning text-to-image models using human
  feedback, 2023.
Alexander C Li, Mihir Prabhudesai, Shivam Duggal, Ellis Brown, and Deepak Pathak. Your diffusion
  model is secretly a zero-shot classifier. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.16203, 2023.
Zhenghao Lin, Yeyun Gong, Yelong Shen, Tong Wu, Zhihao Fan, Chen Lin, Nan Duan, and Weizhu
  Chen. Text generation with diffusion language models: A pre-training approach with continuous
  paragraph denoise, 2023.
Justin Lovelace, Varsha Kishore, Chao Wan, Eliot Shekhtman, and Kilian Weinberger. Latent
  diffusion for language generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.09462, 2022.
M Minderer, A Gritsenko, A Stone, M Neumann, D Weissenborn, A Dosovitskiy, A Mahendran,
 A Arnab, M Dehghani, Z Shen, et al. Simple open-vocabulary object detection with vision
 transformers. arxiv 2022. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.06230.
Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton,
  Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano, Jan Leike, and
  Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback, 2022.
Tim Pearce, Tabish Rashid, Anssi Kanervisto, Dave Bignell, Mingfei Sun, Raluca Georgescu,
  Sergio Valcarcel Macua, Shan Zheng Tan, Ida Momennejad, Katja Hofmann, and Sam Devlin.
  Imitating human behaviour with diffusion models, 2023.
Mihir Prabhudesai, Tsung-Wei Ke, Alexander Cong Li, Deepak Pathak, and Katerina Fragkiadaki.
 Test-time adaptation with diffusion models. In ICML 2023 Workshop on Structured Probabilistic
 Inference {\&} Generative Modeling, 2023.
Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. CoRR, abs/2102.12092, 2021. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.12092.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. ArXiv, abs/2204.06125, 2022. URL https:
 //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:248097655.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models, 2022.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed
  Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo-Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans,
  Jonathan Ho, David J. Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi. Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion
  models with deep language understanding. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave,
  and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=08Yk-n5l2Al.
C Schuhmann. Laoin aesthetic predictor.           2022.   URL https://laion.ai/blog/
  laion-aesthetics/.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
David Silver, Guy Lever, Nicolas Heess, Thomas Degris, Daan Wierstra, and Martin Riedmiller.
  Deterministic policy gradient algorithms. In Eric P. Xing and Tony Jebara (eds.), Proceedings of
  the 31st International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 32 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 387–395, Bejing, China, 22–24 Jun 2014. PMLR. URL https://
  proceedings.mlr.press/v32/silver14.html.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Uriel Singer, Adam Polyak, Thomas Hayes, Xi Yin, Jie An, Songyang Zhang, Qiyuan Hu, Harry
  Yang, Oron Ashual, Oran Gafni, Devi Parikh, Sonal Gupta, and Yaniv Taigman. Make-a-video:
  Text-to-video generation without text-video data, 2022.
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric A. Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics, 2015.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models, 2022.
Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Daniel M. Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford,
  Dario Amodei, and Paul F. Christiano. Learning to summarize from human feedback. CoRR,
  abs/2009.01325, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.01325.
Corentin Tallec and Yann Ollivier. Unbiasing truncated backpropagation through time. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1705.08209, 2017.
Shuhan Tan, Boris Ivanovic, Xinshuo Weng, Marco Pavone, and Philipp Kraehenbuehl. Language
  conditioned traffic generation, 2023.
Bram Wallace, Akash Gokul, Stefano Ermon, and Nikhil Naik. End-to-end diffusion latent optimiza-
  tion improves classifier guidance, 2023.
Mitchell Wortsman, Gabriel Ilharco, Samir Ya Gadre, Rebecca Roelofs, Raphael Gontijo-Lopes,
 Ari S Morcos, Hongseok Namkoong, Ali Farhadi, Yair Carmon, Simon Kornblith, et al. Model
 soups: averaging weights of multiple fine-tuned models improves accuracy without increasing
 inference time. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 23965–23998. PMLR,
 2022.
Xiaoshi Wu, Yiming Hao, Keqiang Sun, Yixiong Chen, Feng Zhu, Rui Zhao, and Hongsheng Li.
  Human preference score v2: A solid benchmark for evaluating human preferences of text-to-image
  synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.09341, 2023a.
Xiaoshi Wu, Keqiang Sun, Feng Zhu, Rui Zhao, and Hongsheng Li. Human preference score: Better
  aligning text-to-image models with human preference, 2023b.
Jiazheng Xu, Xiao Liu, Yuchen Wu, Yuxuan Tong, Qinkai Li, Ming Ding, Jie Tang, and Yuxiao Dong.
   Imagereward: Learning and evaluating human preferences for text-to-image generation, 2023.
Xiaohui Zeng, Arash Vahdat, Francis Williams, Zan Gojcic, Or Litany, Sanja Fidler, and Karsten
  Kreis. Lion: Latent point diffusion models for 3d shape generation, 2022.
Daniel M. Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B. Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, Paul
  Christiano, and Geoffrey Irving. Fine-tuning language models from human preferences, 2020.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A       A PPENDIX
           Prompt                   Stable Diffusion        AlignProp                  Prompt                 Stable Diffusion   AlignProp



   “The black motorcycle is                                                  “A bunch of people posing
   parked on the sidewalk.”                                                      with some bikes..”


“A toy elephant is sitting inside                                            “Two small planes sitting near
      a wooden car toy.”                                                       each other on a run way.”


                                                                             “Residential bathroom with
  “A man sitting at a table in
                                                                              commode and shower and
   front of bowls of spices.”
                                                                                 plain white walls.”


Figure 7: In this Figure we qualitatively compare AlignProp with Stable diffusion while using
multiple prompts of HPS v2 evaluation prompt dataset. As can be seen AlignProp achieves higher
fidelity results with better image-text alignment.


                                                       Aesthetic    Compressibility              Aesthetic + Compressibility
          Compressibility Model                          5.32            8.32                                    6.82
          Mixing 0.5                                     6.61            7.92                                    7.27
          Aesthetic Model                                7.13            5.57                                    6.35

Table 4: In the above Table, we compare the mixing results between Compressibility model and
Aesthetic Model. As can be seen from the results, mixing the weights achieves the best results when
the metric accounts for an average of both the scores. Additionally it achieves second best results on
the individual metrics, thus indicating that mixing does result in an interpolation in the reward space.



    Aesthetic
     Model


    Mixing 0.5


Compressibility
   Model


Figure 8: In this Figure we show additional mixing results between compressibilty and Aesthetic
model.


Implementation details We use 4 A100 GPUs for all our experiments, with Adam Optimizer and
a learning rate of 1e-3. We build our codebase on top of Pytorch 2.0. Few reward functions such as


                                                                        13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


aesthetics that are not text-conditioned and are trained on relatively small datasets can result in a
loss of image-text alignment if optimized above a specific score value. To prevent this we do early
stopping (10th epoch in the training process).


                                                 14
