Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


O NE BY O NE , C ONTINUAL C OORDINATING WITH H U -
MANS VIA H YPER -T EAMMATE I DENTIFICATION

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                              A BSTRACT

         One of the primary objectives in modern artificial intelligence researches is to em-
         power agents to effectively coordinate with diverse teammates, particularly human
         teammates. Previous studies focused on training agents either with a fixed popu-
         lation of pre-generated teammates or through the co-evolution of distinct popula-
         tions of agents and teammates. However, it is challenging to enumerate all pos-
         sible teammates in advance, and it is costly, or even impractical to maintain such
         a sufficiently diverse population and repeatedly interact with previously encoun-
         tered teammates. Additional design considerations, such as prioritized sampling,
         are also required to ensure efficient training. To address these challenges and ob-
         tain an efficient human-AI coordination paradigm, we propose a novel approach
         called Concord. Considering that human participants tend to occur in a sequen-
         tial manner, we model the training process with different teammates as a continual
         learning framework, akin to how humans learn and adapt in the real world. We
         propose a mechanism based on hyper-teammate identification to prevent catas-
         trophic forgetting while promoting forward knowledge transfer. Concretely, we
         introduce a teammate recognition module that captures the identification of corre-
         sponding teammates. Leveraging the identification, a well-coordinated AI policy
         can be generated via the hyper-network. The entire framework is trained in a de-
         composed policy gradient manner, allowing for effective credit assignment among
         agents. This approach enables us to train agents with each generated teammate
         or humans one by one, ensuring that agents can coordinate effectively with con-
         current teammates without forgetting previous knowledge. Our approach outper-
         forms multiple baselines in various multi-agent benchmarks, either with generated
         human proxies or real human participants.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) has made significant progress in recent
years, enabling multiple agents to work together towards a shared goal in diverse domains such
as active voltage control (Wang et al., 2021a) and dynamic algorithm configuration (Xue et al.,
2022b). A variety of MARL solutions have been proposed, including value-based approaches such
as VDN (Sunehag et al., 2018), QMIX (Rashid et al., 2018), and QPLEX (Wang et al., 2021), policy
gradient methods such as MADDPG (Lowe et al., 2017) and MAPPO (Yu et al., 2022), and newer
variants like Transformer (Wen et al., 2022). However, building AI agents that can effectively coor-
dinate with unseen teammates, especially human teammates, remains a significant challenge (Klien
et al., 2004; Mutlu et al., 2013; Strouse et al., 2021; Koster et al., 2022). This ability is essential for
numerous applications, including human-machine communication (Guzman & Lewis, 2020), coop-
erative autonomous vehicles (Toghi et al., 2021), and assistive robot control (Losey et al., 2022).
Previous approaches focused on building effective behavior models from human data, which is in-
efficient for complex problems (Kidd & Breazeal, 2008) and may raise privacy concerns (Pan et al.,
2019). Recent approaches, such as ad-hoc teamwork (Mirsky et al., 2022), zero-shot coordina-
tion (Treutlein et al., 2021), and few-shot teamwork (Fosong et al., 2022), have shown remarkable
coordination abilities in a wide range of tasks, such as Overcooked (Carroll et al., 2019). However,
these methods may suffer from over-fitting to their training teammates and struggle to coordinate
effectively with unseen agents (Mahajan et al., 2022). Thus, the challenge of building AI agents
capable of generalizing to unseen teammates in the open-world (Zhou, 2022) remains.


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Training with different teammates is a promising approach to tackling the mentioned issue, involving
the generation of diverse teammates and an efficient training paradigm. To achieve the former, one
approach is to use hand-crafted policies (Xie et al., 2021; Papoudakis et al., 2021), special object
regularizer (Derek & Isola, 2021; Lupu et al., 2021), or Population-Based Training (PBT) (Strouse
et al., 2021; Xue et al., 2022a; Zhao et al., 2023). Regarding the training paradigm, a naive way is
self-play (Tesauro, 1994; Silver et al., 2018), where the agent iteratively improves via playing against
itself. Fictitious Co-Play (FCP) (Heinrich et al., 2015; Strouse et al., 2021) trains agents to be the best
response to both the fully-trained agents and their checkpoints. These approaches have demonstrated
significant progress in benchmarks such as Overcooked (Carroll et al., 2019) and Hanabi (Lupu
et al., 2021), offering promising prospects for human-AI coordination and cooperation. However,
the aforementioned methods pre-generate various teammates and necessitate access to all of them
during training, which might be unfeasible in the real world. On one hand, the task of enumerating
all potential teammates in advance poses significant challenges. Maintaining a sufficiently diverse
population has already placed a substantial demand on computing and storage resources, incurring
considerable costs. Furthermore, if agents are required to cooperate with an unseen teammate,
learning from scratch with all previous seen teammates (especially human participants) would be
even more wasteful, considering the limitations of global time differences and economic costs. On
the other hand, learning a generalized agent via interactions with a population of teammates requires
meticulous design to ensure efficient training, such as prioritized sampling (Zhao et al., 2023).
To address the aforementioned challenges, we draw inspiration from the manner in which humans
learn to coordinate with diverse teammates. Human participants, with whom agents are trained to
cooperate, typically emerge sequentially. Instead of learning to cooperate with all agents simul-
taneously, humans continually adapt to new teammates while retaining knowledge from previous
interactions (Hadsell et al., 2020). In accordance with this idea, we first formulate the problem as
a Multi-Agent Continual Markov Decision Process (MACMDP), where the controlled agents are
trained to coordinate effectively with different teammates that appear sequentially. We observe that
naively applying single-agent continual learning methods to MARL is inefficient, and typical MARL
approaches are inadequate for continual learning scenarios (RQ1 in Sec. 4.1). Therefore, we propose
a general framework called Concord (abbreviation for Continual coordination) to enable efficient
continual training of AI agents and solve the MACMDP. Concretely, we introduce a teammate recog-
nizer that captures the identification information of each corresponding teammate and represents it as
a latent embedding. We then utilize the learned teammate embeddings based on hypernetworks (Ha
et al., 2017; Oswald et al., 2020) to generate the policy parameters of each controlled agent. Finally,
we use value decomposition to facilitate credit assignment among agents, enabling our framework
to handle multiple controlled agents rather than only one. To evaluate the effectiveness of Concord,
we conduct extensive experiments on various cooperative multi-agent benchmarks including Over-
cooked (Carroll et al., 2019) and StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge benchmark (SMAC) (Samvelyan
et al., 2019). We compare Concord against multiple methods in different scenarios, and the results
demonstrate that Concord significantly outperforms these methods, achieving superiority across a
range of evaluation metrics. Our main contributions are:

       • To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that human-AI coordination challenge is
         explored in a continual manner via our formulated MACMDP.
       • We propose a continual MARL paradigm based on hyper-teammate identification, which is
         capable of effectively coordinating with diverse teammates and striking a balance between
         forward transferring and avoiding forgetting.
       • Empirical studies on various benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of Concord in con-
         tinuously coordinating with diverse teammates, including real human teammates.

2    P ROBLEM F ORMALIZATION

The purpose of human-AI coordination is for AI agents to cooperate well with diverse human team-
mates. Previous works relied on a fixed policy population, involving extensive training of AI agents,
but this approach is computationally expensive and does not align with real-world scenarios where
humans are encountered sequentially. Currently, there is limited research on training AI agents
to work well with humans in the continual setting. To address this gap, we introduce a problem
formulation for continual multi-agent coordination learning.


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Specifically, we formalize the continual multi-agent coordination learning problem as a
Multi-Agent Continual Markov Decision Process (MACMDP) consisting of a tuple M :=
{I, S, A, P, R, Θ, µ, γ, T }, where I is the set of AI agents, S and A are the state and action space,
respectively. P is the transition function, R is the reward function, γ ∈ [0, 1) is the discount fac-
tor and T is the continual learning length. Besides, Θ is the teammate type space, and µ is an
indicator function which means that µ(ζ) ∈ Θ(1 ≤ ζ ≤ T ) denotes the teammate policy encoun-
tered at the ζ-th stage. For the sake of brevity, we denote the policy determined by µ in the ζ-th
stage as πζH . These teammates are encountered sequentially, of which one diagram is provided in
App. B.1. In human-AI coordination tasks, cooperating with different humans can be defined as
different tasks, and each human teammate policy πζH can be represented by a task indicator ζ. In
MACMDP, AI agents can not interact with the previous human teammates, which corresponds to
the assumption that the agent can not interact with previous environments in the common contin-
ual reinforcement learning setting (Khetarpal et al., 2022), but are expected to remember how to
cooperate with all previous human teammates. When handling the task ζ, the AI policy π A and
human policy πζH select actions aA , aH according to the current state s, respectively. The next envi-
ronment state s′ is obtained according to the environment transition function P (s′ |s, aA , aH ) and a
                                                                  A H
global reward is returned byPthet global Areward  function R(s, a , a ). We use the discounted return
Jζ (π A , πζH ) = Es,aA ,aH    t γ R(s, a  , aH
                                                )  as the objective on task ζ.
Under this problem formalization, our goal is to find the AI agent policy π A that can maximize
the expected return with different human teammates after the continual learning process, without
                                                                     PT
forgetting the previous cooperating humans, which means to maximize ζ=1 Jζ (π A , πζH ).


3     M ETHOD

3.1   T EAMMATE - ADAPTIVE AI F RAMEWORK

AI agents are anticipated to identify different teammates and adapt accordingly, enabling them to
acquire the ability to coordinate continually. Additionally, the agents should be able to remember
previous teammates while learning to coordinate with new ones. We here propose a comprehensive
pipeline (depicted in Fig. 1 and App. B) that involves designing a human-aware actor-critic structure
for policies training, building teammate representations for teammates capturing, and implementing
an anti-forgetting mechanism to address the forgetting problem during continual learning.

Human-Aware Actor-Critic In a human-AI coordination scenario, the decision-making process
of the overall multi-agent system is jointly determined by both the AI agents and the humans. To
enable AI agents to identify different teammates, we introduce a teammate-adaptive structure, an
extension and variant of hyper-network (Ha et al., 2017; Oswald et al., 2020). This structure is
specifically designed for continual human-AI coordination tasks and can generate actor networks
that can effectively coordinate with specific teammates by leveraging consistent teammate represen-
                                                                                   A
tations. Concretely, the parameters of the AI actor networks are obtained through θi ζ = fψhyper (zζ ),
where fψhyper represents the hyper-network parameterized by ψ. In essence, we incorporate the abil-
ity to adapt to different teammates into the hyper-network, so that it can generate appropriate actor
networks for cooperating with the human teammates based on the input of different teammate rep-
resentations zζ . More details are reported in App. B.2.
To better assess the contribution of AI to the overall performance, we here design a linearly decom-
posed centralized critic like DOP (Wang et al., 2021b). Therefore, we can create individual critics
for the uncontrollable human agents, and model the global Q function by combining the individual Q
values of both human and AI agents. This approach enables the global Q function to more accurately
reflect the joint decision-making process of human-AI coordination, and facilitate credit assignment
between AI and humans, allowing us to isolate the contribution of the AI agents and provide more
precise learning signals for updating π A . In specific, the critic and actor networks          are updated
                                                                                         2
                                          critic                   ϕ       A H        τ
through minimizing the critic loss L             = Eτ ,aA ,aH Qtot (τ , a , a ) − y          and actor loss
                 hP                                   A            i
                                              A Aζ      ϕ
Lactor = EπA                        A
                     i ki (τ ) log πi   aA
                                         i |τi ; θi  Qi i (τ , aA
                                                                i ) , respectively, where ki (τ ) represents



                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              Trainable Networks              Generated Parameters

                                                             𝑄&'&        𝓛()*&*(                 4. Cooperate with human
       𝑠               Mixing Network
                                                                                        AIActor
                                                                                       AI  Actor
                      𝑄"                            𝑄%                 𝓛),('-
                                                                                               3. Generate Adaptive AI
                                            AICritic
                                               Critic
                                           AI                   Reconstruct 𝜏 "         Hyper-
             AI Critic                                                                 Network
           Human Critic                   `
                                   𝜏%         𝑎 ! 𝓛+(&')             Recognizer
     𝜏"           𝑎"                                                                             Teammate Rep.
                                          AIActor
                                             Actor                                             2. Recognition Process
                                          AI
            HumanActor
           Human  Actor
                                                                Teammate Rep.          Recognizer

                           𝓛),.         Hyper-Network                  ⋯ ⋯
                                                                                        𝜏"     1. Few-shot Interaction

     Training Phase                                                                    Test Phase

           Human                                                        𝜋$"
           Policies
                           𝜋!"                𝜋#"        ⋯                         ⋯

                                                         Past                      Future
     Overall Continual Learning Process



Figure 1: The overall framework of Concord. During the training phase, a human-aware actor-
critic is trained for AI to coordinate with humans effectively, where the AI actors are generated
via a hyper-network. Teammate representations are trained via backpropagation, while generated
by the recognizer in the test phase. When testing, the AI first interacts with human to collect few
trajectories, then obtains the corresponding teammates representation for decision-making.


the coefficients of value decomposition generated by an additional hyper-network when inputting the
historical information τ , the global value Qϕtot (τ , aA , aH ) is obtained through Qϕtot (τ , aA , aH ) =
P            ϕA      A
                           P            ϕH
                                         j      H
   i ki (τ )Qi (τ , ai ) +    j kj (τ )Qj (τ , aj ) + b(τ ), where ki (τ ) and b(τ ) are generated by
              i


learnable networks whose inputs are global state, and ki (τ ) is restrictedh to be non-negativei to en-
                                                                                                   ′
sure monotonicity, and y τ denotes the target value y τ = r + γEa′A  ′H
                                                                 i ,aj
                                                                        Qϕtot (τ ′ , a′A   ′H
                                                                                      i , aj ) . Note
that we refer to the parameters of the critic network as ϕ, and those of the target network as ϕ′ .

Teammate Representation Learning To enable our method to adapt to different teammates, as
mentioned above, we use one hyper-network that can generate adaptive actor networks by inputting
different teammate representations. Here, the teammate representations serve the crucial role of rec-
ognizing the behavior patterns of different human teammates. To adopt this teammate representation
scheme, we have two necessary prerequisites: 1) the teammate representations can help the hyper-
network generate AI actor that can cooperates well with human; 2) the teammate representations
should be obtainable with a minimal amount of interaction with humans during the test phase.
To fulfill the first prerequisite, we design an end-to-end update scheme for teammate representations.
In particular, we maintain a separate teammate representation for each group of human teammates
encountered during the continual learning process. This teammate representation zζ is then fed into
the hyper-network to obtain the parameters of the AI actor network θAζ which is expected to coordi-
nate effectively with πζH . Thus, we directly update the hyper-network and teammate representations
with the gradients back-propagated from optimizing the actor loss Lactor .
In terms of the second prerequisite, we additionally design a recognizer network that can reconstruct
learned teammate representations from limited interaction data. This recognizer network is typically
implemented as a trajectory-encoder that takes the trajectories of human teammates as input and
outputs the prediction of the corresponding teammate representations. In specific, the trajectory
encoder’s inputs differ in different processes. In the training process, we encode trajectories of


                                                                4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                                PTτ −1 Tτ −1−t t
varying lengths and minimize one reconstruction loss denoted as Lrecon ζ     = t=0      λ         ∥ẑζ −
    2
zζ ∥2 . This loss function encourages the encoder to effectively reconstruct teammate representations
using trajectories of different lengths. During the test phase, we roll out some trajectories (typically
2 in our experiments) with the teammate. Each entire trajectory undergoes encoding by the encoder,
yielding a reconstructed representation for each trajectory. Then, they are averaged to yield the final
recognition outcome, thereby achieving few-shot recognition of human teammates.

Anti-forgetting Mechanism One of the key challenges in continual multi-agent cooperation
learning is to avoid catastrophic forgetting of previous human teammates as the AI agent learns and
adapts to new ones. Specifically, within our framework, we aim to combat the forgetting problem
in both the recognizer network fηenc and hyper-network fψhyper simultaneously, which correspond
to the ability to recognize and coordinate with the previous human teammates, respectively. To
tackle this challenge, we employ an anti-forgetting mechanism to enforce regularization on both
fηenc and fψhyper networks during the continual learning process. For the recognizer network, we
utilize a small replay buffer to store the teammate representations and a few of interaction trajec-
tories of the previous human teammates. During cooperation learning with the ζ-th human team-
                                                                       Pζ
mates, the actual loss of the recognizer network is Lrecon = i=1 Lrecon         ζ    . Similarly, when train-
ing the hyper-network at the ζ-th cooperation task, we additionally include one regularization loss
              Pζ−1 hyper
Lreg = ζ−1 1
                 i=1 ∥fψ     (zi ) − fψ̃hyper (zi )∥22 in addition to the actor loss to avoid fψhyper ’s forget-
ting the previous cooperation knowledge, where fψ̃hyper denotes the hyper-network obtained after the
(ζ − 1)-th task. In summary, we propose an anti-forgetting mechanism that effectively safeguards
against the forgetting of past knowledge in both the hyper-network and the recognizer network
through the preservation of the updated hyper-network from the previous round and a small memory
pool containing few-shot interactions and teammate representations of previous human teammates.

3.2   OVERALL A LGORITHM

In this section, we provide the overall description of the procedure of our approach, which is under
a continual coordination learning setting. The pseudo-code for both the training and test phase of
our algorithm can be found in App. B.3.
During the training phase, we conduct cooperation learning with human teammates one by one from
π1H to πTH , where we learn the hyper-network and the recognizer network together. In particular,
when we cooperatively train with the ζ-th human teammates, we firstly optimize the human-aware
actor-critic architecture by minimizing the Lcritic and Lactor losses, where the teammate representa-
tion zζ is updated in an end-to-end manner with the back-propagated gradient ∇zζ Lactor . While for
the hyper-network fψhyper , we update it with the actor loss Lactor plus one regularization loss Lreg ,
which means that the actual loss function for the hyper-network is
                                                                        ζ−1
                                                                  β reg X hyper
          L hyper
                    =L   actor
                                 +β   reg   reg
                                            L     =L   actor
                                                               +          ∥f    (zi ) − fψ̃hyper (zi )∥22 ,   (1)
                                                                 ζ − 1 i=1 ψ

where β reg is the coefficient balancing the two loss terms. After the training process of the hyper-
network and teammate representation, we further optimize the recognizer network via reconstruct-
ing the representations of all the human teammates that have already been seen before, which means
                                                                   Pζ
that we update the fηenc via minimizing the reconstruction loss i=1 Lrecon  i    , where Lrecon
                                                                                           i    indi-
cates the reconstruction loss for the teammate representation of the i-th group of human teammates.
Afterwards, we move to the collaborative training with the next human teammates. In brief, the
collaborative training with each group of human teammates is decomposed of two separate stages,
where we train the hyper-network and teammate representations at the first stage and update the
recognizer network at the second stage.
When it comes to the test phase, we first allow a few interaction with the humans for the AI agents.
The sampled human trajectories are fed into the recognizer fηenc to help attain the predicted team-
mate representation, which is then inputted into the hyper-network fψhyper to obtain the actor network
for the AI agents. The final actor network here is employed to coordinate with the humans.


                                                               5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                  100                                                                            Oracle


      Average reward percentage
                                                                                                                 Concord
                                   80                                                                            EWC
                                                                                                                 CLEAR
                                   60                                                                            Vanilla

                                   40

                                   20

                                    0
                                        Coord. Ring   Asy. Advantages       Many Orders   Open Asy. Advantages

Figure 2: The overall performance of distinct algorithms, where Concord achieves comparable co-
ordination ability with Oracle and outperforms other baselines.


4       E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we first conduct experiments on the widely-used Overcooked (Carroll et al., 2019)
to verify whether Concord can effectively coordinate with human teammates under the continual
setting. Then, we evaluate Concord’s ability to coordinate with multiple teammates through exper-
iments on SMAC (Samvelyan et al., 2019). The human teammates involved in these experiments
consist of both human-like models and real human participants.
We compare the proposed Concord with the following methods. 1) Vanilla. The original policy gra-
dient method DOP (Wang et al., 2021b), which is trained sequentially with teammates arriving one
by one, without any extra design. 2) Elastic Weight Consolidation (EWC) (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017).
A regularization-based method that selectively reduces weight plasticity to prevent catastrophic for-
getting in the continual setting. 3) Continual Learning with Experience And Replay (CLEAR) (Rol-
nick et al., 2018). CLEAR stores the data from old tasks and utilizes it for updating networks while
learning new tasks. Specifically, CLEAR samples data not only from the buffer of the current task,
but also from another one containing samples selected from all prior tasks with equal probability. 4)
Oracle (Huang et al., 2021). Multi-task learning is trained with all the teammates at the same time
rather than one by one. Besides, it knows which specific model it is to coordinate with when testing,
which is the key oracle information in continual human-AI coordination. Note that our Oracle adopt
similar paradigms with ZSC methods: 1) Oracle first constructs a diverse population of teammates
trained from different algorithms, which is similar to the typical ZSC approaches (Strouse et al.,
2021; Yu et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023). 2) In the training process, the training processes of Oracle
and ZSC are both similar to multi-task learning. Detailed settings are provided in App. C.

4.1                 C ONTINUAL C OORDINATION WITH H UMAN - LIKE TEAMMATES

First, we evaluate continual coordination ability with human-like teammates on Overcooked (Car-
roll et al., 2019), where different layouts present a unique challenge that can be overcome through
effective coordination. The players are required to put three onions in a pot, collect an onion soup
from the pot after 20 time steps and deliver the dish to a counter. The agents will receive 20 points
for each dish served, and the goal is to serve as many dishes as possible within the allotted time. We
run each algorithm for 5 random seeds and each seed was tested 32 times. The final results were
obtained after averaging these results. We investigate the following research questions (RQs).

RQ1: How does Concord perform compared to other methods? As can be seen from Fig. 2,
Vanilla achieves the most inferior coordination ability in almost all scenarios, indicating a specific
consideration for the tasks where teammates appear sequentially. Other successful approaches for
single agent continual learning, like EWC, and CLEAR, also suffer from performance degradation
in the involved benchmarks, demonstrating the necessity of specific design for MARL. The Oracle
method, where we train all the tasks simultaneously, can be seen as an upper bound of performance
on the related benchmarks, acquiring superiority over all baselines. Our approach Concord, obtains
comparable performance to Oracle, indicating the efficiency of all the designed modules.


                                                                        6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Key steps                                                                                                    Directions                  counterclockwise (CCW)
        1.placing an onion into the pot                   2.picking up a dish from the dish dispenser                                       clockwise (CW)
        3.picking up ready soup from the pot              4.delivering soup to the serving area                                             bi-direction (Bi-D)
   Behavior Patterns
       Onion: CCW        Onion: CCW        Onion: CCW            Onion: CW              Onion: CW               Onion: Bi-D           Onion: CW             Onion: CCW
       Dish: CCW         Dish: CCW         Dish: CCW             Dish: Bi-D             Dish: CW                Dish: CCW             Dish: CCW             Dish: CCW
       Soup: CCW         Soup: CCW         Soup: CW              Soup: CW               Soup: CW                Soup: CW              Soup: CW              Soup: CW
       Deliver: CW       Deliver: CCW      Deliver: CCW          Deliver: CW            Deliver: CW             Deliver: CW           Deliver: CW           Deliver: CW


      task 1            task 2            task 3, 4              task 5            task 6, 11                task 7, 10             task 8, 12             task 9

   Representation Embeddings
           task 1                              task 1                                             task 1                                                  task 1
                                                                                   task 8                                           task 8, 12
                                                 task 2     task 3, 4                               task 2     task 3, 4                                 task 2
                                                                                                                              task 6, 11                          task 3, 4
        task 2                                                                 task 6         task 7

                                          task 5                                                              task 9                       task 7, 10     task 9
                                                                                         task 5
                                                                                                                                             task 5
                                                                                                                                                              top pot
                                                                                                                                             right pot



Figure 3: The t-SNE (Van der Maaten & Hinton, 2008) projection of different behavior patterns.
Completing a delivery task requires several key steps, including placing an onion into the pot, taking
a dish, taking a ready soup, and delivering the soup, and each step has three directions for human-
like models: always clockwise (CW), always counterclockwise (CCW), and bi-direction (Bi-D).
Then, the behavior pattern of a teammate can be defined as the directions used in the key steps.


Furthermore, we also show the comparisons of different methods on forgetting and forward transfer
in Tab. 3 in App. D.1. Concord achieves the minimum forgetting on all the four layouts, validating
the effectiveness of the proposed anti-forgetting mechanism. Besides, the forward transfer values of
Concord on all the layouts are best, indicating that Concord can coordinate well with unseen team-
mates. Vanilla is worst, demonstrating the necessity of mechanism for continual learning. Specifi-
cally, we compare the single coordination performance of Concord and Vanilla on all the layouts in
Fig. 12-15 of App. D.2. We can find Vanilla exhibits a considerable amount of forgetting.

RQ2: How does the teammate representation mechanism work? As an important aspect of
Concord, the learning of teammate representations helps AI agents prevent catastrophic forgetting
and effectively adapt to coordinate with different human teammates. The human recognizer encodes
a representation embedding for each teammate based on their behavioral patterns. Using this em-
bedding, an appropriate actor network is generated and utilized to effectively cooperate with the
teammate. We demonstrate the differences in behavioral patterns among distinct human-like models
and the corresponding relationship between embedding and behavior pattern in Fig. 3. Two main
observations can be made: 1) The behavioral patterns of human-like models are diverse; 2) Similar
behavior patterns have similar embedding representations, such as 3&4, 6&11, 8&12, and 5, 6, 8,
11&12 (i.e., using the same pot to cook), demonstrating the effectiveness of our method in identify-
ing human teammate behavior patterns, which can help AI agents cooperate more effectively.

RQ3: Is the value decomposition useful? One component of our approach design is the human-
aware actor-critic architecture, which decomposes the global Qtot into the individual Q values of
teammates and AI agents. We here design an ablation that drops the value decomposition practice in
Coord. Ring layout of Overcooked environment, which means treating the teammate as part of the
environment and only learning the Q value of the AI agent. This reduces to applying single agent
reinforcement learning algorithm like previous works (Heinrich et al., 2015; Strouse et al., 2021).
As shown in Fig. 4(a), where we report the testing performance on all 12 tasks after the whole
continual training, the red curve consistently surpasses the orange one. This indicates that the com-
plete Concord algorithm generally shows better anti-forgetting performance over the baseline w/o
value decomposition, demonstrating the effectiveness of the human-aware actor-critic architecture
to facilitate collaborating learning. Due to space limitations, further analysis, such as the number of
episodes for recognition, comparison between few-shot and zero-shot recognition, comparison with


                                                                               7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              160             Concord                                         1.0


 Average reward per episode
                                              Concord w/o Human Critic
                                              Concord (Average over Tasks)
                                              Concord w/o Human Critic (Average over Tasks)   0.8
                              140
                                                                                              0.6
                              120                                                                                                                Concord
                                                                                              0.4                                                EWC
                                                                                                                                                 CLEAR
                              100                                                             0.2                                                Vanilla
                                                                                                                                                 Memory Decay
                                    0    2    4           6           8          10           0.0   P&P         P&M      P&E      M&M      M&E     E&E

                                    (a) Study on value decomposition                                          (b) Experimental results on SMAC

Figure 4: (a) Performance comparison between Concord with and without value decomposition. (b)
Experimental results on the map 4m. The gray shaded bar is used to denote the degree of forgetting,
which equals to the highest test win rate during training minus the final test win rate. The x-axis
represents the combination of two teammates, e.g., P&P means both teammates are poor (P) models.


given teammate ID, and sensitivity analysis of the replay buffer size, as well as experiments con-
ducted on the SMAC environment, can be found in Appendix D.3 and Appendix D.4, respectively.

4.2                                 C ONTINUAL C OORDINATION BETWEEN M ULTIPLE H UMAN - LIKE TEAMMATES AND
                                    M ULTIPLE AI AGENTS

Multi-player human-AI coordination is an understudied yet important setting in practical appli-
cations. To test the generalization ability of Concord, we use three maps in the SMAC environ-
ment (Samvelyan et al., 2019) to assess the coordination ability between multiple human-like team-
mates and multiple AI agents. We use DOP (Wang et al., 2021b) to train the human-like teammates.
Three checkpoints with low, medium, high win rates during the training process were selected to
simulate poor (P), medium (M) and expert (E) human players, respectively. Then, we train the agent
via different algorithms to continually coordinate with single (maps 3m and 2s1z) or multiple (map
4m) of human-like teammates. Fig. 4(b) presents the results on map 4m, from which we can see
that the gray shaded area of Concord is smallest, indicating that Concord generally has better anti-
forgetting performance over other baselines. Results on maps 3m and 2s1z are reported in App. D.4.

4.3                                 C ONTINUAL C OORDINATION WITH H UMANS

Finally, we conduct experiments on the Open Asy. Advantages layout to investigate the ability of
coordinating with real humans. We first collect around 160 human-human trajectories (for a total of
64k environment timesteps) and partition them into two subsets, splitting each trajectory into two
single-agent trajectories. Based on the collected human data, we construct 8 sets of human proxy
models through behavior cloning. Then we train different methods by using these human proxy
models as the teammates that appear sequentially. Note that the AI agents obtained by different
methods will play with the real human participants in the test phase, not the human proxy models.
More details about the construction of human proxy models and ethical statement concerning this
experiment are provided in App. E.1 and E.2, respectively.
Main results. We show the single coordination performance after training in Fig. 5(a). Among
these algorithms, Concord is the closest to oracle in terms of performance, and outperforms CLEAR
and EWC baselines with most teammates, which is consistent with the results in Section 4.1. The
Vanilla method performs the worst and shows catastrophic forgetting, which again illustrates the
importance of the anti-forgetting in continual human-AI coordination.
Human preference. To check the preference of AI agents obtained by different algorithms of human
players, we additionally introduce a popular subjective metric, i.e., human preference (Strouse et al.,
2021; Yu et al., 2023), to evaluate different methods, with detailed explanation in App. E.3. As
shown in Fig. 5(b), Concord is better than the three baselines and comparable with Oracle. For
instance, the percentage of volunteers who prefer Concord method is 62.5% higher than those who
prefer CLEAR. This shows that Concord is relatively more preferred by humans, demonstrating the
value of Concord for practical human-AI coordination.


                                                                                                          8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                   Human3
                                                                                                     Oracle          0.125    0.375    0.5     0.875
                   Human4                                        Human2


                                                                               250
                                                                                                    Concord -0.125            0.375   0.625    0.875
                                                                      200225
                                                       125   150175
                                                75 100
          Human5                      0 25
                                           50
                                                                                 Human1
                                                                                                      EWC -0.375 -0.375               0.25     0.75

                                                                                          Oracle    CLEAR -0.5       -0.625   -0.25            0.625
                                                                                          Concord
                                                                                          EWC
                                                                                          CLEAR
                   Human6                                        Human8
                                                                                          Vanilla    Vanilla -0.875 -0.875    -0.75   -0.625
                                   Human7                                                                     Oracle Concord EWC CLEAR Vanilla
                            (a) Main results                                                                     (b) Human preference

Figure 5: (a) Single coordination performance results with humans. (b) Human preference results
for row method over column method. The value at i-th row and j-th column is the difference in the
percentage of humans who prefer i-th method compared to those who prefer j-th method more.

5   R ELATED WORK
Cooperative MARL has attracted popular attention (Oroojlooy & Hajinezhad, 2022), exhibiting sig-
nificant advancements in diverse domains (Sartoretti et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2021a; Xue et al.,
2022b). However, amidst the success in MARL, the challenge of developing AI agents that can
effectively coordinate with diverse teammates remains a fundamental challenge (Dafoe et al., 2021).
Typical approaches utilize techniques like modelling (Albrecht & Stone, 2018) to capture others’
intentions or behavior or (repeatedly) build an effective behavior model over human data and
plan with the human model (Sheridan, 2016). Other related approaches like ad-hoc teamwork
(AHT) (Mirsky et al., 2022), few-shot teamwork (FST) (Fosong et al., 2022), and zero-shot co-
ordination (ZSC) (Treutlein et al., 2021) have been developed recently. AHT considers designing
agents that can coordinate with new teammates without prior coordination (Stone et al., 2010). The
goal of ZSC is to train the agent(s) that can coordinate effectively with a wide range of unseen team-
mates (Hu et al., 2020; Treutlein et al., 2021). Few-shot adaptation usually samples K episodes by
any policy to obtain a latent variable z for downstream tasks, which plays a crucial role in single
agent reinforcement learning (Kumar et al., 2020; Osa et al., 2022; Gaya et al., 2022b).
Continual Reinforcement Learning emerges as a promising solution to address the aforementioned
challenges (Khetarpal et al., 2022), where the agent aims to avoid catastrophic forgetting, as well
as enable knowledge transfer to new tasks (a.k.a. stability-plasticity dilemma (Parisi et al., 2019)).
Among the previous works, EWC (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017) conducts ℓ2 distance-based weight reg-
ularization with the weights learned in the previous tasks. CLEAR (Rolnick et al., 2018) is a task-
agnostic method without need for task information during the continual learning process. It stores
a large experience replay buffer and addresses the forgetting problem by sampling data. Hyper-
CRL (Huang et al., 2021) utilizes a hypernetwork (Oswald et al., 2020) to enhance the efficiency of
continual learning. A detailed related work can be found in App. A.

6   C ONCLUSIONS AND LIMITATIONS
Recognizing the importance and practicality of human-AI coordination, this study takes a significant
stride towards addressing this challenge in a continual manner. We begin by formulating the prob-
lem as a MACMDP, where teammates are encountered sequentially. Subsequently, a mechanism
based on hyper-teammate identification is proposed to avoid catastrophic forgetting while promote
forward knowledge transfer for multi-agent coordination. To the best of our knowledge, our pro-
posed method, Concord, is the first to address the human-AI coordination problem via continual
training. Experiments on various multi-agent benchmarks validate the effectiveness of Concord,
demonstrating its strong ability to continually coordinate with generated human-like models or real
human participants across a range of evaluation metrics. Although Concord alleviates the issue of
storage overhead compared to previous methods, it still necessitates a certain amount of storage to
prevent forgetting. Besides, addressing large-scale problems poses a challenge for current human-AI
coordination methods. Further research is required to delve deeper into these two topics.


                                                                                              9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Stefano V Albrecht and Peter Stone. Autonomous agents modelling other agents: A comprehensive
  survey and open problems. Artificial Intelligence, 258:66–95, 2018.
Samuel Barrett and Peter Stone. Cooperating with unknown teammates in complex domains: A
  robot soccer case study of ad hoc teamwork. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 2010–2016, 2015.
Lucian Busoniu, Robert Babuska, and Bart De Schutter. A comprehensive survey of multiagent re-
  inforcement learnin. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C (Applications
  and Reviews), 38(2):156–172, 2008.
Micah Carroll, Rohin Shah, Mark K Ho, Tom Griffiths, Sanjit Seshia, Pieter Abbeel, and Anca
 Dragan. On the utility of learning about humans for human-AI coordination. In Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems 32, pp. 5175–5186, 2019.
Rujikorn Charakorn, Poramate Manoonpong, and Nat Dilokthanakul. Generating diverse coopera-
  tive agents by learning incompatible policies. In The 11th International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2023.
Shuo Chen, Ewa Andrejczuk, Zhiguang Cao, and Jie Zhang. Aateam: Achieving the ad hoc team-
  work by employing the attention mechanism. In The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, pp. 7095–7102, 2020.
Allan Dafoe, Yoram Bachrach, Gillian Hadfield, Eric Horvitz, Kate Larson, and Thore Graepel.
  Cooperative ai: machines must learn to find common ground. Nature, 593(7857):33–36, 2021.
Kenneth Derek and Phillip Isola. Adaptable agent populations via a generative model of policies. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34, pp. 3902–3913, 2021.
Elliot Fosong, Arrasy Rahman, Ignacio Carlucho, and Stefano V Albrecht. Few-shot teamwork.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.09300, 2022.
Ted Fujimoto, Samrat Chatterjee, and Auroop Ganguly. Ad hoc teamwork in the presence of adver-
  saries. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.05071, 2022.
Jean-Baptiste Gaya, Thang Doan, Lucas Caccia, Laure Soulier, Ludovic Denoyer, and Roberta
  Raileanu. Building a subspace of policies for scalable continual learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2211.10445, 2022a.
Jean-Baptiste Gaya, Laure Soulier, and Ludovic Denoyer. Learning a subspace of policies for on-
  line adaptation in reinforcement learning. In The 10th International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022b.
Pengjie Gu, Mengchen Zhao, Jianye Hao, and Bo An. Online ad hoc teamwork under partial ob-
  servability. In The 10th International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Jun Guo, Yonghong Chen, Yihang Hao, Zixin Yin, Yin Yu, and Simin Li. Towards comprehen-
  sive testing on the robustness of cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2204.07932, 2022.
Andrea L Guzman and Seth C Lewis. Artificial intelligence and communication: A human–machine
  communication research agenda. New Media & Society, 22(1):70–86, 2020.
David Ha, Andrew M. Dai, and Quoc V. Le. Hypernetworks. In The 5th International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2017.
Raia Hadsell, Dushyant Rao, Andrei A Rusu, and Razvan Pascanu. Embracing change: Continual
  learning in deep neural networks. Trends in cognitive sciences, 24(12):1028–1040, 2020.
Johannes Heinrich, Marc Lanctot, and David Silver. Fictitious self-play in extensive-form games.
  In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 805–813, 2015.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jonathan Ho and Stefano Ermon. Generative adversarial imitation learning. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems 29, pp. 4565–4573, 2016.
Hengyuan Hu, Adam Lerer, Alex Peysakhovich, and Jakob Foerster. “other-play” for zero-shot
  coordination. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  4399–4410, 2020.
Yizhou Huang, Kevin Xie, Homanga Bharadhwaj, and Florian Shkurti. Continual model-based
  reinforcement learning with hypernetworks. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
  Automation, pp. 799–805, 2021.
Samuel Kessler, Piotr Miłoś, Jack Parker-Holder, and Stephen J Roberts. The surprising ef-
  fectiveness of latent world models for continual reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2211.15944, 2022a.
Samuel Kessler, Jack Parker-Holder, Philip J. Ball, Stefan Zohren, and Stephen J. Roberts. Same
  state, different task: Continual reinforcement learning without interference. In Thirty-Sixth AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 7143–7151, 2022b.
Khimya Khetarpal, Matthew Riemer, Irina Rish, and Doina Precup. Towards continual reinforce-
  ment learning: A review and perspectives. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 75:1401–
  1476, 2022.
Cory D Kidd and Cynthia Breazeal. Robots at home: Understanding long-term human-robot inter-
  action. In IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 3230–3235,
  2008.
James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A
  Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, et al. Overcom-
  ing catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences,
  114(13):3521–3526, 2017.
Glen Klien, David D Woods, Jeffrey M Bradshaw, Robert R Hoffman, and Paul J Feltovich. Ten
  challenges for making automation a “team player” in joint human-agent activity. IEEE Intelligent
  Systems, 19(6):91–95, 2004.
Raphael Koster, Jan Balaguer, Andrea Tacchetti, Ari Weinstein, Tina Zhu, Oliver Hauser, Dun-
  can Williams, Lucy Campbell-Gillingham, Phoebe Thacker, Matthew Botvinick, et al. Human-
  centred mechanism design with democratic AI. Nature Human Behaviour, 6(10):1398–1407,
  2022.
Dhireesha Kudithipudi, Mario Aguilar-Simon, Jonathan Babb, Maxim Bazhenov, Douglas Black-
  iston, Josh Bongard, Andrew P Brna, Suraj Chakravarthi Raja, Nick Cheney, Jeff Clune, et al.
  Biological underpinnings for lifelong learning machines. Nature Machine Intelligence, 4(3):196–
  210, 2022.
Saurabh Kumar, Aviral Kumar, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. One solution is not all you need:
  Few-shot extrapolation via structured maxent RL. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems 33, pp. 8198–8210, 2020.
Niklas Lauffer, Ameesh Shah, Micah Carroll, Michael D. Dennis, and Stuart Russell. Who needs
  to know? Minimal knowledge for optimal coordination. In Proceedings of the 40th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 18599–18613, 2023.
Soochan Lee, Junsoo Ha, Dongsu Zhang, and Gunhee Kim. A neural dirichlet process mixture
  model for task-free continual learning. In The 8th International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations, 2020.
David Lopez-Paz and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. Gradient episodic memory for continual learning. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30, pp. 6467–6476, 2017.
Dylan P Losey, Hong Jun Jeon, Mengxi Li, Krishnan Srinivasan, Ajay Mandlekar, Animesh Garg,
  Jeannette Bohg, and Dorsa Sadigh. Learning latent actions to control assistive robots. Autonomous
  robots, 46(1):115–147, 2022.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ryan Lowe, Yi Wu, Aviv Tamar, Jean Harb Pieter Abbeel, and Igor Mordatch. Multi-agent actor-
  critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems 30, pp. 6379–6390, 2017.
Andrei Lupu, Brandon Cui, Hengyuan Hu, and Jakob Foerster. Trajectory diversity for zero-shot
  coordination. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  7204–7213, 2021.
Xueguang Lyu, Yuchen Xiao, Brett Daley, and Christopher Amato. Contrasting centralized and
  decentralized critics in multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the International
  Joint Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, pp. 844–852, 2021.
Anuj Mahajan, Mikayel Samvelyan, Tarun Gupta, Benjamin Ellis, Mingfei Sun, Tim Rocktäschel,
  and Shimon Whiteson. Generalization in cooperative multi-agent systems. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2202.00104, 2022.
Marc Masana, Xialei Liu, Bartlomiej Twardowski, Mikel Menta, Andrew D Bagdanov, and Joost
 van de Weijer. Class-incremental learning: survey and performance evaluation on image classifi-
 cation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.15277, 2020.
Reuth Mirsky, Ignacio Carlucho, Arrasy Rahman, Elliot Fosong, William Macke, Mohan Sridharan,
  Peter Stone, and Stefano V Albrecht. A survey of ad hoc teamwork research. In European
  Conference on Multi-Agent Systems, pp. 275–293, 2022.
Bilge Mutlu, Allison Terrell, and Chien-Ming Huang. Coordination mechanisms in human-robot
  collaboration. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Collaborative Manipulation, pp. 1–6, 2013.
Afshin Oroojlooy and Davood Hajinezhad. A review of cooperative multi-agent deep reinforcement
  learning. Applied Intelligence, pp. 1–46, 2022.
Takayuki Osa, Voot Tangkaratt, and Masashi Sugiyama. Discovering diverse solutions in deep
  reinforcement learning by maximizing state–action-based mutual information. Neural Networks,
  152:90–104, 2022.
Johannes Von Oswald, Christian Henning, João Sacramento, and Benjamin F. Grewe. Continual
  learning with hypernetworks. In The 8th International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2020.
Xinlei Pan, Weiyao Wang, Xiaoshuai Zhang, Bo Li, Jinfeng Yi, and Dawn Song. How you act
  tells a lot: Privacy-leaking attack on deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 18th
  International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems, pp. 368–376, 2019.
Georgios Papoudakis, Filippos Christianos, and Stefano Albrecht. Agent modelling under partial
  observability for deep reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems 34, pp. 19210–19222, 2021.
German I Parisi, Ronald Kemker, Jose L Part, Christopher Kanan, and Stefan Wermter. Continual
  lifelong learning with neural networks: A review. Neural Networks, 113:54–71, 2019.
Arrasy Rahman, Elliot Fosong, Ignacio Carlucho, and Stefano V Albrecht. Towards robust ad hoc
  teamwork agents by creating diverse training teammates. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.14138, 2022.
Tabish Rashid, Mikayel Samvelyan, Christian Schroeder, Gregory Farquhar, Jakob Foerster, and
  Shimon Whiteson. QMIX: Monotonic value function factorisation for deep multi-agent rein-
  forcement learning. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 4295–4304, 2018.
Manish Ravula, Shani Alkoby, and Peter Stone. Ad hoc teamwork with behavior switching agents.
 In Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp.
 550–556, 2019.
David Rolnick, Arun Ahuja, Jonathan Schwarz, Timothy P. Lillicrap, and Greg Wayne. Experience
  replay for continual learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32, pp.
  348–358, 2018.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Mikayel Samvelyan, Tabish Rashid, Christian Schröder de Witt, Gregory Farquhar, Nantas Nardelli,
 Tim G. J. Rudner, Chia-Man Hung, Philip H. S. Torr, Jakob N. Foerster, and Shimon Whiteson.
 The Starcraft multi-agent challenge. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on
 Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems, pp. 2186–2188, 2019.
Guillaume Sartoretti, Justin Kerr, Yunfei Shi, Glenn Wagner, TK Satish Kumar, Sven Koenig, and
  Howie Choset. Primal: Pathfinding via reinforcement and imitation multi-agent learning. IEEE
  Robotics and Automation Letters, 4(3):2378–2385, 2019.
Thomas B Sheridan. Human–robot interaction: status and challenges. Human factors, 58(4):525–
  532, 2016.
David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Matthew Lai, Arthur Guez,
  Marc Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran, Thore Graepel, et al. A general reinforcement
  learning algorithm that masters chess, shogi, and go through self-play. Science, 362(6419):1140–
  1144, 2018.
Peter Stone, Gal Kaminka, Sarit Kraus, and Jeffrey Rosenschein. Ad hoc autonomous agent teams:
  Collaboration without pre-coordination. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth AAAI Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 1504–1509, 2010.
DJ Strouse, Kevin McKee, Matt Botvinick, Edward Hughes, and Richard Everett. Collaborating
  with humans without human data. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34, pp.
  14502–14515, 2021.
Peter Sunehag, Guy Lever, Audrunas Gruslys, Wojciech Marian Czarnecki, Vinı́cius Flores Zam-
  baldi, Max Jaderberg, Marc Lanctot, Nicolas Sonnerat, Joel Z Leibo, Karl Tuyls, and Thore
  Graepel. Value-decomposition networks for cooperative multi-agent learning based on team re-
  ward. In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent
  Systems, pp. 2085–2087, 2018.
Gerald Tesauro. Td-gammon, a self-teaching backgammon program, achieves master-level play.
  Neural computation, 6(2):215–219, 1994.
Behrad Toghi, Rodolfo Valiente, Dorsa Sadigh, Ramtin Pedarsani, and Yaser P Fallah. Cooperative
  autonomous vehicles that sympathize with human drivers. In IEEE/RSJ International Conference
  on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 4517–4524, 2021.
Johannes Treutlein, Michael Dennis, Caspar Oesterheld, and Jakob Foerster. A new formalism,
  method and open issues for zero-shot coordination. In Proceedings of the 38th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10413–10423, 2021.
L. Van der Maaten and G. E. Hinton. Visualizing data using t-sne. Journal of machine learning
  research, 9(11):2579–2605, 2008.
Jianhao Wang, Zhizhou Ren, Terry Liu, Yang Yu, and Chongjie Zhang. QPLEX: Duplex dueling
   multi-agent Q-learning. In The 9th International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Jianhong Wang, Wangkun Xu, Yunjie Gu, Wenbin Song, and Tim C. Green. Multi-agent reinforce-
   ment learning for active voltage control on power distribution networks. In Advances in Neural
   Information Processing Systems 34, pp. 3271–3284, 2021a.
Xihuai Wang, Zhicheng Zhang, and Weinan Zhang. Model-based multi-agent reinforcement learn-
  ing: Recent progress and prospects. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.10603, 2022a.
Yihan Wang, Beining Han, Tonghan Wang, Heng Dong, and Chongjie Zhang. DOP: Off-policy
  multi-agent decomposed policy gradients. In The 9th International Conference on Learning Rep-
  resentations, 2021b.
Zhi Wang, Chunlin Chen, and Daoyi Dong. Lifelong incremental reinforcement learning with online
  bayesian inference. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 33(8):4003–
  4016, 2022b.


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Muning Wen, Jakub Grudzien Kuba, Runji Lin, Weinan Zhang, Ying Wen, Jun Wang, and Yaodong
 Yang. Multi-agent reinforcement learning is a sequence modeling problem. In Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems 35, pp. 16509–16521, 2022.
Maciej Wołczyk, Michał Zajkac, Razvan Pascanu, Łukasz Kuciński, and Piotr Miłoś. Continual
 world: A robotic benchmark for continual reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Infor-
 mation Processing Systems 34, pp. 28496–28510, 2021.
Annie Wong, Thomas Bäck, Anna V Kononova, and Aske Plaat. Deep multiagent reinforcement
  learning: Challenges and directions. Artificial Intelligence Review, pp. 1–34, 2022.
Annie Xie, Dylan Losey, Ryan Tolsma, Chelsea Finn, and Dorsa Sadigh. Learning latent represen-
  tations to influence multi-agent interaction. In 4th Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 575–588,
  2021.
Ke Xue, Yutong Wang, Lei Yuan, Cong Guan, Chao Qian, and Yang Yu. Heterogeneous multi-agent
  zero-shot coordination by coevolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.04957, 2022a.
Ke Xue, Jiacheng Xu, Lei Yuan, Miqing Li, Chao Qian, Zongzhang Zhang, and Yang Yu. Multi-
  agent dynamic algorithm configuration. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
  35, pp. 20147–20161, 2022b.
Chao Yu, Akash Velu, Eugene Vinitsky, Jiaxuan Gao, Yu Wang, Alexandre Bayen, and Yi Wu.
  The surprising effectiveness of PPO in cooperative multi-agent games. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems 35, pp. 24611–24624, 2022.
Chao Yu, Jiaxuan Gao, Weilin Liu, Botian Xu, Hao Tang, Jiaqi Yang, Yu Wang, and Yi Wu. Learning
  zero-shot cooperation with humans, assuming humans are biased. In The 11th International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Fuxiang Zhang, Chengxing Jia, Yi-Chen Li, Lei Yuan, Yang Yu, and Zongzhang Zhang. Discovering
  generalizable multi-agent coordination skills from multi-task offline data. In The 11th Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Kaiqing Zhang, Zhuoran Yang, and Tamer Başar. Multi-agent reinforcement learning: A selective
  overview of theories and algorithms. Handbook of Reinforcement Learning and Control, pp.
  321–384, 2021.
R. Zhao, J. Song, H. Hu, Y. Gao, Y. Wu, Z. Sun, and Y. Wei. Maximum entropy population based
  training for zero-shot human-ai coordination. In Proceedings of the 37th AAAI Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), pp. 6145–6153, 2023.
Zhi-Hua Zhou. Open-environment machine learning. National Science Review, 9(8), 2022.
Changxi Zhu, Mehdi Dastani, and Shihan Wang. A survey of multi-agent reinforcement learning
  with communication. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.08975, 2022.


                                               14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Appendix

A    D ETAILED R ELATED W ORK

Many real-world problems consist of multiple interactive agents, which can often be represented
as a Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) problem (Busoniu et al., 2008; Zhang et al.,
2021). Additionally, when these agents share a common objective, it falls under the category of
cooperative MARL (Oroojlooy & Hajinezhad, 2022), which has exhibited significant advancements
in diverse domains such as path finding (Sartoretti et al., 2019), active voltage control (Wang et al.,
2021a), and dynamic algorithm configuration (Xue et al., 2022b). Numerous approaches have been
proposed to facilitate agent coordination, including policy-based methods such as MADDPG (Lowe
et al., 2017) and MAPPO (Yu et al., 2022), value-based techniques like VDN (Sunehag et al., 2018)
and QMIX (Rashid et al., 2018), and other approaches like the transformer architecture (Wen et al.,
2022). These methods have demonstrated remarkable coordination abilities across a wide range of
tasks, including SMAC, Hanabi, and GRF (Yu et al., 2022). In addition to the mentioned approaches
and their variants, numerous other methods have been proposed to investigate cooperative MARL,
such as efficient communication strategies (Zhu et al., 2022), offline policy deployment (Zhang
et al., 2023), model learning in MARL (Wang et al., 2022a), policy robustness in the presence
of perturbations (Guo et al., 2022), and training paradigms like CTDE (centralized training with
decentralized execution) (Lyu et al., 2021), and more.
Building AIs that can cooperate and coordinate with different teammates or human remains a funda-
mental requirement and challenge for AI (Dafoe et al., 2021). A typical approach utilizes techniques
like modelling (Albrecht & Stone, 2018) to capture others’ intentions or behavior or (repeatedly)
build an effective behavior model over human data and plan with the human model (Sheridan, 2016).
These methods require an expensive and time-consuming data-collection process. Benefiting from
the success of cooperative MARL (Wong et al., 2022), many related approaches like ad-hoc team-
work (AHT) (Mirsky et al., 2022), zero-shot coordination (ZSC) (Treutlein et al., 2021), few-shot
teamwork (FST) (Fosong et al., 2022) have been developed recently. AHT is the research prob-
lem of designing agents that can coordinate with new teammates without prior coordination (Stone
et al., 2010), including teammates type inference (Barrett & Stone, 2015; Chen et al., 2020), chang-
ing point detection (Ravula et al., 2019), partial observation solving (Gu et al., 2021), adversarial
training (Fujimoto et al., 2022), robustness training (Rahman et al., 2022), etc. The goal of ZSC
is to train the agent(s) that can coordinate effectively with a wide range of unseen teammates (Hu
et al., 2020; Treutlein et al., 2021). Many works emerging to improve the ability of multi-agent sys-
tem from different aspects, including diversity measurement (Lupu et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2023),
training paradigm design (Hu et al., 2020; Strouse et al., 2021; Xue et al., 2022a), human bias based
approaches (Yu et al., 2023), diverse teammates generation (Charakorn et al., 2023), etc. The agents
in AHT aim to coordinate with teammates from a target population, while agents in ZSC need aim
to coordinate with arbitrary unseen teammates without any prior coordination (Mirsky et al., 2022;
Lauffer et al., 2023). Few-shot adaptation plays a crucial role in single agent reinforcement learn-
ing (Kumar et al., 2020; Osa et al., 2022; Gaya et al., 2022b), which samples K episodes by any
policy to obtain a latent variable z for downstream tasks. In FST setting (Fosong et al., 2022), skilled
agents trained in a team to complete one task are combined with skilled agents from different tasks
and together must learn to adapt to an unseen but related task.
Another topic that is related to our work is Continual Learning, which involves sequential repre-
sentations of tasks or samples (Parisi et al., 2019; Masana et al., 2020; Kudithipudi et al., 2022).
Continual learning, or to say incremental learning or lifelong learning, is considered in many differ-
ent fields, while in the field of continual reinforcement learning (Khetarpal et al., 2022), we expect
the agents to sequentially learn decision-making across different tasks. Among the previous works,
EWC (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017) conducts ℓ2 distance-based weight regularization with the weights
learned in the previous tasks. This algorithm requires additional supervision information to select a
specific Q-function head and task-specific exploration schedule for different tasks. Different from
EWC, CLEAR (Rolnick et al., 2018) is a task-agnostic method without need for task information
during the continual learning process. It stores a large experience replay buffer and addresses the
forgetting problem by sampling data of previous tasks from the buffer. Several other approaches,
such as HyperCRL (Huang et al., 2021) and (Kessler et al., 2022a), utilize a learned world model
to enhance the efficiency of continual learning. To address scalability issues in scenarios with a


                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


large number of tasks, CN-DPM (Lee et al., 2020) and LLIRL (Wang et al., 2022b) decompose
the task space into subsets of data (tasks) and employ techniques like Dirichlet Process Mixture or
Chinese Restaurant Process to expand the neural network for efficient continual supervised learning
and reinforcement learning tasks, respectively. OWL (Kessler et al., 2022b) is a recently proposed
approach that utilizes a multi-head architecture to achieve high learning efficiency. CSP (Gaya et al.,
2022a) incrementally builds a subspace of policies for training a reinforcement learning agent on a
sequence of tasks. Despite the various approaches that have been proposed to solve the continual
learning problem, they mainly focus on the field of single-agent reinforcement learning. There is
still limited research considering continual learning in multi-agent problem setting, let alone the
problem of multi-agent continual coordination learning.
Even the mentioned methods could endow the trained agents with the ability to coordinate more
efficiently with different teammates. They need to train with all teammates at all times, which
requires extensive computing and storage resources and extra design, such as prioritized sampling.
In this work, we show these approaches are of low learning efficiency and take a further step for this
problem by modeling it as a continual learning problem.


B     M ORE D ETAILS ABOUT THE P ROPOSED M ETHOD

B.1   W ORKFLOW D IAGRAM OF M ULTI -AGENT CONTINUAL COORDINATION L EARNING

In the section of Problem Formalization, we propose a problem setting of Multi-Agent Continual
Markov Decision Process (MACMDP), where the goal is to conduct multi-agent continual coordi-
nation learning. We hope this formalization can stimulate further research on training agents to work
well with humans in the continual setting. To further provide a visual understanding of the process
of MACMDP, a workflow diagram illustrating MACMDP is provided in Fig. 6. As depicted in this
diagram, the AI agents are expected to collaboratively train with the teammate policies one by one,
and interacting with the previous teammates is prohibited during training with the new teammates.


          Human             Human               Human                               Human
         Policy 𝜋"(        Policy 𝜋%(          Policy 𝜋'(        ⋯                 Policy 𝜋&(       ⋯
                                                          Teammate Policy Stream
                                                                                        Collaborative
                                                                                          training


       AI Agent           AI Agent           AI Agent                          AI Agent
              $
      Policy 𝜋(")                $
                         Policy 𝜋(%)                $
                                            Policy 𝜋(')          ⋯                    $
                                                                              Policy 𝜋(&)           ⋯

                                                                         Continual Learning Timeline



           Figure 6: Workflow diagram of Multi-Agent continual coordination Learning.


B.2   N ETWORK A RCHITECTURE

Hyper-Network The hyper-network in our method is used to generate the parameters of the AI
actor by inputting the teammate representation to it. Thus, the network architecture determines the
size of parameters generated by the hyper-network. In specific, we model the actor network with
three layers as shown in Fig. 7(a), including a fully-connected layer, followed by a 64 bit GRU, and
further followed by another fully-connected layer that outputs a probability distribution over local
actions. In our design, the parameters of this actor network is completely generated by the hyper-
network. In specific, we model the hyper-network as three multi-layer perceptions (MLPs), each
generating the parameters of one layer of the actor network, which is also shown in Fig. 7(a). We
set each MLP with two hidden layers of 20 neurons and ELU non-linearity function, and the input


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                   Predicted Teammate
                                                                                                Teammate Rep. 𝑧!
                    GRU                                  Rep. 𝑧̂!
   𝑠!     FC                    FC         𝜋
                                                                                                                    𝐿)*+,-
                                                                                                                     !

                                   Actor Network          FC                           𝑧̂!#            𝑧̂!$           𝑧̂!%
                                                                                                                                               ' ($
                                                                                                                                             𝑧!̂ !

          FC         FC         FC                                                             ℎ$              ℎ%              ℎ&
                                                       GRU                     ℎ#                                                   ⋯                    ℎ '! RNN Hidden

        FC 20×20   FC 20×20   FC 20×20                                                                                                                        Recognizer
                                                          FC                                        𝑠$ , 𝑎$"
                                                                                    𝑠# , 𝑎#"                                            𝑠'! ($ , 𝑎 "
                                                                                                                                                   '! ($
                                                                                                                    𝑠% , 𝑎%"        ⋯
        FC 32×20   FC 32×20   FC 32×20                       Recognizer                                                                                  Human Trajectory
                                                                                                                                                     Reconstruction Process
                                                   Human Trajectory 𝜏!"
                                  Hyper-Network

                       (a)                                                                     (b)

Figure 7: (a) Network architecture of the hyper-network and actor network. (b) Network architecture
of the recognizer network. Tτ in the figure is short for TτζH , which indicates the horizon of the human
trajectory τζH .



dimension of each MLP network equals to the dimension of teammate representation, which is set
32 throughout all our experiments.


Recognizer Network The recognizer network (see Fig. 7(b)) is utilized to reconstruct the team-
mate representation zζ from a few of human interaction trajectories. Specifically, the recognizer
network is built as a RNN-based trajectory encoder, which takes the human trajectory as input. For
each human trajectory τζH , the recognizer will output a predicted teammate representation for each
timestep t, which we denote as ẑζt , with the trajectory information before t. Then we update the
recognizer network via minimizing the following reconstruction loss:

                                                             τ −1
                                                            TX
                                               Lrecon
                                                ζ     =             λTτ −1−t ∥ẑζt − zζ ∥22 ,                                                                                 (2)
                                                             t=0


which is a weighted sum of the ℓ2 distances between every ẑζt and zζ , where we utilize one hyper-
parameter λ to control the weights. On one hand, by minimizing the ℓ2 distance between each
ẑζt and zζ , we ensure the recognizer’s ability to reconstruct the representation zζ from variable-
length trajectory information. On the other hand, we assign larger weights to the ẑζt loss terms with
larger t. The reason for this practice is that during the final test phase, only the predicted teammate
representation at the last timestep ẑζTτ −1 is utilized as the input of the subsequent networks, which
means that we hope that ẑζt with larger t should be more accurate. From a different perspective,
the reconstruction losses for ẑζt that t is smaller than Tτ − 1 are utilized as auxiliary losses to
facilitate the recognizer network training. In practice, the hyper-parameter λ is set as 0.994 and 0.92
in Overcooked and SMAC, respectively. Above, we have explained how the recognizer network
generates the reconstructed teammate representation with one human trajectory. However, we aim
to utilize multiple trajectories to recognize teammates in our algorithm. In practical implementation,
we firstly generate representation with each human trajectory and then compute the mean vector of
these representations.


B.3     OVERALL W ORKFLOW OF C ONCORD

Following the workflow of the multi-agent continual coordination learning in Fig. 6, the main idea
of our approach is depicted in Fig. 8. In more details, the main parts of our approach Concord can
be decomposed into two phases, the training phase and the test phase. During the training phase, we
conduct the continual coordination learning, and during the test phase, we recognize the involved
human teammates and let the AI agents to cooperate with them. The overall flow of these two phases
are respectively shown in Alg. 1 and Alg. 2.


                                                                          17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Teammate Policies                                                       …                                             2
                                                                                                                           𝜋(1 )


                             *                   *                 *                     *
       AI Agent Policies    𝜋(()                𝜋(+)              𝜋(,)                  𝜋(- )
                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                   𝜋(1 )



                            "#$%&               "#$%&             "#$%&
       Hyper-network       𝑓!                  𝑓!               𝑓!                    𝑓!
                                                                                        "#$%&                       "#$%&
                                                                                                                   𝑓!

         Teammate           𝓏#(                  𝓏#+               𝓏#,                   𝓏# -
                                       𝓏(                𝓏+                  𝓏,                  𝓏-                 𝓏1
       Representations

                                                                                                                    𝑓.%/0
         Recognizer                  𝑓.%/0              𝑓.%/0               𝑓.%/0               𝑓.%/0

                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                   𝜋(1
       Teammate Datasets                                                                      2
                                Replay Buffer𝟏~𝑻 = 𝑁 ∗ {(𝑠(2 , 𝑎(2 ), (𝑠+2 , 𝑎+2 ), . . . , (𝑠789    2
                                                                                                  , 𝑎789 )}
                                                                                                                                       )


                                                                              Continual Learning              Unknown Teammate


Figure 8: A high-level workflow figure to show the main idea of our approach. We use z̃ζ to denote
the initialized representation and zζ to denote the learned teammate representation. During the
recognizer training, each task stores a small amount of data in the Replay Buffer, where N is the
number of trajectories per teammate, and supervised learning is performed to align the behavioral
trajectories and teammate representations.


B.4   S TORAGE REQUIREMENT DURING CONTINUAL LEARNING

To address the potential forgetting problem of the hyper-network and recognizer network, Concord
needs to store some variables when learning continually. Specifically, our algorithm requires storing
the following two types of variables:

      a. The parameters of the hyper-network at the last round, denoted as ψ̃, are used to com-
         pute Lreg . This variable always occupies static storage space, which is not relevant to the
         continual learning length T . Therefore, the storage cost for ψ̃ is considered acceptable.
      b. A small buffer B is utilized to store a few of human trajectories and teammate representa-
         tions for previous teammates. In specific, for each encountered teammate policy πζH , we
         store 36 human trajectories and one representation vector with dimension of 32. The fi-
         nal storage cost for these variables grows linearly with the continual learning length T . In
         practice, we find that the storage cost for these variables are relatively acceptable because
         we only store a few of human trajectories and the storage cost for teammate representations
         is small.

C     E XPERIMENT S ETUP
C.1   D ETAILS OF E NVIRONMENT

In this work, we conduct experiments on two popular multi-agent cooperation environments Over-
cooked (Carroll et al., 2019) and SMAC (Samvelyan et al., 2019). In this section, we provide the
detailed descriptions of these two environments.

Overcooked Overcooked is an environment proposed for coordination challenges. In this environ-
ment, two players control one kitchen chef to cook and serve soup. Specifically, they are required to
put specific ingredients in one pot, make soup and deliver it, for example, in Coord. Ring layout, the
players need to put three onions in a pot, collect an onion soup from the pot after 20-time steps, and
deliver the dish to a counter. The agents will receive 20 points for each dish served, and the goal is
to serve as many dishes as possible within the allotted time. Moreover, we select 4 different layouts
in our experiments, which are shown in Fig. 9.

StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge (SMAC) SMAC is a popular benchmark for cooperative
multi-agent reinforcement learning, which contains multiple combat scenarios. In this environ-


                                                                     18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Training phase
Require: Parameters η, ψ, ϕ, {zζ }Tζ=1 , Small buffer B
Explanation:
    fηenc : Recognizer network parameterized by η
    {πζH }Tζ=1 : Teammate policy stream
    τζH : Few interaction data obtained by interacting with πζH
    zζ : Learned teammate representation for teammate policy πζH
    fψhyper : Hyper-network parameterized by ψ
    B: small buffer that stores a few of human trajectories and teammate representations for all
    previous seen teammates.
Ensure: Update the parameters η, ψ, ϕ, {zζ }Tζ=1
 1: Set ψ̃ as None
 2: for πζH in the teammate policy stream do
 3:    // Training critic network, hyper-network and teammate representation
 4:    for episode in RL training period do
 5:        Compute the critic loss Lcritic , actor loss Lactor
 6:        if ψ̃ is None then
 7:           Let Lhyper := Lactor
 8:        else
 9:           Let Lhyper := Lactor + β reg Lreg
10:        end if
11:        Update ϕ via gradient descend method with gradient ∇ϕ Lcritic
12:        Update ψ via gradient descend method with gradient ∇ψ Lhyper
13:        Update zζ via gradient descend method with gradient ∇zζ Lactor
14:    end for
15:    Let ψ̃ := ψ // Store the hyper-network parameters at the last round
16:    // Training recognizer network
17:    Select multiple human trajectories τζH from the RL training process, and store each (τζH , zζ )
       into the buffer B.
18:    for iteration in Recognizer training period do
19:        Compute Lrecon via sampling data from B
20:        Update η via gradient descend method with gradient ∇η Lrecon
21:    end for
22: end for


                                                           20   20                   20   20
         20   20                     20   20               10   10                   10   10
                                                           20   20                   20   20

                                                                                                       Player 1

                                                                                                       Player 2

                                                                                                       Time

                                                                                                       Reward
(a) Coordination Ring   (b) Asymmetric Advantages   (c) Many Orders   (d) Open Asymmetric Advantages



Figure 9: Four layouts of the Overcooked environment, with each one emphasizing different coor-
dination strategies.


ment, the AI agents and human teammates control specific ally units and are expected to coordi-
nate to defeat the enemy units controlled by the built-in AI. Specifically, at the beginning of each
episode, the ally units are spawned on the fixed regions on the map. At each timestep, the ally
agents can select actions from the action set {no-op, move[right, left, up, down],
stop, attack[enemy id]}, and then a global reward will be given according to the damage


                                                        19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              (a) 3m                            (b) 2z1s                            (c) 4m



                Figure 10: Three SMAC maps that are selected in our experiments.

Algorithm 2 Test phase
Require: Parameters η, ψ
Explanation:
   fηenc : Recognizer network parameterized by η
   πζH : Collaborative policy of the teammates
   τζH : Few interaction data obtained by interacting with the teammates
   ẑζ : Predicted teammate representation obtained by inputting τζH to fηenc
   fψhyper : Hyper-network parameterized by ψ
    AI Actor: AI actor network generated by inputting ẑζ to fψhyper
Ensure: Deployed AI policy in coordination with teammates
 1: Interact with teammates using πζH to obtain τζH
 2: ẑζ ← fηenc (τζH )
                     hyper
 3: AI Actor ← fψ (ẑζ )
 4: return Deploy AI Actor as AI policy in coordination with the teammates



caused to enemy units. Extra rewards of 10 and 200 will be given if one enemy unit is killed or the
ally units win the combat. We conduct experiments on three SMAC maps in this paper as shown
in Fig. 10, which are 3m, 2z1s, and 4m, respectively. On all these three maps, there exist the same
number and type of units on both ally and enemy sides, where 3m and 4m signify the presence of 3
marines and 4 marines, respectively, and 2z1s indicates 2 zealots and 1 stalkers.

C.2   H YPER - PARAMETERS S ELECTION

In Tab. 1, we list the selection of hyper-parameters that are critical to our algorithm. We adopted this
set of hyper-parameters throughout all the experiments in this paper. However, we utilized different
training periods per task on different environment scenarios, of which the details are listed in Tab. 2.


                  Table 1: Hyper-parameters selected for our proposed approach.
                               Hyper-parameter                              Value
                              Discount factor γ                                   0.99
                    RMSprop learning rate for actor / critic                0.0005 / 0.0001
             Adam learning rate for hyper and recognizer network                 0.001
                         Batch size for actor learning                             32
                         Buffer size for critic learning                         5000
                  Max/Min ϵ value for ϵ-greedy exploration                     0.5 / 0.05
                   Step number of exploration decay period                       500k
          Embedding dimension for teammate representation (Demb )                  32
                      Regularization loss weight (β reg )                          2.0
                  Episode number for teammate recognition                           2
          Episode number for training / validating recognizer network            32 / 4



                                                  20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                Table 2: Training period per task for different environment scenarios.
                       Environment             Scenario            Step number
                                            Coord. Ring                5M
                                          Asy. Advantages              10M
                       Overcooked
                                            Many orders                7M
                                        Open Asy. Advantages            7M
                                                  3m                    3M
                          SMAC                   2z1s                  1.5M
                                                  4m                    2M


C.3      D ETAILS OF C OMPARED METHODS

In terms of the baseline algorithms employed in our experiments, we adapt EWC (Kirkpatrick et al.,
2017) and CLEAR (Rolnick et al., 2018), which are two classic continual learning algorithms, to
our experiment setting and additionally design two other baselines: Vanilla and Oracle. Among the
latter two baselines, Vanilla does not do any extra design for the continual learning process, while
Oracle is always allowed for collaborative training with all human teammates. Here, to address
the potential unfamiliarity of some readers with the field of continual learning, we have provided
additional descriptions for the EWC and CLEAR algorithms to enhance the readers’ understanding
of the specific processes of EWC and CLEAR, as well as how we adapt them in our context.

EWC Elastic Weight Consolidation (EWC) is a regularization-based technique that selectively re-
duces the plasticity of weights to alleviate catastrophic forgetting. The technique Fisher information
matrix evaluates the importance of all weights and uses that for gradient updates. There are two
variants of EWC: Offline EWC keeps a model with a Fisher matrix for every previous task, which
causes costly storage. Online EWC uses only one Fisher matrix that is computed based on all the
previous tasks. Here, we choose Online EWC as our benchmark.

CLEAR When training, CLEAR samples a mini-batch from the current task and another replay
mini-batch. The samples in the replay mini-batch are selected with the same probability as all
previous tasks. CLEAR leverages behavioral cloning from replay mini-batch to enhance stability.
Specifically, two additional loss terms are added to induce behavioral cloning between the network
and its past self. (1) the KL divergence between the historical policy distribution and the present pol-
icy distribution, (2) the ℓ2 norm of the difference between the historical and present value functions.
Unlike the original paper, we use Cross Entropy loss instead of KL loss to guide the agent to choose
the same action as its past self under the same state because we find it more effective. Additionally,
we don’t add any constraints to criticism for easier learning.

Oracle Here, we would like to explain why the multi-task learning approach can be seen as Oracle.
1) Multi-task learning (Oracle) can access all the previous models in the training process. However,
Concord (and another continual learning method) can only be trained with the previous teammates
once in the process. 2) Multi-task learning (Oracle) knows which teammate it is coordinating in the
test phase. However, Concord (and another continual learning method) has to identify the teammate
by some specific mechanisms.

C.4      C ONSTRUCTION OF H UMAN - LIKE TEAMMATES

To evaluate the performance of coordination with human-like teammates, we should first construct
a set of teammates. Building AIs that can cooperate with humans remains a fundamental chal-
lenge (Dafoe et al., 2021), as it requires human-like teammates under the property of high behavior
diversity. We here use Maximum Entropy Population-based training (MEP) (Zhao et al., 2023) and
Hidden-utility Self-Play (HSP) (Yu et al., 2023) algorithms to model a diversity of human-like be-
havioral policies, for their proven diverse agent ability in the Overcook environment. Specifically,
we use the code released by the HSP algorithm1 to train MEP and HSP policies, and the number
   1
       The code we used for HSP is at https://github.com/samjia2000/HSP


                                                  21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: Comparisons of distinct algorithms in all 4 layouts on forgetting and forward transfer
metrics. The best and second best values on each layout are colored in red and blue, respectively.
                         Coord. Ring                     Asy. Advantages                     Many orders                  Open Asy. Advantages
 Algorithm
                 Forg.           F. Transfer           Forg.         F. Transfer        Forg.         F. Transfer         Forg.          F. Transfer
 Concord       -1.31 ± 4.23    103.09 ± 13.02       -16.11 ± 6.85   119.59 ± 9.41     -1.27 ± 6.69   100.85 ± 3.14     -6.83 ± 4.59     162.29 ± 6.94
  EWC         -16.47 ± 4.18     92.03 ± 8.61       -54.14 ± 13.95    54.98 ± 8.01    -20.52 ± 1.41   82.85 ± 18.41     -7.69 ± 3.38     153.85 ± 3.68
 CLEAR        -10.79 ± 2.62     89.51 ± 2.46       -120.61 ± 2.52    72.65 ± 1.73     -2.33 ± 3.85   99.58 ± 5.91     -63.14 ± 55.75   117.14 ± 14.92
 Vanilla     -46.92 ± 11.57     80.94 ± 9.19      -109.83 ± 20.48    60.82 ± 7.33   -68.36 ± 10.14    67.61 ± 4.16   -123.89 ± 17.91   109.94 ± 32.31


of our human-like models is defined as 12 (among them, 8 MEP policies and 4 HSP policies), to
simulate real human behavior diversity and preference. As shown in Fig. 11, the diverse teammates
allow the agent to learn more universal coordination behaviors, and therefore have stronger continual
human-AI coordination performance.


      (a) Coord. Ring                          (b) Asymm. Adv.                      (c) Many Orders                  (d) Open Asymm. Adv.

Figure 11: Illustration of diversity of teammates. We plot the distribution of teammates’ actions
πp {· | s} by t-SNE (Van der Maaten & Hinton, 2008) projection, where each point represents the
t-SNE results of teammates’ action distribution in each episode, and different teammates have dif-
ferent action distributions, thus the obtained teammates can be seen as diverse.


D     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
D.1     C ONTINUAL L EARNING A BILITY Q UANTIFICATION

To comprehensively analyze the performance of various algorithms in the context of continual
human-AI coordination, we introduce the Single Coordination Performance Pi (t), where t ∈
{1, 2, ...T } and Pi (t) represents the episode reward when coordinating with the i-th teammate after
completing training with the t-th teammate. We use the following metrics (Lopez-Paz & Ranzato,
2017; Wołczyk et al., 2021) for evaluation:
                                                             PN
        • Average coordination performance. P = N1 i=1 Pi (T ), which is the average episode
           reward when coordinate with all the teammates after the training process.
                              PN −1
        • Forgetting. N 1−1 i=1 Pi (T ) − Pi (i), which is used to measure the average performance
           loss with seen teammates (i.e., forget) after training with the new teammate.
                                      PN
        • Forward transfer. N 1−1 i=2 Pi (i − 1), which is used to measure the coordination ability
           with unseen human teammates.
As shown in Tab. 3, we can find Concord achieves the minimum forgetting on all the four layouts,
validating the effectiveness of the proposed anti-forgetting mechanism.

D.2     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS ON OVERCOOKED E NVIRONMENT

In Sec. 4.1 of the manuscript, we compare the detailed single coordination performance of Concord
and Vanilla on the Asym. Adv. layout of Overcooked environment. To further analyze the situations
on several other layouts, we present additional experimental results on the other three layouts here.
Fig. 12-15 demonstrate that Concord continues to suffer less forgetting and achieves better forward
transfer performance.


                                                                           22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


As expected, Vanilla exhibits a considerable amount of forgetting, as indicated by the lower triangle
of the matrix, and has poor forward transfer ability, as reflected by the upper triangle of the matrix.
While Concord performs significantly better than Vanilla.

  1   90    87    92    56    41      83    106     92    78    48    102   63    112    89     105   109     41      81        117   84    94    82     82    71
  2   82    121   94    77    33      93    83      87    112   40    95    53    113    108    104   126     23      54        80    86    106   95     62    58
  3   57    76    123   82    54      70    162     103   96    62    97    94    118    105    114   115     26      76        93    93    113   97     57    57
  4   78    98    114   120   45      85    142     99    120   72    83    82    112    106    116   126     42      72        105   80    115   96     60    72
  5   56    37    62    49    120     92    131     100   27    77    123   109   112    101    111   120    113      118       148   123   118   94     118   93
  6   21    20    19    23    100     145   131     115   18    40    93    113   109    103    114   119    112      128       150   124   102   99     117   104
  7   62    73    93    59    69      74    185     98    74    74    91    84    109    99     112   116     96      121       169   122   116   98     100   103
  8   57    49    72    62    94      96    138     137   31    63    107   99    113    102    123   124    113      129       159   140   117   98     118   106
  9   92    91    116   114   36      63    146     95    116   81    92    102   108    101    119   126    104      125       173   129   132   100    118   104
 10   90    37    81    58    36      94    147     75    50    117   84    74    114    106    116   123     99      126       162   133   126   113    99    93
 11   58    44    72    66    89      106   153     129   50    79    145   113   105    94     119   116    108      127       162   136   125   103    129   110
 12   60    61    72    63    68      76    155     120   38    69    109   141   113    103    121   128    113      129       158   134   132   110    129   123
      1     2     3     4     5        6    7       8     9     10    11    12    1      2      3      4      5       6         7     8     9     10     11    12
                                    Partner Index                                                                  Partner Index


Figure 12: Single coordination performance of Vanilla (left) and Concord (right) on the Coord. Ring
layout. The value at i-th row and j-th in the matrix is Pi (j).

                                                                                                                                                                         250
  1   129   104   12    114   104     24    70      86    117   67    123    3     162    156    21 162161156 16721   58 167
                                                                                                                     161  140 58120140 178120      133  196 196 1 1
                                                                                                                                                   178 133
  2   95    113   48    101   80      42    49      72    139   46    99    15     133    200    27 133133200 17727   53 177
                                                                                                                     133  131 53123131 161123      146  155 155 1 1
                                                                                                                                                   161 146
  3   13     2    155    9    14      21     0       6     7    89    14    70     146    183    195 146175183 132    74 132
                                                                                                                 195 175   93 74 68 93 17768       167  174 174121 121
                                                                                                                                                   177 167               200

  4   138   91     3    130   122     45    120     109   144   155   145    1     153    194    188 153178194 134    77 134
                                                                                                                 188 178  100 77120100 166120  136  190 190111 111
                                                                                                                                               166 136
  5   111   126    9    153   134     16    90      107   144   98    135    1     147    194    184 147196194 182
                                                                                                                 184 166   97 166134 97 158
                                                                                                                     196 182              134  117  147 14795 95
                                                                                                                                               158 117                   150
  6   68    25    12    27    43      242   13      20    34    221   29    57     150    167                    187 203
                                                                                                 187 150179167 153         78 203131 78 175
                                                                                                                     179 153              131 113   152 15292 92
                                                                                                                                               175 113
  7   158   135   18    144   139     50    143     128   169   159   178   15     139    159    176 139202159 169
                                                                                                                 176 214  107 214118107 183118 156
                                                                                                                     202 169                        163 16396 96
                                                                                                                                               183 156
  8   131   121   10    140   119     39    116     113   156   125   146   10     152    180    146 152201180 167
                                                                                                                 146 190  117 190136117 138
                                                                                                                     201 167              136 167   166 16691 91
                                                                                                                                               138 167                   100


  9   137   95    30    138   117     45    66      84    148   80    144    8     148    157    148 148187157 143
                                                                                                                 148 179  115 179138115 183
                                                                                                                     187 143              138 145   167 16795 95
                                                                                                                                               183 145
 10   49    10    75    13    26      196    5      11    19    216   15    104    168    162    186 168193162 174
                                                                                                                 186 178  106 178129106 141
                                                                                                                     193 174              129      245  174 17475 75
                                                                                                                                                   141 245               50

 11   135   135   18    136   117     23    93      111   147   103   146    1     160    161    194 160194161 173
                                                                                                                 194 181  147 181132147 163
                                                                                                                     194 173              132      202  193 19385 85
                                                                                                                                                   163 202
 12    9     0    95     1    12      119    0       4     6    172    3    168    171    162    177 171186162 152   184  139    112
                                                                                                                 177 186 152 184 139 112171        188  164 164147 147
                                                                                                                                                   171 188
      1     2     3     4     5        6    7       8     9     10    11    12      1      2      3 1 4 2 53               64   57 6 8 7 9 8       109   1011 1112 12
                                                                                                                                                                         0

                                    Partner Index                                                                  Partner Index
                                                                                                                            Partner Index


Figure 13: Single coordination performance of Vanilla (left) and Concord (right) on the Asym. Adv.
layout. The value at i-th row and j-th in the matrix is Pi (j).

  1   206   24    33    95    63      10    10      32    115   68     5    40    198    41     38    144     90       2        17    29    60    48     85    60
  2   124   166   53    75    76      209   76      25    56    45    55    51    223    162    92    162    108      200       61    23    130   67     94    69
  3   18    27    92    31    59      128   66      12    29    37    33    66    223    160    120   168    101      205       74    31    116   67     111   64
  4   207   46    65    171   111     65    34      35    122   90    73    61    223    159    116   172    114      210       72    37    126   87     123   67
  5   91    48    56    64    128     100   23      36    93    80    75    50    222    157    122   167    131      212       81    38    131   82     118   67
  6   71    128   80    35    74      218   87      26    65    50    98    73    221    140    110   167    118      223       83    38    100   85     114   68
  7   126   113   90    73    56      183   138     22    82    57    55    85    221    159    119   168    124      219       102   37    125   83     116   62
  8   149   66    56    91    94      143   81      54    109   94    85    78    224    154    119   173    112      219       99    62    99    94     118   65
  9   167   45    40    130   97      94    62      46    152   118   76    45    224    143    116   174    109      219       96    63    141   102    116   64
 10   164   47    52    133   102     37    48      67    115   131   67    80    222    156    113   161    106      218       100   61    134   123    113   65
 11   34    66    91    36    46      188   55      16    50    62    137   55    223    155    114   143    114      219       101   60    142   112    120   65
 12   51    122   82    70    28      213   94      23    26    65    61    98    221    156    119   171    110      219       98    61    145   119    122   94
      1     2     3     4     5        6    7       8     9     10    11    12    1      2      3      4      5       6         7     8     9     10     11    12
                                    Partner Index                                                                  Partner Index


Figure 14: Single coordination performance of Vanilla (left) and Concord (right) on the Many Orders
layout. The value at i-th row and j-th in the matrix is Pi (j).

D.3         A DDITIONAL A NALYSIS

One important part of Concord is to utilize the recognizer network to recognize the teammates
through a few of interaction trajectories during the test phase. To analyze whether such a few-shot
mechanism is necessary and examine how the number of episodes used for teammate recognition in-
fluences the algorithm performance, we conduct ablation studies on the layout Asym. Adv. of Over-
cooked environment. In specific, we first provide the experimental results under different numbers
of episodes for recognizing teammates, and then we further investigate the zero-shot coordination
ability of different methods.


                                                                                  23
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             1               196   189   163       151    0      191   195     171        1     2    197    3        197   192   99                       196          33      197   198     9     44    20    187   23
             2               163   196   146       139    2      156   171     63         6     3    144    1        195   194   105                      201          15      198   199     9     35    9     185   10
             3               153   173   166       158    4      142   184     70         8     1    137    1        198   186   175                      200          0       193   198     38    0     1     190   0
             4               140   141   142       165   39      139   130     38        34     9    133   21        198   189   183                      207          0       194   193     86    0     1     188   0
             5                2     3     4         0    192      4     3       3        171   180    2    180       194   194   164                      209          196     196   195     116   171   197   193   186
             6               164   175   154       178   96      201   181     125       98    115   200   90        197   195   169                      196          193     197   196     139   173   191   190   180
             7               166   172   149       182   43      172   190     122       43    44    172   42        196   195   172                      199          198     174   198     130   173   190   190   186
             8                97   117   111       127   65      131   122     174       60    62    131   66        193   193   173                      209          195     178   198     171   178   195   187   181
             9                7     8    19         4    187     10     5       3        185   180    1    166       200   195   180                      204          193     196   199     175   189   194   189   188
            10                41   17    31        14    181     36     8      45        176   196   15    183       202   190   179                      212          193     195   198     174   190   207   188   195
            11               131   138   132       135   118     124   147     66        130   107   138   110       193   189   162                      205          193     196   192     176   190   198   195   181
            12                19   14    35        24    134     39    12      27        143   152   12    183       199   193   158                      196          187     196   198     171   185   200   189   200
                              1    2     3         4     5        6    7       8         9     10    11    12        1     2     3                            4        5        6    7       8     9     10    11    12
                                                               Partner Index                                                                                                 Partner Index


  Figure 15: Single coordination performance of Vanilla (left) and Concord (right) on the Open Asy.
  Adv. layout. The value at i-th row and j-th in the matrix is Pi (j).

                             180


                                                                                                                                 Average reward per episode
Average reward per episode


                                                                                                                                                              150
                             160
                                                                                                                                                              100
                             140
                                                                                                                                                                  50
                             120

                             100               1                  2                  3               4           5
                                                                                                                                                                   0 OracleConcord EWC CLEAR Naive                         Concord
                                               Number of episodes for recognizing human                                                                                                    zeroshot                        fewshot


  Figure 16: (a) The performance comparison with different episode numbers for the recognizer.
  (b) The performance of different algorithms in zero-shot testing and the performance of Concord
  algorithm in few-shot testing.


  Number of episodes for recognition. The selection of the number of episodes for human recog-
  nition is a critical hyper-parameter in Concord. As depicted in Fig. 16 (a), utilizing 2 episodes yields
  a notable improvement compared to using only 1 episode. Although employing more episodes ne-
  cessitates additional data, the impact is not substantial. Consequently, the number of episodes for
  human recognition has been set to 2 in our experiments.

  Few-shot and zero-shot recognition. We ablate the few-shot mechanism for different methods, as
  shown in Fig. 16 (b). For the zero-shot version of our approach, we refrain from pre-sampling certain
  trajectories to recognize teammates. Instead, we utilize in-episode trajectory information to estimate
  the teammate representation, which is subsequently inputted into the hyper-network. Additionally,
  to better differentiate between the methods, we evaluate their generalization ability in this ablation
  study by conducting tests with an additionally generated teammate policy. As we can see from the
  results, Concord achieves better performance than other methods under zero-shot setting, while only
  Concord with few-shot mechanism achieves comparable performance to the Oracle baseline. This
  result demonstrates the necessity of the few-shot mechanism.

  Comparison with given teammates ID. To investigate the influence of known teammates, we
  additionally test the performance of Concord (ID), which can be seen as Concord equipped with an
  Oracle identification mechanism. As show in Tab. 4, we can see that Concord (ID) shows a slight ad-
  vantage over Concord, but has no significant differences. This means that the identification accuracy
  of our identification mechanism is effective. Besides, the performance comparison between Con-
  cord (ID) and Oracle validates the effectiveness of other parts of Concord besides our identification
  module.

  Sensitivity analysis of replay buffer size. To analyze the sensitivity of the replay buffer size in
  terms of addressing the forgetting issue, we add a sensitivity analysis in Tab. 5. It can be observed


                                                                                                                     24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 4: Comparisons of distinct algorithms in all 4 layouts on average coordination performance
with 5 random seeds. Concord (ID) is that the agents are given identities, which can be seen as
Concord equipped with an Oracle identification mechanism. The best mean value on each problem
except for Oracle is highlighted in bold. The symbols +, −, and ≈ indicate that the result is sig-
nificantly superior to, inferior to, and almost equivalent to Concord, respectively, according to the
Wilcoxon rank-sum test with a significance level of 0.05.
       Environment                Oracle              EWC                CLEAR               Vanilla        Concord (ID)          Concord
     Coord. Ring            127.05 ± 3.23       89.38 ± 11.87        102.54 ± 3.25        83.55 ± 12.83     126.34 ± 2.86      123.28 ± 3.01
   Asy. Advantages          191.91 ± 2.42       51.48 ± 6.84          50.42 ± 3.28         47.28 ± 9.76     169.27 ± 6.39      160.08 ± 13.45
     Many Orders            140.81 ± 4.22       98.03 ± 22.81        130.45 ± 6.01         79.85 ± 9.82     137.22 ± 5.43      134.76 ± 4.01
 Open Asy. Advantages       197.83 ± 4.87       177.63 ± 3.58       106.95 ± 19.78         66.03 ± 3.24     191.06 ± 6.84      189.68 ± 5.71
            +/−/≈                 2/0/2               0/4/0               0/3/1               0/4/0               0/0/4                /


Table 5: The sensitivity analysis of replay Buffer. The best mean results for Episode Reward are in
bold. Here, Forg. represents the metric of Forgetting, F. Transfer represents the metric of Forward
transfer, Random represents the identification mechanism with randomly generated representations,
and ID represents Concord with an oracle identification mechanism.
                                    Coord. Ring                                                        Asy. Advantages
   Size
                Episode Reward              Forg.             F. Transfer         Episode Reward             Forg.              F. Transfer
       4          109.97 ± 0.98       -3.67 ± 5.62         99.69 ± 1.31             81.97 ± 7.32          -64.62 ± 6.01       108.57 ± 14.17
       8          117.72 ± 1.97       -7.78 ± 1.85        113.63 ± 2.72           128.61 ± 13.87         -51.54 ± 13.05       131.87 ± 8.31
      16          122.16 ± 1.86       -2.01 ± 1.13        114.81 ± 1.72           136.19 ± 13.61         -28.36 ± 15.45       143.57 ± 8.46
      24          126.51 ± 1.94       0.61 ± 4.21         117.09 ± 2.22            165.94 ± 3.64           -2.73 ± 8.24       136.42 ± 9.83
      32          124.91 ± 1.96       -1.93 ± 4.92        113.57 ± 2.56            166.41 ± 4.47          -12.46 ± 9.71        131.01 ± 5.04
      48          126.27 ± 1.45       -0.27 ± 0.65        113.94 ± 2.03           167.75 ± 13.96          -5.79 ± 16.45        148.96 ± 4.92
      64          111.94 ± 0.48       1.84 ± 2.14         104.21 ± 2.08            166.86 ± 4.76          -13.12 ± 3.77       123.81 ± 16.62
 Random            36.92 ± 6.94      -1.58 ± 21.68        19.45 ± 5.64              33.27 ± 8.15         -20.36 ± 14.83       39.36 ± 14.17
   ID             129.69 ± 1.45       1.76 ± 2.64         88.45 ± 0.25             173.25 ± 2.63          -3.36 ± 3.12        109.79 ± 2.02


that Concord achieves relatively good performance across the ranges of buffer size for each team-
mate from 8 to 64.
Moreover, to prevent any potential misunderstanding, we emphasize that Concord distinguishes
itself from conventional replay-based methods. In our approach, the replay buffer is solely employed
to prevent the forgetting of teammate recognition rather than to help learn solving previous tasks.
An example of conventional replay-based methods in our experiments is CLEAR.


D.4        C OMPLETE VALUE D ECOMPOSITION S TUDY R ESULTS

In Sec. 4.1 of the manuscript, we study the influence of value decomposition in the Coord. Ring
layout of Overcooked environment with line charts, of which the concrete statistics are presented in
Tab. 6. To further validate the effectiveness of value decomposition when there exist multiple AI
agents cooperating with multiple human-like teammates, we further conduct value decomposition
study on different SMAC maps, of which the results are reported in Tab. 7-9. Similar to the results
in Overcooked, Concord with value decomposition also achieves better performance on different
SMAC maps, which further significantly demonstrates the effectiveness of our value decomposition.


Table 6: Performance comparison between Concord with and without value decomposition in the
Coord. Ring layout of Overcooked environment.
           Algorithm        Task1    Task2    Task3    Task4    Task5    Task6    Task7   Task8    Task9   Task10    Task11   Task11       Average
         Concord            113       103      121      128      113     129       158     134     132      110       129       123         124
 Concord w/o Human Critic   100       100       92      101       89     148       162     117     107      104       118       134         114


                                                                        25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 7: Performance comparison between Concord with and without value decomposition on the
SMAC map 3m.
                       Algorithm          Task1 Task2 Task3 Average
                          Concord                            0.98           0.98           0.99       0.9833
                  Concord w/o Human Critic                   0.97           0.97           0.99       0.9766


Table 8: Performance comparison between Concord with and without value decomposition on the
SMAC map 2z1s.
                       Algorithm          Task1 Task2 Task3 Average
                          Concord                            0.91           0.99           0.98          0.96
                  Concord w/o Human Critic                   0.92           0.93           0.97          0.94


Table 9: Performance comparison between Concord with and without value decomposition on the
SMAC map 4m.
           Algorithm          Task1 Task2 Task3 Task4 Task5 Task6 Average
              Concord               0.81            0.82             0.91           0.91          0.92       0.99   0.8933
      Concord w/o Human Critic      0.75            0.75             0.89           0.89          0.95       0.98   0.8683

1.0                                                            1.0
                                              Concord
0.8                                           EWC              0.8
                                              CLEAR
0.6                                           Vanilla          0.6
                                              Memory Decay
0.4                                                            0.4

0.2                                                            0.2

0.0        Poor         Medium             Expert              0.0           Poor                   Medium          Expert


Figure 17: Experimental results on SMAC maps 3m and 2z1s. The gray shaded bar is used to denote
the degree of forgetting, which equals to the highest test win rate during training minus the final test
win rate.


D.5     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS ON SMAC E NVIRONMENT

In Sec. 4.2 of the manuscript, we compare Concord with other methods on the SMAC map 4m. Here,
we further provide the experimental results on the other two SMAC maps in Fig. 17 to demonstrate
the consistency of the conclusion across different maps. From the results, we can observe that the
Concord method still exhibits the smallest gray shaded region in these two maps, indicating that
generality of the anti-forgetting ability of our approach.


E      D ETAILED I NFORMATION FOR H UMAN PARTICIPATION

E.1     E THICAL S TATEMENT

In terms of the experiments that has human participation, we claim that we have employed effective
practice to avoid possible ethical issues.

Test introduction Before the experiments, we informed the volunteers of the specific details of
the entire experiments, including that they would be arranged to play the game with AI agents,
and that their playing data during test and the final test results would be utilized for the academic
research of this work. All the collected data is only for experiment purposes and we only make the
testing results public in this paper. The volunteers voluntarily choose whether to participate in the
experiment, and all participating volunteers were informed of and agreed to our practice.


                                                             26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Possible Risk for Humans and Broader Impact The main risks for the volunteers are twofold:
the potential leakage of their personal information and the time cost. Regarding the former, we only
invited the volunteers to participate in our experiments without the requirement for any unnecessary
personal information. Additionally, we will keep the volunteers’ identity information completely
confidential. As for the latter, we first adjusted the frequency of the AI decision-making in the
experiment to make the coordination process between humans and AI more comfortable. Besides,
we provided appropriate material compensation for the volunteer’s participation in the experiments.
Furthermore, the experimental results are encouraging in the sense that we demonstrate Concord is
a promising method for dealing with Human-AI coordination in multi-agent systems via continual
learning. It is not yet at the application stage and does not have a broader impact. However, this work
learns one by one coordination via continual learning, making Concord more practical in real-world
applications.

E.2   E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS FOR C ONTINUAL C OORDINATION WITH H UMANS .

To assess the performance of Concord in coordination with humans, we recruited 8 volunteers (25%
female, 75% male, aged between 18 and 35). The volunteers were divided into four groups and
given a comprehensive introduction to the basic gameplay and experimental procedures. All volun-
teers were fully informed of their rights, and the experiments were approved by the relevant depart-
ment. The Overcooked game was remotely deployed on a server accessible through the volunteers’
browsers. Using this setup, we were able to collect trajectories of human players interacting with
each other, as shown in Fig. 18. We collect around 160 human-human trajectories (for a total of 64k
environment timesteps) and partition the these into two subsets, splitting each trajectory into two
single-agent trajectories. Based on the collected human data, we construct 8 sets of human proxy
models through behavior cloning. Then we train different methods by using these human proxy
models as the teammates that appear sequentially. Note that the AI agents obtained by different
methods will play with the real human participants, not the human proxy models. In our preliminary
experiments, we observed that human models trained through behavior cloning outperformed those
trained with Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning (GAIL) (Ho & Ermon, 2016). Hence, we
decided to employ the former throughout our experiments.


Figure 18: Open Asymmetric Advantages.The layout of the two rooms, all players are initialized
in the right room, and players need to coordinate cooking, delivery or cooking and delivery at the
same time, as well as ingredients (tomatoes or onions).The example trajectories represent different
Human-AI coordination policies.


E.3   D EFINITION OF THE H UMAN P REFERENCE M ETRIC

In Sec. 4.3 of the main paper, we validate our approach to conduct continual coordination with real
humans. To provide a more comprehensive comparison of our approach with other baselines, we
present the experimental results in two different dimensions. Among them, the main results are in the
form of the single coordination performance, which is an objective metric. To further consider the
humans’ subjective feelings, we additionally include one metric we refer to as “Human preference”
in the main paper (Strouse et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2023). To calculate the human preference, some
human participants have tasks as judges. Note the real human participants in our experiments we
recruited have two tasks:

       • Players. We first collect some trajectories of them, then construct human proxy models
         based on these trajectories. Then we train different methods by using these human proxy
         models as the partners that appear sequentially. When testing, the obtained agents by dif-


                                                  27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         ferent methods will play with the real human participants, not the human proxy modes. The
         final single coordination performance is shown in Fig. 5(a).
       • Judges. We assign a different participant to each player as a judge, which will judge the
         preferences in the game between trained agents and the corresponding human player.

In terms of the formal definition of this metric, the human preference for method A over method
B can be calculated as follows. Let N be the total number of human players participating in the
experiment, NA be the number of human players who rank A over B, and NB be the number of
those who rank B over A. Then, Human preference for method A over method B is computed as
NA     NB
 N − N . The human players will first play with the trained agents by different algorithms. The
game replays are recorded for the following judging process, where each algorithm is evaluated
against with a different algorithm. There is 5 different algorithms (i.e., Oracle, Concord, EWC,
CLEAR, and Vanilla), thus there is total 10 rounds of evaluations. In each evaluation, human judges
are asked to watch the replays of the two algorithms and vote for the algorithm that is preferred. For
example, let N = 8 be the number of human judges, A and B are the two methods compared in a
round, NA = 3 be the number of human players who rank A over B, and NB = 5 be the number
of those who rank B over A. Then, Human preference for method A over method B is computed as
NA     NB     3     5
 N − N = 8 − 8 = −0.25. Similarly, human preference for method B over method A is 0.25.
The final human preference is shown in Fig. 5(b).


                                                 28
