Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


M ODULAR L EARNING OF
D EEP C AUSAL G ENERATIVE M ODELS FOR
H IGH - DIMENSIONAL C AUSAL I NFERENCE
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Pearl’s causal hierarchy establishes a clear separation between observational, inter-
         ventional, and counterfactual questions. Researchers proposed sound and complete
         algorithms to compute identifiable causal queries at a given level of the hierarchy
         using the causal structure and data from the lower levels of the hierarchy. However,
         most of these algorithms assume that we can accurately estimate the probability
         distribution of the data, which is an impractical assumption for high-dimensional
         variables such as images. On the other hand, modern generative deep learning
         architectures can be trained to learn how to accurately sample from such high-
         dimensional distributions. Especially with the recent rise of foundation models
         for images, it is desirable to leverage pre-trained models to answer causal queries
         with such high-dimensional data. To address this, we propose a sequential training
         algorithm that, given the causal structure and a pre-trained conditional generative
         model, can train a deep causal generative model, which utilizes the pre-trained
         model and can provably sample from identifiable interventional and counterfactual
         distributions. Our algorithm, called WhatIfGAN, uses adversarial training to learn
         the network weights, and to the best of our knowledge, is the first algorithm that
         can make use of pre-trained models and provably sample from any identifiable
         causal query in the presence of latent confounders with high-dimensional data.
         We demonstrate the utility of our algorithm using semi-synthetic and real-world
         datasets containing images as variables in the causal structure.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Evaluating the causal effect of an intervention on a system of interest, or understanding what would
have happened to a sub-population had a different intervention been taken are fundamental questions
that arise across disciplines. Pearl’s structural causal models (SCMs) provide a principled approach
to answering such queries from data. Using SCMs, today we have a clear understanding of which
causal queries can be answered from data on a fundamental level, and which cannot without further
assumptions Pearl (1995); Shpitser & Pearl (2008); Huang & Valtorta (2012); Bareinboim & Pearl
(2012b). The associated identification algorithms find a closed-form expression for an interventional
distribution using only observational data, by making use of the causal structure via do-calculus
rules Pearl (1995). With sufficient data, these functionals can be evaluated by first estimating the
observational joint distribution, then evaluating these expressions, which are also called the estimands.
Today, most our datasets contain high-dimensional variables, such as images. With the advancement
of modern deep learning architectures, many machine learning problems that require handling
high dimensional data, such as prediction, or training generative models, are effectively solved in
practice. However, the existing causal inference algorithms are unable to handle high-dimensional
variables, i.e., there is no general causal inference algorithm for arbitrary causal structures that
can use high-dimensional data. The aforementioned identification algorithms are not applicable
since it is practically impossible to obtain a closed-form expression of the joint distribution with
high-dimensional image datasets. Other causal inference methods either assume no unobserved
confounders Kocaoglu et al. (2018), or solve the problem only for very specific structures Louizos
et al. (2017) or causal queries Nemirovsky et al. (2020).


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                               USD ∼ N (0, 1) (Represents the confounder)
                Hospital
                Location                  nS ∼ N (0, 1)


                                                                           S                                                X
                                                      +                               +                                             +                         D
                  Xray
  Symptoms                    Diagnosis
                 Image
                                                          GS (nS , USD )
       P(Diagnosis|do(Symptoms))?                                                                    GX (S, nX )                                GD (X, nD , USD )
                                                                               nX ∼ N (0, 1)                                    nD ∼ N (0, 1)


        (a) Causal Graph                                             (b) Deep Causal Generative Model

Figure 1: A causal graph for XrayImage example (left) and its deep generative model representation
(right). For each variable, a NN (ex: GS , GX , GD ) is trained on datasets to mimic the true mechanism.


As an example, consider a healthcare dataset where we observe Symptoms, Diagnosis and
XrayImage of a collection of patients. Suppose our dataset contains a mixture data from two
hospitals in different cities, which we do not observe to ensure patient privacy. One of the cities is
more wealthy, where patients are less likely to fall sick on average, and have access to better-trained
doctors who are less likely to misdiagnose them. Then, hospital location acts as a latent confounder
that affect both the Symptoms and Diagnosis. Suppose the medical X-ray device is standardized
by the World Health Organization and is not affected by the wealth of the cities. In this realistic
scenario, the data-generating process can be summarized by the causal graph in Figure 1. We would
like to understand how likely an average person across the two cities is to be diagnosed if they get the
symptom. This is the well-known front-door graph Pearl (2009) where the causal effect of Symptom
on Diagnosis can be computed       from the observational distribution over Symptom, Diagnosis and
XrayImage as follows: x,s′ p(x|s)p(d|x, s′ )p(s′ ). However, it is not possible to reliably estimate
                          P

p(x|s), i.e., the probability of observing a specific X-ray image, given Symptom = s. To the best of
our knowledge, no existing causal inference algorithm can address this causal inference problem.
In this paper, we propose a sampling-based solution to address this problem. Our solution is general
and not limited to the front-door graph. For causal queries with scalar, or low-dimensional targets, we
can collect samples from the correct interventional distribution and use these samples to estimate the
interventional distribution. For high-dimensional targets, our method can be used to obtain samples
from the interventional distribution, which is implicitly modeled. Our solution uses deep learning
architectures that mimic the causal structure of the system, see Figure 1b. Although the use of
such structured deep generative models have been explored recently, the existing solutions either
assume no unobserved confounders Kocaoglu et al. (2018), or assume all variables are discrete Xia
et al. (2021; 2023). Furthermore, they cannot use pretrained image generators. This is useful since
state-of-the-art deep image geneators can only be successfully trained by a few industrial research
labs with access to the required resources DALL-E (2022); ChatGPT (2022); Bard (2023).
Our key contribution is a modular training algorithm that can identify which parts of the deep causal
generative models, such as the one in Figure 1b, can be trained separately, and which parts should be
trained together. We show that after this modularization, there is a correct training order for each
sub-network, which our algorithm identifies and follows, freezing the weights of networks already
trained in the previous steps of the algorithm. The following are our main contributions:

       • We propose an adversarial learning algorithm for training deep causal generative models
         with latent confounders for high-dimensional variables. We show that, after convergence, our
         model can produce high-dimensional samples according to interventional or counterfactual
         queries that are identifiable from the data distributions.
       • We propose an algorithm to train deep causal generative models in a modular manner
         using both observational and interventional datasets while preserving their theoretical
         guarantees after convergence. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first algorithm that
         can modularize the training process in the presence of latent confounders, thereby enabling
         the use of large pre-trained models for causal effect estimation.
       • We demonstrate the utility of WhatIfGAN with experiments on high-dimensional semi-
         synthetic datasets Colored-MNIST and real-world COVIDx CXR-3 dataset. Modular
         training converges better and can correctly sample from interventional and counterfactual
         distributions compared to two of our closest benchmarks.


                                                                 2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2    R ELATED WORKS
There are many principled algorithms for estimating interventional or counterfactual distributions
in different settings. Shpitser & Pearl (2008) estimate causal effects from observational data using
their sound and complete identification algorithms. Bareinboim & Pearl (2012b) proposes zID that
utilizes observational and all combinations of experimental datasets to identify causal effects that are
not possible to estimate from only observvations. Lee et al. (2020) covers both of these problems
and suggests the gID algorithm that can make use of arbitrary sets of observational and interventional
datasets to estimate a causal query. Similarly, Correa et al. (2021) employs arbitrary combinations of
datasets for complete counterfactual identification.
Louizos et al. (2017); Nemirovsky et al. (2020) offer to solve the causal inference problem using
deep generative models. Yet, they do not offer theoretical guarantees of causal estimation in general,
but for some special cases. Researchers have recently focused on imposing causal structures within
neural network structures. Particularly, Kocaoglu et al. (2018) introduces a deep causal model that
produces interventional image samples after training on observational data. Pawlowski et al. (2020)
applies normalizing flows and variational inference to predict exogenous noise for counterfactual
inference. However, a major limitation is the causally sufficiency assumption, i.e., each observed
variable is caused by independent unobserved variables. In contrast, the semi-Markovian model
having shared unobserved confounders between variables, is quite common in the real world.
For semi-Markovian models, Xia et al. (2021); Balazadeh Meresht et al. (2022) follow a similar
approach as Kocaoglu et al. (2018) to arrange neural models as a causal graph. They propose a
minimization-maximization method to identify and estimate causal effects. However, these methods
use only observational data and do not consider interventional data and hence cannot estimate most
counterfactuals. Xia et al. (2023) extends these to identify and estimate counterfactual queries.
Most of the existing methods described above can only handle low-dimensional discrete variables
except Bica et al. (2020) and it is not clear how to extend their results to continuous high-dimensional
image data. Moreover, if these methods are given a pre-trained neural network model, they do not
have the ability to incorporate them in their training. Our approach, to the best of our knowledge,
is the first and only solution to address this problem in the presence of unobserved confounders,
unlocking the potential of large pre-trained models for causal inference.

3    BACKGROUND
Definition 3.1 (Structural causal model (SCM) (Pearl, 2009)). An SCM M is a 5-tuple M =
(V, N , U, F, P (.)), where each observed variable Vi ∈ V is realized as an evaluation of the function
fi ∈ F which looks at a subset of the remaining observed variables P ai ⊂ V, an unobserved
exogenous noise variable Ei ∈ N , and an unobserved confounding variable Ui ∈ U. P (.) is a
product joint distribution over all unobserved variables N ∪ U.

Each SCM induces a directed graph called the causal graph, or acyclic directed mixed graph (ADMG)
with V as the vertex set. The directed edges are determined by which variables directly affect which
other variable by appearing explicitly in that variable’s function. Thus the causal graph is G = (V, E)
where Vi → Vj iff Vi ∈ P aj . The set P aj is called the parent set of Vj . We assume this directed
graph is acyclic (DAG). Under the semi-Markovian assumption, each unobserved confounder can
appear in the equation of exactly two observed variables. We represent the existence of an unobserved
confounder between X, Y in the SCM by adding a bidirected edge X ↔ Y to the causal graph.
These graphs are no longer DAGs although still acyclic.
Vi is called an ancestor for Vj if there is a directed path from Vi to Vj . Then Vj is said to be a
descendant of Vi . The set of ancestors of Vi in graph G is shown by AnG (Vi ). A do-intervention
do(vi ) replaces the functional equation of Vi with Vi = vi without affecting other equations. The
distribution induced on the observed variables after such an intervention is called an interventional
distribution, shown by Pvi (V). P∅ (V) = P (V) is called the observational distribution. In this paper,
we use L1 , L2 , and L3 distributions as notation for observational, interventional, and counterfactual
distributions respectively. We follow the same for datasets and queries.
Definition 3.2 (c-components). A subset of nodes is called a c-component if it is a maximal set of
nodes in G that are connected by bi-directed paths.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4     D EEP C AUSAL G ENERATIVE M ODELS WITH U NOBSERVED C ONFOUNDERS
The basic idea behind Kocaoglu et al. (2018) that also motivates our work is the following: Suppose
the ground truth data-generating SCM is made up of functions Xi = fi (P ai , Ei ). If we have these
equations, we can simulate an intervention on, say X5 = 1, by evaluating the remaining equations.
However, we can never hope to learn the functions and unobserved noise terms from data. The
fundamental observation of Pearl is that even then there are some causal queries that can be uniquely
identified as some deterministic function of the causal graph and the joint distribution between
observed variables, e.g., p(d|do(s)) = ξ(G, p(s, d, x)) in Figure 1a for some deterministic ξ. This
means that, if we can, somehow, train a causal model made up of neural networks that fits to the data,
and has the same causal graph, then it has to induce the same interventional distribution p(d|do(s))
as the ground truth SCM, irrespective of what functions the neural network uses. This is a very strong
idea that allows mimicing the causal structure, and opens up the possibility of using deep learning
algorithms for performing causal inference through sampling even with high-dimensional variables.
Xia et al. (2021) took this idea one step further to check identifiability of a causal query by maximizing
and minimizing the causal effect, which is now a differentiable function since neural nets are used.
However, training such networks with high-dimensional data is challenging, and their work is
limited to low-dimensional variables. GANs have been successfully applied to approximately fit
high-dimensional image data, which is our training algorithm choice in this paper to handle high-
dimensional data. We first define a deep causal generative model and show identifiability results,
formalizing the simple observation above that allows us to use deep learning to answer causal queries.
Definition 4.1. A neural net architecture G is called a deep causal generative model (DCM) for an
ADMG G = (V, E) if it is composed of a collection of neural nets, one Gi for each Vi ∈ V such that
      1. each Gi accepts a sufficiently high-dimensional noise vector Ni ,
      2. the output of Gj is input to Gi iff Vj ∈ P aG (Vi ),
      3. Ni = Nj iff Vi ↔ Vj .
Noise vectors Ni replace both the exogenous noise terms in the true SCM and the unobserved
confounders. They need to have sufficiently high dimension to be able to induce the observed
distribution. We say a DCM is representative enough for an SCM if the neural networks have
sufficiently many parameters to induce the observed distribution induced by the true SCM. We
assume this in this work. With this definition, we have the following, similar to Xia et al. (2021):
Theorem 4.2. Consider any SCM M = (G, N , U, F, P (.)). A DCM G for G entails the same
identifiable interventional distributions as the SCM M if it entails the same observational distribution.
Although the theorem focuses on interventional distributions, it can trivially be generalized to any
counterfactual distribution by expanding the notion of identifiability to use a given collection of
interventional distributions, and requiring the DGM to entail the same interventional distributions for
the said collection. Please see Theorem C.3 in Appendix C.3 for the general statement and proof.
Thus, even with high-dimensional variables in the true SCM, given a causal graph, any identifiable
interventional query can, in principle, be sampled from by training a DCM that fits to the observational
distribuiton. However, trianing both low and high dimensional variables is challenging, and any
modularization not only is expected to help train more easily, but also allows the possibility of using
pre-trained image generative models. We focus on uncovering how to achieve such modularization.

4.1   BASICS OF MODULAR TRAINING WITH UNOBSERVED CONFOUNDERS

Consider the graph G in Figure 2. Suppose, we have an observational dataset D ∼ P (V). Our goal
is to sample from different L2 distributions such as P (X2 |do(X1 )) and P (Z2 |do(X1 )) by training a
DCM G for G that fits the observational data P (V), in accordance with Theorem 4.2.The DCM will
contain one feed-forward neural net per observed variable, i.e., G = {GZ1 , GZ2 , GZ3 , GX1 , GX2 }.
The question we are interested in is, which neural nets can be trained separately, and which need to be
trained together to be able to fit the joint distribution. Let Q be the distribution induced by the DCM.
Suppose we first train the causal generative model GZ1 , i.e., learn a mapping that can sample from
P (Z1 |Z3 , X1 ). Even if we provide the unobserved confounder N1 (see Definition 4.1), which also


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              Step (1/ 3):                                          Step (2/ 3): Train Z1,Z2,Z3   Step (3/ 3): Train X1, X2
                            Build H-graph:                                         Or, use pretrained Z1,Z2,Z3


  Z3         Z1        Z2                           Z3          Z1        Z2          Z3         Z1        Z2      Z3        Z1
                                              H1

       X1             X2                           H2                    X2                                             X1            X2
                                                         X1                                X1
            Graph G
                                                              Dataset:                          Match                        Match


Figure 2: Modular training on H-graph: H1 : [Z1 , Z2 , Z3 ] → H2 : [X1 , X2 ] with dataset D ∼ P (V ).


affects Z2 and Z3 , the neural network can learn a mapping that later make it impossible to induce the
correct dependence between Z1 , Z2 , or Z1 , Z3 no matter how GZ2 or GZ3 are trained later. This is
because fitting the conditional P (Z1 |Z3 , X1 ) does not provide any incentive for the model to induce
the correct dependency through latent variables. If model ignores the dependence due to the latent
confounders, it cannot induce dependence between Z3 and Z2 conditioned on Z1 . This observation
suggests that the causal mechanisms of variables that are in the same c-component should be trained
together. Therefore, we have to train [GZ1 , GZ2 , GZ3 ] together; similarly [GX1 , GX2 ] together.
Another issue is that it is very difficult to condition in feedforward models during training, which
is the case in a DCM. To sample from Q(z1 |z3 , x1 ) it is not sufficient to feed z3 , x1 to the network
GZ1 . In fact, observe that this is exactly the intervention operation and we would give us a sample
from Q(Z1 |do(Z3 , X1 )). Thus, while training DCMs, it is trivial to intervene on the inputs to a
neural network, but highly non-trivial to condition since feedforward models cannot easily be used
to correctly update the posterior via backdoor paths. This, together with the previous observation
motivates us to fitting interventional distributions a central part of our algorithm, as we explain below:
To match the joint P (V) for semi-Markovian models while preserving the integrity of c-components,
we propose using Tian’s factorization (Tian & Pearl, 2002). It factorizes P (V) into c-factors: the
joint distributions of each c-component Cj intervened on their parents, i.e., Ppa(Cj ) (Cj ).
                                             P (v) = P (x1 , x2 |do(z1 ))P (z1 , z2 , z3 |do(x1 ))                                      (1)
Due to this factorization, matching P (V) is equivalent to matching each of the c-factors. If we had
access to the L2 distributions from do(z1 ) and do(x1 ), ∀z1 , x1 , we could intervene on GZ1 and GX1
in the DCM to obtain do(z1 ) and do(x1 ) samples and train the generative models to match these L2
distributions. However, we only have access to the P (V) dataset. Our key idea is to leverage the
do-calculus rule-2 (Pearl, 1995) to use observational samples and pretend that they are from these
L2 distributions. This gives us a handle on how to modularize the training process of c-components.
For example, in Figure 2, P (z1 , z2 , z3 |do(x1 )) = P (z1 , z2 , z3 |x1 ) since do-calculus rule-2 applies,
i.e., intervening on X1 is equivalent to conditioning on X1 . We can then use the conditional distri-
bution as a proxy/alternative to the c-factor to learn Q(z1 , z2 , z3 |do(x1 )) with the DCM. However,
P (x1 , x2 |do(z1 )) ̸= P (x1 , x2 |z1 ). To overcome this issue, we seek to fit a joint distribution that
implies this c-factor, i.e., we find a superset of X1 , X2 on which rule-2 applies. We can include Z1
into the joint distribution that needs to be matched together with X1 , X2 and check if the parent
set of {X1 , X2 , Z1 } satisfy rule-2. We continue until we reach the joint P (x1 , x2 , z1 , z3 ) to be the
alternative distribution for {X1 , X2 }’s c-factor.
After identifying which sub-networks of the DCM can be trained separately, we need to decide a valid
order in which they should be trained. For the same example, we can first train [GZ1 , GZ2 , GZ3 ]
together to induce Q(z1 , z2 , z3 |do(x1 )) = P (z1 , z2 , z3 |x1 ) = P (z1 , z2 , z3 |do(x1 )). This is shown
in step (2/3) in Figure 2: We can produce samples from the mechanisms of Z1 , Z2 , Z3 by intervening
on their parent X1 with real observations from dataset D. Thus, we do not need GX1 to be pre-trained.
Now, we train mechanisms of the next c-component [GX1 , GX2 ] in our training order (step
3/3). As discussed, we need to ensure Q(X1 , X2 , Z1 , Z3 |do(∅)) = P (X1 , X2 , Z1 , Z3 |do(∅)) =
P (X1 , X2 , Z1 , Z3 |∅). Since mechanisms of Z1 , Z3 were trained in the previous step, we can freeze
the neural network weights of [GZ1 , GZ3 ]. These are used to correctly sample from Z1 given X1 , and
feed this correctly sampled value into the network of X2 . In Appendix D.1, we show that the c-factors


                                                                               5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


in Equation 1 will correctly match the true c-factors after fitting these two conditional probabilities
in this order. Therefore, DCM matches the joint distribution P (V) as well. On the other hand, if
we first trained the networks [GX1 , GX2 ], it would not be possible to match the joint distribution
P (x1 , x2 , z1 , z3 ) as the mechanisms of Z1 , Z3 are not yet trained. Thus, this order would not work.
In the following, we generalize these ideas into an algorithm that can modularize the training process
of different c-components, while identifying a valid training order to match the joint distribution.

4.2   M ODULAR T RAINING A LGORITHM FOR DCM S

To match the joint distribution P (V) by training the DCMs in a modular way, we have to: 1) arrange
the c-components in a valid training order and 2) train (sets of) c-components to match their c-factors.
Arranging the c-components: Consider a c-component Ct . When should a c-component Cs be
trained before Ct ? Since we need rule 2 of do-calculus to hold on the parents of Ct for training, if Cs
contains some parents of Ct that are located on the backdoor paths between any two variables in Ct ,
then Cs must be pre-trained before Ct . Conditioning and intervening on those parents of Ct in Cs is
not the same, i.e., P (Ct |do(pa(Ct ∩ Cs )) ̸= P (Ct |pa(Ct ∩ Cs ). Thus we include them in the joint
distribution that we want to match for Ct , which requires those parents in Cs to be pre-trained.
To obtain a partial order among all c-components, we construct a directed graph structure called
H-graph that contains c-components as nodes. While adding edges, if any cycle is formed, we merge
c-components on that cycle into a single h-node indicating that they will need to be trained jointly.
Thus some h-nodes may contain more than one c-component. The final structure is a DAG and gives
us a valid partial order T for modular training (Proposition D.14). Formally an H-graph is defined as:
Definition 4.3 (H-graph). Given a causal graph G with c-components C = {C1 , . . . Cn }, let {Hk }k
be some partition of C. The directed graph (VH , EH ) where VH = {Hk }k and Hs → Ht ∈ EH iff
P (Ht |do(paG (Ht ) ∩ Hs )) ̸= P (Ht |paG (Ht ) ∩ Hs ), is called an H-graph for G if it is acyclic.
We run the subroutine Contruct_Hgraph() in Algorithm 1 to build an H-graph. We check the edge
condition in line 5 and merge cycles in line 7 if any. In Figure 2 step (1/3), we build the H-graph
H1 : [Z1 , Z2 , Z3 ] → H2 : [X1 , X2 ] for G. For a larger example, please see Appendix E.2. Note that,
we only use the H-graph to obtain a partial training order via h-nodes. An(Hk ) and P a(Hk ) below
refer to ancestors and parents in the causal graph G, not in the H-graph, for any h-node Hk .
Training c-components: We follow H-graph’s topological order and train the c-components in an h-
node Hk to match their corresponding c-factors Ppa(Cj ) (Cj ), ∀Cj ∈ Hk and matching Ppa(Hk ) (Hk )
ensures this. Although we can generate fake interventional samples from Qpa(Hk ) (Hk ) induced by
the DCM, they can not be used to train GHk as we do not have access to real data samples from the
interventional distribution Ppa(Hk ) (Hk ). Thus, we train GHk to learn a larger joint distribution that
can be obtained from the observational dataset as an alternative to its c-factors. We search for a set Ak
that can be added to the joint with Hk such that PP a(Hk ,Ak ) (Hk , Ak ) = P (Hk , Ak |P a(Hk , Ak )),
i.e., true interventional and conditional distribution are the same. This enables us to take conditional
samples from the input dataset and use them as interventional data samples and match their distribution
with the DCM-generated fake interventional samples from QP a(Hk ,Ak ) (Hk , Ak ) to train GHk . The
above condition is generalized into a modularity condition below:
Definition 4.4. Let Hk be an h-node in the H-graph. A set Ak ⊆ AnG (Hk )\Hk satisfies the modular-
ity condition if it is the smallest set with P (Hk , Ak |do(P a(Hk , Ak ))) = P (Hk , Ak |P a(Hk , Ak )).
As mentioned, such L1 and L2 distributional equivalence holds when the do-calculus rule-2 applies.
 PP a(Hk ,Ak ) (Hk , Ak ) = P (Hk , Ak |P a(Hk , Ak )), if (Hk , Ak ⊥⊥ P a(Hk , Ak ))GP a(Hk ,Ak ) (2)
This suggests a graphical criterion to find such a set Ak . Intuitively, if the outgoing edges of
P a(Hk , Ak ) are deleted (GP a(Hk ,Ak ) ), they become d-separated from {Hk , Ak }, i.e., there exists no
backdoor path from P a(Hk , Ak ) to {Hk , Ak }. Therefore, for a specific Hk , we start with Ak = ∅
and check if P a(Hk , Ak ) satisfies the conditions of rule-2 for {Hk , Ak }. If not, we add parents of
{Hk , Ak } in Ak . We include the ancestors since only they can affect Hk ’s mechanisms from outside
of the c-component. We continue the process until P a(Hk , Ak ) satisfies the condition of rule-2.
After constructing the H-graph at Algorithm 2 in line 3, we train each h-node Hk according to
the partial order to match with the c-factors’ alternative distribution for the c-components in Hk .


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Construct_Hgraph(G)                               Algorithm 2 Modular Training(G, D)
 1: Input: Causal Graph G                                       1: Input: Causal Graph G, Dataset D.
 2: C ← get_ccomponents(G)                                      2: Initialize DCM G
 3: Create nodes Hk = Ck in H, ∀Ck ∈ C                          3: H ← Construct_Hgraph(G)
 4: for each Hs , Ht ∈ H such that s ̸= t do                    4: for each Hk ∈ H in partial order do
 5:    if P (Ht |do(pa(Ht ) ∩ Hs ))                             5:    Initialize Ak ← ∅
       ̸= P (Ht |pa(Ht ) ∩ Hs ) then                            6:    while IsRule2(Hk , Ak ) = 0 do
 6:       H.add(Hs → Ht )                                       7:       Ak ← P aG (Hk , Ak )
 7: H ← Merge(H, cyc), ∀cyc ∈ Cycles(H)                         8:    GHk ←TrainModule(GHk , G, Hk , Ak , D)
 8: Return: H                                                   9: Return: G


(lines 4-8). We initialize a set Ak = ∅ to keep track of the joint distribution we need to match to
train each h-node Hk . We search for the set of ancestors Ak of the current h-node Hk such that
Ak satisfies the modularity condition for Hk (line 6), which is checked by Algorithm 5: IsRule2(.).
Finding a set Ak satisfying the modularity condition implies that we can train GHk by matching:
          Qpa(Hk ,Ak ) (Hk , Ak ) = P (Hk , Ak |P a(Hk , Ak )); Now training: Hk , Pre-trained: Ak            (3)
We utilize adversarial training to train the generators in GHk on observational dataset D to match the
above. This is done by Algorithm 4: TrainModule() called in line 8. More precisely, this sub-routine
uses all mechanisms in {Hk , Ak } to produce samples but only updates the mechanisms in GHk
corresponding to the current h-node and returns those models after convergence. Even though we
will train only GHk i.e., GV , ∀V ∈ Hk , Ak appears together with Hk in the joint distribution that
we need to match. Thus, we use pre-trained causal mechanisms of Ak , i.e., GV , ∀V ∈ Ak here.
Following the partial order of H-graph ensures that we have already trained Ak before Hk .
Training GHk to match the conditional distribution of data with the interventional distribution of the
DCM, as in Equation 3, is sufficient to learn the c-factors PP a(Cj ) (Cj ), ∀Cj ∈ Hk . After training
each GHk according to the partial order of H-graph, WhatIfGAN will learn a DCM that induces
Q(V) = P (V) from data. For example, in Figure 2 we match P (z1 , z2 , z3 |x1 ) = Q(z1 , z2 , z3 |do(x1 ))
at step (2/3) and P (x1 , x2 , z1 , z3 ) = Q(x1 , x2 , z1 , z3 ) at step (3/3). Thus, P (V) = Q(V) in this graph.
Finally, the trained DCM can sample from L2 and L3 distributions identifiable from P (V) such as
P (X2 |do(X1 )) or P (Z2 |do(X1 )). These are formalized in Theorem 4.5. Proof is in Appendix D.6.
Sampling with WhatIfGAN: For L2 sampling, we set the intervened variables to fixed values instead
of using their neural networks and push forward those values to generate the rest of the variables.
We have the following assumptions, mainly that the causal graph is given1 and that GAN training can
correctly learn the desired conditional data distribution for each h-node.
Assumption 1: The true causal graph with the location of latent confounders is known. Assumption
2: The causal graph G is semi-Markovian Tian et al. (2006). Assumption 3: For any h-node Hk
in the H-graph, GAN training of DCM on D converges to sample from the conditional distribution
P (Hk , Ak |pa(Hk , Ak )) for all Hk , where Ak is from Algorithm 2.
Theorem 4.5. Consider any SCM M = (G, N , U, F, P (.)). Suppose Assumptions 1-3 hold. Algo-
rithm 2 on (G, D) returns a DCM G that entails i) the same observational distribution, and ii) the
same identifiable interventional distributions as the SCM M.

5       E XPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
We present WhatIfGAN performance on semi-synthetic high-dimensional Colored-MNIST
dataset (LeCun et al., 1998) and real-world COVIDx CXR-3 dataset Wang et al. (2020). In Ap-
pendix F, we show performance on Sachs and Colored-MNIST-2 (for counterfactual sampling).

5.1       P ERFORMANCE ON IMAGE MEDIATOR EXPERIMENT AND BENCHMARK COMPARISON

We show WhatIfGAN performance in an experiment on the front-door graph in Figure 3a that involves
both low and high-dimensional variables. We constructed a synthetic SCM where a hidden variable
    1
        Causal discovery is typically an orthogonal problem to inference, and is beyond our scope in this work.


                                                         7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                            Consistent,
                                  Inconsitent   Low quality Good quality


               D


                A

      (a) Causal graph    (b) Comparing MNIST generation                   (c) Training converges for ours.

Figure 3: Performance on frontdoor. NCM produces good images but not consistent with do(D).
WhatIfGAN without modular training (rep) produces consistent but low-quality images. Our modular
approach with training order: {I} → {D, A} produces consistent, good images and converges faster.


U affects both D and A. Image variable I contains the digit value of D, and A is some attribute of
I obtained from a randomly chosen projection of the image. The digit color can be considered as
exogenous noise. Suppose we are given a dataset sampled from P (D, A, I). Our goal is to estimate
the causal effect P (A|do(D)).
                             R We can use the backdoor criterion (Pearl, 1993), to evaluate the
ground truth P (A|do(D)) = U P (A|D, U )P (U ) since we know U in the true SCM. From the input
L1 dataset, P (A|do(D)) is identifiable with the front-door criterion (Pearl, 2009).
The identification algorithm can not be applied since it requires image distribution. If we can train all
mechanisms in the DCM to match P (D, A, I), we can produce correct samples from P (A|do(D)).
For this purpose, we construct the WhatIfGAN architecture with a neural network GD having fully
connected layers to produce D, a CNN-based generator GI to generate images, and a classifier GA
to classify MNIST images into variable A such that D and A are confounded. Now, for this graph,
the corresponding H-graph is [I] → [D, A]. Thus, we first train GI by matching P (I|D). Instead
of training GI , we can also employ a pre-trained generative model that takes digits D as input and
produces an MNIST image showing D digit in it. Thus in Fig 3b, WhatIfGAN shows images of the
digit 0 (top, right) and digit 1 (bottom, right) due to do(D = 0) and do(D = 1) intervention. Next, to
train GD and GA , we should match the joint distribution P (D, A, I) since {I} is ancestor set A for
c-component {D, A}. GAN convergence becomes difficult using the loss of this joint distribution
since the losses generated by low and high dimensional variables are not easily comparable and
non-trivial to re-weight (see Appendix F.2). Thus, we map samples of I to a low-dimensional
representation, RI with a trained encoder and match P (D, A, RI) instead of the joint P (D, A, I).
In Figure 3b, 3c, we compare our method with Xia et al. (2023): NCM and a version of our
method: WhatIfGAN-rep that does not use modular training, with respect to image quality and total
variation distance from true P (D, A) and P (A|do(D)). We implemented NCM on our architectures
as it could not be directly used for images. Since NCM trains all mechanisms with the same loss
function calculated from both low and high-dimensional samples, it learns marginal distribution
P (I) (Figure 3b left) but does not fully converge to match the joint P (D, A, I) (all red-lines are
not going down in Figure 3c). Thus, NCM produces good-quality images but is not consistent with
do(D) intervention. WhatIfGAN-rep uses a low-dim representation of images: RI and matches
the joint distribution P (D, A, RI) as a proxy to P (D, A, I) without modularization. We observe
WhatIfGAN-rep to converge (Figure 3c blue-lines) slower compared to the original WhatIfGAN
and produce consistent but low-quality images (Figure 3b middle) for do(D) intervention. Finally,
WhatIfGAN modular training matches P (D, A, RI) and converges faster (Figure 3c green-lines) for
P (D, A), P (A|do(D)) and produces good-quality, consistent P (I|do(D)) images (Figure 3b right).

5.2   P ERFORMANCE ON R EAL - WORLD COVID X CXR-3 DATASET

In this section, we conduct a case study with the COVIDx CXR-3 (Wang et al., 2020) dataset. This
dataset contains 30,000 chest X-ray images with Covid (C) and pneumonia (N ) labels from over
16,600 patients located in 51 countries. The X-ray images are of healthy patients (C = 0, N = 0),
patients with non-Covid pneumonia (C = 0, N = 1), and patients with Covid pneumonia (C =


                                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                    COVID-19   Normal   Pneumonia
                  Covid
                Symptoms


                             Real


     Location


                XrayImages
                             Fake
                Pneumonia
                 Diagnosis



(a) COVIDx CXR-3 graph (b) Real data vs pre-trained model           (c) Training converges with low TVD



         Figure 4: WhatIfGAN converges with pre-trained model on COVIDx CXR-3 dataset.


1, N = 1). X-ray images for COVID non-pneumonia (C = 1, N = 0) are not present in this dataset
as according to health experts those images do not contain enough signal for pneumonia detection.
There is no ground truth causal graph associated with this dataset. In order to demonstrate the
convergence behavior of WhatIfGAN on real high-dimensional datasets, we consider the causal graph
shown in Figure 4a. Note that the causal effect estimates obtained via this graph may not reflect
the true causal effect since the ground truth graph is unknown and there may be other violations of
assumptions such as distribution shift and selection bias. However, observe that this graph does not
impose conditional independence restrictions on the joint distribution P (C, Xray, N ). Therefore,
we expect our modular training algorithm to correctly match the observational joint distribution.
Our reasoning for using this causal graph is as follows: we can assume that Covid symptoms
determine the X-ray features and the pneumonia diagnosis is made based on the X-rays. Thus we
can add direct edges between these variables. A patient’s location is hidden and acts as a confounder
because a person’s socio-economic and health conditions in a specific location might affect both
the likelihood of getting Covid and being properly diagnosed with Pneumonia by local health care.
The X-ray images are done by chest radiography imaging examination. Due to the standardization
of equipment, we assume the difference in X-ray data across hospital locations is minor and can
be ignored. Thus, Location ̸→ XrayImages. We aim to learn that if a patient is randomly picked
and intervened with Covid (hypothetically), how likely will they be diagnosed with pneumonia, i.e.,
P (N |do(C))? If our mentioned assumptions (including no selection bias, etc.) are correct, we expect
WhatIfGAN to correctly sample from interventional distribution after training by Theorem 4.5.
To match the joint distribution P (C, Xray, N ), we follow the modular training order: [GXray ] →
[GC , GN ]. Instead of training GXray from scratch, we use a pre-trained model (Giorgio Carbone,
2023) that can be utilized to produce Xray images corresponding to C ∈ [0, 1] input. Figure 4b shows
images for the original dataset and output images from the pre-trained model. Next, we train GC and
GN together since they belong to the same c-component. Since the joint distribution contains both
low and high-dimensional variables, we map Xray to a low-dimensional representation Rxray with
an encoder and match P (C, Rxray, N ). In Figure 4c, we plot the total variation distance (TVD)
of P (C), P (N ), P (N |C), P (N, C). We observe that TVD for all distributions is decreasing. The
average treatment effect, i.e., the difference between E[P (N |do(C = 1))] and E[P (N |do(C = 0))]
is in [0.05, 0.08] after convergence. This implies that intervention with Covid increases the likelihood
of being diagnosed with Pneumonia. However, these results are based on this specific COVIDx
CXR-3 dataset and should not be used to make medical inferences without expert opinion.

6    C ONCLUSION
We propose a modular adversarial training algorithm called WhatIfGAN for learning deep causal
generative models for estimating causal effects with high-dimensional variables in the presence of
unobserved confounders. After convergence, WhatIfGAN can generate high-dimensional samples
from identifiable interventional and counterfactual distributions.


                                                        9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Vahid Balazadeh Meresht, Vasilis Syrgkanis, and Rahul G Krishnan. Partial identification of treatment
  effects with implicit generative models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  22816–22829, 2022.

Bard. Bard - chat based ai tool from google, powered by palm 2. https://bard.google.com/
  chat, 2023. Accessed: Sep 26, 2023.

Elias Bareinboim and Judea Pearl. Causal inference by surrogate experiments: Z-identifiability. In
  Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, UAI’12, pp.
  113–120, Arlington, Virginia, USA, 2012a. AUAI Press. ISBN 9780974903989.

Elias Bareinboim and Judea Pearl. Causal inference by surrogate experiments: z-identifiability. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1210.4842, 2012b.

Ioana Bica, James Jordon, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Estimating the effects of continuous-valued
  interventions using generative adversarial networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 33:16434–16445, 2020.

Daniel C. Castro, Jeremy Tan, Bernhard Kainz, Ender Konukoglu, and Ben Glocker. Morpho-MNIST:
  Quantitative assessment and diagnostics for representation learning. Journal of Machine Learning
  Research, 20(178), 2019.

ChatGPT. Chatgpt: A large language model trained by openai. https://openai.com/blog/
  chatgpt/, 2022. Accessed: Sep 26, 2023.

Juan Correa, Sanghack Lee, and Elias Bareinboim. Nested counterfactual identification from arbitrary
  surrogate experiments. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:6856–6867, 2021.

DALL-E. Dall-e 2 is an ai system that can create realistic images and art from a description in natural
 language. https://openai.com/dall-e-2, 2022. Accessed: Sep 26, 2023.

Gianluca Cavallaro Giorgio Carbone, Remo Marconzini. Cxr-acgan: Auxiliary classifier
  gan (ac-gan) for conditional generation of chest x-ray images (pneumonia, covid-19 and
  healthy patients) for the purpose of data augmentation. https://github.com/giocoal/
  CXR-ACGAN-chest-xray-generator-covid19-pneumonia, 2023.

Ishaan Gulrajani, Faruk Ahmed, Martin Arjovsky, Vincent Dumoulin, and Aaron C Courville.
   Improved training of wasserstein gans. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30,
   2017.

Yimin Huang and Marco Valtorta. Pearl’s calculus of intervention is complete. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1206.6831, 2012.

Amin Jaber, Jiji Zhang, and Elias Bareinboim. Causal identification under markov equivalence:
 Completeness results. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2981–2989. PMLR,
 2019.

Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. Categorical reparameterization with gumbel-softmax. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=rkE3y85ee.

Murat Kocaoglu, Christopher Snyder, Alexandros G Dimakis, and Sriram Vishwanath. Causalgan:
 Learning causal implicit generative models with adversarial training. In International Conference
 on Learning Representations, 2018.

Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to
  document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 86(11):2278–2324, 1998.

Sanghack Lee, Juan D Correa, and Elias Bareinboim. General identifiability with arbitrary surrogate
  experiments. In Uncertainty in artificial intelligence, pp. 389–398. PMLR, 2020.


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Christos Louizos, Uri Shalit, Joris M Mooij, David Sontag, Richard Zemel, and Max Welling. Causal
  effect inference with deep latent-variable models. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.
Daniel Nemirovsky, Nicolas Thiebaut, Ye Xu, and Abhishek Gupta. Countergan: generating realistic
  counterfactuals with residual generative adversarial nets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.05199, 2020.
Nick Pawlowski, Daniel Coelho de Castro, and Ben Glocker. Deep structural causal models for
  tractable counterfactual inference. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
  857–869, 2020.
Judea Pearl. [bayesian analysis in expert systems]: comment: graphical models, causality and
  intervention. Statistical Science, 8(3):266–269, 1993.
Judea Pearl. Causal diagrams for empirical research. Biometrika, 82(4):669–688, 1995.
Judea Pearl. Causality. Cambridge university press, 2009.
Karen Sachs, Omar Perez, Dana Pe’er, Douglas A Lauffenburger, and Garry P Nolan. Causal protein-
  signaling networks derived from multiparameter single-cell data. Science, 308(5721):523–529,
  2005.
Marco Scutari and Jean-Baptiste Denis. Bayesian networks: with examples in R. Chapman and
 Hall/CRC, 2021.
Ilya Shpitser and Judea Pearl. What counterfactuals can be tested. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Third
   Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 352–359, 2007.
Ilya Shpitser and Judea Pearl. Complete identification methods for the causal hierarchy. Journal of
   Machine Learning Research, 9:1941–1979, 2008.
Ilya Shpitser and Judea Pearl. Effects of treatment on the treated: Identification and generalization.
   In Proceedings of the 25th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, UAI 2009, pp.
   514–521. AUAI Press, 2009.
Jin Tian and Judea Pearl. A general identification condition for causal effects. eScholarship, University
   of California, 2002.
Jin Tian, Changsung Kang, and Judea Pearl. A characterization of interventional distributions in
   semi-markovian causal models. In AAAI, pp. 1239–1244, 2006.
Boris van Breugel, Trent Kyono, Jeroen Berrevoets, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Decaf: Generating
  fair synthetic data using causally-aware generative networks. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:22221–22233, 2021.
Linda Wang, Zhong Qiu Lin, and Alexander Wong. Covid-net: a tailored deep convolutional neural
  network design for detection of covid-19 cases from chest x-ray images. Scientific Reports, 10
  (1):19549, Nov 2020. ISSN 2045-2322. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-76550-z. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-76550-z.
Kevin Xia, Kai-Zhan Lee, Yoshua Bengio, and Elias Bareinboim. The causal-neural connection:
  Expressiveness, learnability, and inference. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  34:10823–10836, 2021.
Kevin Muyuan Xia, Yushu Pan, and Elias Bareinboim. Neural causal models for counterfactual iden-
  tification and estimation. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=vouQcZS8KfW.
Depeng Xu, Yongkai Wu, Shuhan Yuan, Lu Zhang, and Xintao Wu. Achieving causal fairness
  through generative adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2019.


                                                   11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C ONTENTS

1   Introduction                                                                                    1

2   Related works                                                                                   3

3   Background                                                                                      3

4   Deep Causal Generative Models with Unobserved Confounders                                       4
    4.1   Basics of modular training with unobserved confounders . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        4
    4.2   Modular Training Algorithm for DCMs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         6

5   Experimental evaluation                                                                         7
    5.1   Performance on image mediator experiment and benchmark comparison . . . . . .             7
    5.2   Performance on Real-world COVIDx CXR-3 dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            8

6   Conclusion                                                                                      9

A Broader Impacts                                                                                  13

B Limitations and Future work                                                                      13

C Appendix: WhatIfGAN: adversarial training of deep causal generative models                       14
    C.1 WhatIfGAN training loss gradients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      14
    C.2 WhatIfGAN interventional and counterfactual sampling after training . . . . . . .          14
    C.3 WhatIfGAN: adversarial training of deep causal generative models (Full training) .         15
    C.4 Training with Multiple Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      15
    C.5 Non-Markovianity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       16

D Appendix: WhatIfGAN Modular Training                                                             17
    D.1 Tian’s Factorization for Modular Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      17
    D.2 Modular training for interventional dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    17
          D.2.1 Modular training basics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    17
          D.2.2 Training process of modular WhatIfGAN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          20
          D.2.3 Learn P (V)-factors from interventional datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       21
    D.3 Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   21
    D.4 Identifiable distributions from WhatIfGAN Modular Training . . . . . . . . . . . .         21
    D.5 Matching Distributions with WhatIfGAN Modular Training . . . . . . . . . . . . .           24
          D.5.1 Matching Observational distributions with Modular Training on D ∼ P (V)            25
          D.5.2 Matching Observational distributions with Modular Training on D ∼
                PI (V), ∀I ∈ I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     26
          D.5.3 Matching Interventional distributions with Modular Training on D ∼
                PI (V), ∀I ∈ I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     28


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    D.6 Identifiability of Algorithm 7:WhatIfGAN Modular Training . . . . . . . . . . . .              31

E Modular Training on different graphs                                                                 32
    E.1 Modular Training Example 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           32
    E.2 Modular training example 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         32

F Experimental Analysis                                                                                33
    F.1   Experiment checklist . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       33
          F.1.1   Training Details and Compute . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         33
          F.1.2   Reproducibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      33
    F.2   Image mediator experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        33
    F.3   Performance on Real-world COVIDx CXR-3 dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .               35
    F.4   MNIST Experiment 2: L2 and L3 ampling from MNIST dataset . . . . . . . . . .                 36
          F.4.1   MNIST experimental setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         36
          F.4.2   MNIST low dimensional variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          36
          F.4.3   MNIST High dimensional variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           37
          F.4.4   MNIST Derivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         38
    F.5   Asia/Lung Cancer dataset      . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    39
    F.6   Real-world: Sachs protein dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        39
    F.7   Synthetic Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       40

G Algorithms & Pseudo-codes                                                                            42

H Frequently Asked Questions                                                                           42


A    B ROADER I MPACTS

Our proposed algorithm WhatIfGAN, can sample from high-dimensional observational, interventional,
and counterfactual distributions. As a result, it can be used to explore different creative directions such
as producing realistic interventional and counterfactual images that we can not observe in real-world.
We can train WhatIfGAN models on datasets and perform intervention on sensitive attributes to detect
any bias towards them or any unfairness against them (Xu et al., 2019; van Breugel et al., 2021).
However, an adversary might apply our method to produce realistic images which are causal. As a
result, it will be harder to detect fake data generated by DCM from real data.


B    L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE WORK

Similar to most causal inference algorithms, we had to make the assumption of having a fully specified
causal graph with latents, as prior. With the advancements in causal discovery with latents, it might be
possible to reliably learn part of the structure and leverage the partial identifiability results from the
literature. Indeed, this would be one of the future directions we are interested in. Another limitation
of this work is that we assumed each confounder to cause only two observed variables which is
considered as semi-Markovian in literature. We aim to extend our work for non-Markovian causal
models where confounders can cause any number of observed variables.


                                                   13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C     A PPENDIX : W HAT I F GAN: ADVERSARIAL TRAINING OF DEEP CAUSAL
      GENERATIVE MODELS

Definition C.1 (Identifiability (Shpitser & Pearl, 2007)). Given a causal graph, G, let M be the set
of all causal models that induce G and objects ϕ and θ are computable from each model in M. We
define that ϕ is θ-identifiable in G, if there exists a deterministic function gG determined by the graph
structure, such that ϕ can be uniquely computable as ϕ = gG (θ) in any M ∈ M.
Definition C.2 (Causal Effects z-Identifiability). Let X,Y,Z be disjoint sets of variables in the causal
graph G. If ϕ = Px (y) is the causal effect of the action do(X=x) on the variables in Y, and θ contains
P (V) and interventional distributions P (V \ Z′ |do(Z′ )), for all Z′ ⊆ Z, where ϕ and θ satisfies the
definition of Identifiability, we define it as z-identifiabililty. (Bareinboim & Pearl, 2012a) proposes a
z-identification algorithm to derive gG for these ϕ and θ

C.1   W HAT I F GAN TRAINING LOSS GRADIENTS

Let’s assume we have V1 , V2 , ..., Vn ∈ V, then we can update the model weights for each of these
variable’s generators based on the following gradients.
                                  ∂L      ∂Lobs
                                                              T
                                      obs
                                    ∂X1     ∂X2   ... ∂L  obs
                                                        ∂Xn
                                                                      
                                                                        ∇X1
                                                                            
                                  ∂Lx1    ∂Lx1         ∂Lx1 
                                                  ... ∂Xn             ∇X2 
                    ∇T × 1 =  ∂X1          ∂X2                × 1 =  ...                    (4)
                                 
                                  ...       ...  ...    ... 
                                                                            
                                    ∂Lxn   ∂Lxn         ∂L
                                                  ... ∂Xxnn             ∇Xn
                                    ∂X1     ∂X2


Here, ∇i,j represents loss gradient for the generator of variable Xj for the i-th real observational or
interventional dataset. For any column ∇∗,j , we know that each of the corresponding observational
and interventional distributions is produced from a single function, fj of a true causal model and we
want our implicit generative models, Gj to mimic the true structural functions. Therefore, we sum
all the loss gradients of ∇∗,j together as ∇Xj and update Xj ’s model, Gj ’s weights based on that.
This will ensure that after converging, WhatIfGAN models will learn distributions of all the available
datasets and according to Theorem4.2, it will be able to produce samples from causal queries which
are identifiable from these given distributions.

C.2   W HAT I F GAN INTERVENTIONAL AND COUNTERFACTUAL SAMPLING AFTER TRAINING

After WhatIfGAN training, to perform hard intervention and produce samples accordingly, we
manually set values of the intervened variables instead of using their neural network. Then, we feed
forward those values into its children’s mechanisms and generate rest of the variable like as usual.
Figure 5(b) is the WhatIfGAN network for the causal graph in Figure 5(a). Now, in Figure 5(c), we
performed do(X = x). Exogenous variables U and nX are not affecting X anymore as we manually
set X = x. For counterfactual sampling of Px (Y |x′ ), we follow the three steps, i) Abduction: With
rejection sampling, we record the posterior exogenous nX , confounding U and the gumbel noises
responsible for producing X = x′ in the DCM’s no intervention forward propagation (Figure 5c).
We collect Gumbel Noise as we performed Gumbel-softmax (Jang et al., 2017) to deal with discrete
variables. ii) Action: We intervene on GX with X = x iii) Prediction: We use pre-recorded
exogenous variable values as input to rest of the variable’s neural network and push forward through
the neural networks. (Figure 5c).


                                                  nZ               do(X=x)        nZ

                          U2                 U1        GZ     U2             U1        GZ   U2
                 Z        X     Y       nX                         nY                            nY
                     U1                      GX               GY             GX             GY

                          (a)                      (b)                             (c)


        Figure 5: (a) Causal Graph with latents. (c), (d) DCM before and after intervention.


                                                         14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.3     W HAT I F GAN: ADVERSARIAL TRAINING OF DEEP CAUSAL GENERATIVE MODELS (F ULL
        TRAINING )

In this section, we prove that a trained DCM can sample from identifiable causal queries from any
causal layer. We assume M1 as true SCM and M2 as DCM of WhatIfGAN.
Theorem C.3. Let M1 = (G = (V, E), N , U, F, P (.)) be an SCM. If a causal query KM1 (V)
is identifiable from a collection of observational and/or interventional distributions {Pi (V)}i∈[m]
for graph G, then any SCM M2 = (G, N ′ , U ′ , F ′ , Q(.)) entails the same answer to the causal
query if it entails the same input distributions. Therefore, for any identifiable query K, if
{Pi (V)}i∈[m] KM1 (V) and Pi (V) = Qi (V), ∀i ∈ [m], then KM1 (V) = KM2 (V).
              ⊥


Proof. By definition of identifiability, we have that KM1 = gG ({Pi (V)}i∈[m] ) for some deterministic
function gG that is determined by the graph structure. Since M2 has the same causal graph, the query
KM2 is also identifiable and through the same function gG , i.e., KM2 = gG ({Qi (V)i∈[m] }). Thus,
the query has the same answer in both SCMs, if they entail the same input distributions over the
observed variables, i.e., Pi (V) = Qi (V), ∀i.


                                                            U2
                                                                                                U2
                   USD
                                            U1

          S        X          D        X1        X2         W           Y             Z         X         Y
   nS         nX         nD                                                                U1
                                  (b) {P (V), Px1 (V)}     Px1 ,x2 (Y |x′1 , x′2 )   (c) {P (V), Pz (X, Y )} Px (Y )
                                                      ⊥


                                                                                                           ⊥
        (a) Front-door graph


                                                                                                               ⊥
Figure 6: Causal graphs with latents and respective identifiable causal queries. θ identifies ϕ :θ ϕ

Corollary C.4. Let M1 = (G = (V, E), N , U, F, P (.)) and M2 = (G, N ′ , U ′ , F ′ , Q(.)) be two
SCMs. If {P (V)} Px (Y ) for X, Y ⊂ V, X ∩ Y = ∅ and P (V) = Q(V) then Px (Y ) = Qx (Y )
                   ⊥


For example, in Figure 6(b), the interventional query Px1 ,x2 (W ) is identifiable from P (V). According
to the Corollary C.4, after training on P (V) dataset, WhatIfGAN will produce correct interventional
sample from Px1 ,x2 (W ) and along with other queries in L2 (P (V)).
Bareinboim & Pearl (2012b) showed that we can identify some L2 -queries with other surrogate
interventions and L1 -distributions. Similarly, we can apply Theorem 4.2:
Corollary C.5. Let M1 = (G = (V, E), N , U, F, P (.)) and M2 = (G, N ′ , U ′ , F ′ , Q(.))
be two SCMs and X, Y be disjoint, and {Si }i arbitrary subsets of variables.                    If
i){P (V), Ps1 (V), Ps2 (V) . . .} Px (Y ), ii)P (V) = Q(V) and iii)Psi (V) = Qsi (V), ∀i, si then
                                  ⊥


Px (Y ) = Qx (Y ).

In Figure 6(c), the interventional query Px (Y ) is identifiable from P (V) and Pz (X, Y ). Therefore,
after being trained on datasets sampled from these distributions, WhatIfGAN will produce correct
interventional sample from Px (Y ) and all other queries in L2 (P (V), Pz (X, Y )).
We apply Theorem 4.2 to answer counterfactual queries:
Corollary C.6. Let M1 = (G = (V, E), N , U, F, P (.)) and M2 = (G, N ′ , U ′ , F ′ , Q(.))
be two SCMs and X, Y be disjoint, and {Si }i arbitrary subsets of variables.                       If
i){P (V), Ps1 (V), Ps2 (V), . . .} P (Yx |e), ii)P (V) = Q(V) and iii)Psi (V) = Qsi (V), ∀i, si then
                                  ⊥


P (Yx |e) = Q(Yx |e).

In Figure 6(b), the counterfactual query Px1 ,x2 (Y |x′1 , x′2 ) is identifiable from P (V) and Px1 (V)
(see Appendix F.4.4). After training on datasets sampled from Px1 (V) and P (V), WhatIfGAN will
produce correct counterfactual samples from Px1 ,x2 (Y |x′1 , x′2 ) and queries in L3 (P (V), Px1 (V)).

C.4     T RAINING WITH M ULTIPLE DATASETS

We propose a method in Algorithm 3 for training WhatIfGAN with both L1 and L2 datasets. We
use Wasserstein GAN with penalized gradients (WGAN-GP) (Gulrajani et al., 2017) for adversarial


                                                      15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 3 WhatIfGAN Training on Multiple Datasets
 1: Input: Causal Graph G = (V, E), Interventional datasets= (I, D), DCM G, Critic D, Parameters=
    θ1 , . . . , θn , λ = 10
 2: while θ1 , . . . , θn has not converged do
 3:     for each (X, D) ∈ (I, D) do
 4:         compare_var = V
 5:         Sample real data vxr ∼ D following the distribution Prx with intervention X.
 6:         x ← X.values //X=(keys, values)
 7:         vxf = RunGAN(G, G, X, compare_var, ∅)
 8:         v̂x = ϵvxr + (1 − ϵ)vxf
 9:         Lx = Dwx (vxf ) − Dwx (vxr ) ∗ λ(∥∇v̂x Dwx (v̂x )∥2 − 1)2
10:          Gloss = Gloss + DwxP    (vxf )
11:          wx = Adam(∇wx m m    1
                                       j=1 LDx , wx , α, β1 , β2 )
12:     for θ ∈ θ1 , . . . θn do
13:          θ = Adam(∇θ − Gloss , θ, α, β1 , β2 )
14: Return: θ1 , . . . θn

training. G is the DCM, a set of generators and {Dx }X∈I are a set of discriminators for each
intervention value combinations. The objective function of a two-player minimax game would be
                                      X
                                 min     max L(Dx , G),
                                    G        Dx
                                         x

                     L(Dx , G) = E [Dx (v)] −          E        [Dx (G(x) (z, u))]
                                  r
                                  v∼Px             z∼PZ ,u∼PU

Here, for intervention do(X = x), X ∈ I, G(x) (z, u) are generated samples and v ∼ Prx are real L1
or L2 samples. We train our models by iterating over all datasets and learn L1 and L2 distributions
(line 3). We produce generated interventional samples by intervening on the corresponding node
of our architecture. For this purpose, we call Algorithm 9 RunGAN(), at line 7. We compare the
generated samples with the input L1 or L2 datasets. For each different combination of the intervened
variables x, Dx will have different losses, LX=x from each discriminator (line 9). At line 10, we
calculate and accumulate the generator loss over each dataset. If we have V1 , . . . , Vn ∈ V, then
we update each variable’s model weights based on the accumulated loss (line 13). This will ensure
that after convergence, WhatIfGAN models will learn distributions of all the available datasets and
according to Theorem 4.2, it will be able to produce samples from same or higher causal layers queries
that are identifiable from these input distributions. Following this approach, WhatIfGAN Training
in Algorithm 3, will find a DCM solution that matches to all the input distributions, mimicking
the true SCM. Finally, we describe sampling method for WhatIfGAN after training convergence in
Appendix C.2.
Proposition C.7. Let M1 be the true SCM and Algorithm 3: WhatIfGAN Training converges after
being trained on datasets: D = {Di }i , outputs the DCM M2 . If for any causal query KM1 (V)
identifiable from D then KM1 (V) = KM2 (V)

Proof. Let M1 = (G = (V, E), N , U, F, P (.)) be the true SCM and M2 = (G, N ′ , U ′ , F ′ , Q(.))
be the deep causal generative model represented by WhatIfGAN. WhatIfGAN Training converges
implies that Qi (V) = Pi (V), ∀i ∈ [m] for all input distributions. Therefore, according to Theo-
rem 4.2, WhatIfGAN is capable of producing samples from correct interventional or counterfactual
distributions that are identifiable from the input distributions.

C.5   N ON -M ARKOVIANITY

Note that, one can convert a non-Markovian causal model M1 to a semi-Markovian causal model M2
by taking the common confounder among the observed variables and splitting it into new confounders
for each pair. Now, for a causal query to be unidentifiable in a semi-Markovian model M2 , we can
apply the Identification algorithm (Shpitser & Pearl, 2008) and check if there exists a hedge. The
unidentifiability of the causal query does not depend on the confounder distribution. Thus, if the
causal query is unidentifiable in the transformed semi-Markovian model M2 , it will be unidentifiable
in the original non-Markovian model M1 as well.
Besides Semi-Markovian, Theorem 4.2 holds for Non-Markovian models, with latents appearing
anywhere in the graph and thus can be learned by WhatIfGAN training. Jaber et al. (2019) performs


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                    H?              HZ1, do(Z1)
                                      G
                                                  H0
                               Z3     Z1     Z2         Z3        Z1      Z2   Z3      Z1         Z2


                                 X1         X2               X1          X2     X1           X2
                                                   H1
                                      (a)                         (b)                  (c)



                       Figure 7: (a) Causal graph G, (b) H∅ -graph, (c) H Z1 -graph
causal effect identification on equivalence class of causal diagrams, a partial ancestral graph (PAG)
that can be learned from observational data. Therefore, we can apply their method to check if an
interventional query is identifiable from observational data in a Non-Markovian causal model and
express the query in terms of observations and obtain the same result as Theorem C.3.

D       A PPENDIX : W HAT I F GAN M ODULAR T RAINING
D.1     T IAN ’ S FACTORIZATION FOR M ODULAR T RAINING

In Figure 7(a), We apply Tian’s factorization (Tian & Pearl, 2002) to get,

                          P (v) = P (x1 , x2 |do(z1 ))P (z1 , z2 , z3 |do(x1 ))                                      (5)
We need to match the following distributions with the DCM.
                                   P (x1 , x2 |do(z1 )) = Q(x1 , x2 |do(z1 ))
                                                                                                                     (6)
                           P (z1 , z2 , z3 |do(x1 )) = Q(z1 , z2 , z3 |do(x1 ))

With modular training, we matched the following alternative distributions:
                            P (z1 , z2 , z3 |x1 ) = Q(z1 , z2 , z3 |do(x1 ))
                                                                                                                     (7)
                           P (x1 , x2 , z1 , z3 ) = Q(x1 , x2 , z1 , z3 )

Now, for the graph in Figure 7(a),
P (x1 , x2 , z1 , z2 , z3 ) = P (x1 , x2 |do(z1 )) × P (z1 , z2 , z3 |do(x1 )
                              P (x1 , x2 , z1 , z3 )
                            =                         × P (z1 , z2 , z3 |x1 ) [C-factorization of P (x1 , x2 , z1 , z3 )]
                              P (z1 , z3 |do(x1 ))
                              P (x1 , x2 , z1 , z3 )
                            =                        × P (z1 , z2 , z3 |x1 ) [Do-calculus rule-2 applies]
                                P (z1 , z3 |x1 )
                                 P (x1 , x2 , z1 , z3 )
                            =P                            × P (z1 , z2 , z3 |x1 )
                                 z2 P (z1 , z2 , z3 |x1 )
                           Q(x1 , x2 , z1 , z3 )
                         =P                       × Qx1 (z1 , z2 , z3 )                  [According to Equation 7]
                           z2 Qx1 (z1 , z2 , z3 )
                         = Q(x1 , x2 , z1 , z2 )        [We can follow the same above steps as P (.) for Q(.)]
                                                                                                            (8)
Therefore, if we match the distributions in Equation 7 with the DCM, it will match P (V) as well.

D.2     M ODULAR TRAINING FOR INTERVENTIONAL DATASET

D.2.1     M ODULAR TRAINING BASICS
Suppose, for the graph in Figure 8, we have two datasets Dp̃ ∼ P (V) and Dz1 ∼ PZ1 (V ), i.e.,
intervention set I = {∅, Z1 }. Joint distributions in both dataset factorize like below:
          P (v) = Pz1 (x1 , x2 )Px1 (z1 , z2 , z3 )
        Pz1 (v) = Pz1 (x1 , x2 )P (z3 )Pz1 (z2 )
                                                                                          (9)
                 = Pz1 (x1 , x2 )Pz1 (z2 , z3 )[Since Z2 , Z3 independent in GZ1 graph]
                   = Pz1 (x1 , x2 )Px1 ,z1 (z2 , z3 )[Ignores intervention using do calculus rule-2]

                                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We change the c-factors for Pz1 (V ) to keep the variables in each c-factor same in all distributions. This
factorization suggests that to match P (V) and PZ1 (V ) we have to match each of the c-factors using
Dp̃ and Dz1 datasets. In Figure 2 graph G, Px1 (z1 , z2 , z3 ) = P (z1 , z2 , z3 |x1 ) since do-calculus
rule-2 applies. And in GZ1 , P (z3 )Pz1 (z2 ) can be combined into Px1 ,z1 (z2 , z3 ). Thus we can
use these distributions to train part of the DCM: GZ1 , GZ2 , GZ3 to learn both Q(z1 , z2 , z3 |do(x1 ))
and Q(z2 , z3 |do(x1 , z1 )). However, P (x1 , x2 |do(z1 )) ̸= P (x1 , x2 |z1 ) in P (V). But we have
access to Pz1 (V). Thus, we can train GX1 , GX2 with only dataset DZ1 ∼ Pz1 (V) (instead of both
Dp̃ , DZ1 ) and learn Q(x1 , x2 |do(z1 )). This will ensure the DCM has matched both P (V) and Pz1 (V)
distribution.
Thus, we search proxy distributions to each c-factor corresponding to both P (V) and PZ1 (V ) dataset,
to train the mechanisms in a c-component Y. For each of the c-factors corresponding to Y in P (V)
and Pz1 (V ), we search for two ancestor sets Ap̃ , AZ1 in both P (V) and Pz1 (V ) datasets such that
the parent set P a(Y ∪ Ap̃ ) satisfies rule-2 for the joint Y ∪ Ap̃ and P a(Y ∪ AZ1 ) satisfies rule-2
for the joint Y ∪ AZ1 with do(Z1 ) intervention.
We update Definition 4.4as modularity condition-I for multiple interventional datasets as below:
Definition D.1 (Modularity condition-I). Given a causal graph G, an intervention I ∈ I and a
c-component variable set Y, a set A ⊆ AnGI (Y) \ Y is said to satisfy the modularity condition if it
is the smallest set that satisfies P (Y ∪ X|do(P a(Y ∪ X)), do(I)) = P (Y ∪ X|P a(Y ∪ X), do(I)),
i.e., do-calculus rule-2 (Pearl, 1995) applies.


  Z3         Z1    Z2             Z3         Z1         Z2                        Z3        Z1      Z2                   Z3         Z1
                            H1

       X1         X2             H2    X1           X2                                 X1                                     X1           X2
  Graph G
                                                                                            Match                                  Match
                                         Dataset:               Step (2/ 3):
                                                                                                          Step (3/ 3):
                                                               Train Z1,Z2,Z3
                                                                                                          Train X1, X2
                                         Step (1/ 3):        Or, use pretrained
                                       Build H-graph:              Z1,Z2,Z3



   Z3        Z1    Z2             Z3         Z1         Z2                                                                Z3          Z1
                                                                                   Z3        Z1      Z2

        X1        X2                   X1           X2                                                                         X1           X2
    Graph



Figure 8: Modular training on H-graph: H1 : [Z1 , Z2 , Z3 ] → H2 : [X1 , X2 ] with dataset D ∼ P (V ).


Unlike before, we have access to Pz1 (V) and we can use that to match Pz1 (x1 , x2 ) in both cases.
To match the L1 and L2 joint distributions according to (9), we train each c-component one by
one. For each c-component, we identify the modularity conditions of all c-factors Ppa(Y)∪I (Y),
∀I ∈ I and use them to train Y. We train the mechanisms in Y to learn an alternative to each
c-factor Ppa(Y)∪I (Y), ∀I ∈ I. For some ancestor set AI , the alternative distribution is in the form
P (Y ∪ AI |do(P a(Y ∪ AI )), do(I)) which should be equivalent to P (Y ∪ A|P a(Y ∪ A), do(I)).
We will find an AI from the DI , ∀I ∈ I such that we do not require P a(Y ∪ A) to be intervened on.
Now, to match P (Y ∪A|P a(Y ∪A), do(I)) = Q(Y ∪A|do(P a(Y ∪A)), do(I)) with our generative
models, we pick the observations of P a(Y ∪ A) from DI dataset and intervene in our DCM with
those values besides intervening on GI . Since we do not need generated samples for P a(Y ∪ A)
from DCM, rather their observations from the given DI dataset, we do not require them to be trained
beforehand. However, the order in which we train c-components matters and we follow the partial
order found for P (V) dataset even thought we train with multiple datasets.
For example, in Figure 2, we have two graphs G and GZ1 . We follow G’s training order for both
graphs to train the c-components, i.e., [GZ1 , GZ2 , GZ3 ] → [GX1 , GX2 ]. Here, for the c-component
Y = {Z1 , Z2 , Z3 }, we match P (V) c-factor Px1 (z1 , z2 , z3 ) and Pz1 (V) c-factor Px1 ,z1 (z2 , z3 ) thus
have to find alternative distribution for them. We find the smallest ancestor set Ap̃ , AZ1 for these


                                                                     18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 4 TrainModule(G, G, H∗ , A, D)
 1: Input: DCM G, Graph G(V, E), h-node H∗ , Ancestor set A, Data D, Params θH , λ = 10
 2: while θH∗ has not converged do
 3:   for each (Ai , Xi , Di ) ∈ (A, D) do
 4:      Vr = H∗ ∪ Ai ∪ P a(H∗ ∪ Ai ) ∪ Xi
 5:      Initialize critic Dwi
 6:      for t = 1, . . . , m {m samples} do
 7:         Sample real data vxr ∼ Di
 8:         xr ← get_intv_values(Xi , Di )
 9:         vxf = RunGAN(G, xr , Vr , θH∗ )
10:         v̂x = ϵvxr + (1 − ϵ)vxf
              (t)
11:         Li = Dwi (vxf ) − Dwi (vxr ) ∗ λ(∥∇v̂x Dwi (v̂x )∥2 − 1)2
                                1
                                  Pm     (t)
12:      wi = Adam(∇wi m            t=1 Li , wi )
                                   m
         Gloss = Gloss + m j=1 −Dwi (vxf )
                               1
                                  P
13:
14:   for θ ∈ θH∗ {All hnode mechanisms} do
15:      θ = Adam(∇θ Gloss , θ)
16: Return: θ1 , . . . θn


Algorithm 5 IsRule2(Y, X, I = ∅ (by default))
 1: Input: Variable sets Y and X, Intervention I.
 2: Return:
 3: if P (Y ∪ X|do(P a(Y ∪ X)), do(I)) = P (Y ∪ X|P a(Y ∪ X), do(I)) then
 4:    Return:1
 5: else
 6:    Return:0

c-factors in both Dp̃ and DZ1 datasets. A∅ = ∅ satisfies modularity condition for P (V) c-factor and
their P a(Y ∪ A) = {X1 }. AZ1 = ∅ satisfies modularity condition for Pz1 (V) c-factor and their
P a(Y ∪ A) = ∅. At step (2/3) in Figure 2, We do not need GX1 to be pre-trained. [GZ1 , GZ2 , GZ3 ]
converges by matching both P (z1 , z2 , z3 |x1 ) = Qx1 (z1 , z2 , z3 ) and Px1 ,z1 (z2 , z3 ) = Qx1 ,z1 (z2 , z3 ).
Now, we train mechanisms of the next c-component [GX1 , GX2 ] in our training order (step 3/3).
We have to match P (V) c-factor Pz1 (x1 , x2 ) and PZ1 (V) c-factor Pz1 (x1 , x2 ). Ancestor set Ap̃ =
{Z1 , Z3 } satisfies the modularity condition for Y = {X1 , X2 } with P (V) dataset but AZ1 = ∅ a
smaller set, satisfies the modularity condition for same c-factor with Pz1 (V) dataset. Also, Pz1 (V)
c-factor is Pz1 (x1 , x2 ). Thus if we train [GX1 , GX2 ] with only PZ1 (V) dataset, it will learn both
c-factors and converge with Pz1 (x1 , x2 ) = Qz1 (x1 , x2 ). Since we have matched all the c-factors,
our DCM will match both P (V) and PZ1 (V) distributions. During training of [GX1 , GX2 ], we had
A = ∅ for both observation and interventional c-factors. Therefore, we do not need any pre-trained
mechanisms, rather we can directly use the observations from PZ1 (V) dataset as parent values. We
define HI -graph for each I ∈ I as below:
Definition D.2 (HI -graph). For a post-interventional graph GI , let the set of c-components in GI be
C = {C1 , . . . Ct }. Choose a partition {HkI }k of C such that the HI -graph HI = (VHI , EHI ), defined
as follows, is acyclic: VHI = {HkI }k and for any s, t, HsI → HtI ∈ EHI , iff P (HtI |do(pa(HtI ) ∩
HsI )) ̸= P (HtI |pa(HtI ) ∩ HsI ), i.e., do-calculus rule-2 does not hold. Note that one can always
choose a partition of C to ensure HI is acylic: The HI graph with a single node H1I = C in GI . Even
though HI for different I might have different partial order, during training, every HI follows the
partial order of H∅ . Since its partial order is valid for other H-graphs as well (Proposition D.14).

Here, HI is the H-graph constructed from GI , for I ∈ I where I is the intervention set. H∅ is the
H-graph constructed from G for observational training. HkI := k-th h-node in the HI graph. During
H I -graphs construction, we resolve cycles by combining c-components on that cycle into a single
h-node. Please check example in Figure 15. After merging all such cycles, H I , ∀I ∈ I will become
directed acyclic graphs. The partial order of this graph will indicate the training order that we can
follow to train all variables in G. For example in Figure 8, two given datasets D1 and D2 , imply two
different graphs G and GZ1 respectively. [Z3 ] → [Z1 , Z2 ] → [X1 , X2 ] is a valid training order for
HZ1 , we follow the same order as H∅ . We follow : [Z1 , Z2 , Z3 ] → [X1 , X2 ].


                                                       19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 6 Construct-HI -graph(G, I)
 1: Input: Causal Graph G, Intervention set, I
 2: for each I ∈ I do
 3:    C ← get_ccomponents(GI )
 4:    Construct graph HI by creating nodes HjI as HjI = Cj , ∀Cj ∈ C
 5: for each I ∈ I do
 6:    for each HsI , HtI ∈ HI such that HsI ̸= HtI do
 7:       if P (HtI |do(pa(HtI ) ∩ HsI )) ̸= P (HtI |pa(HtI ) ∩ HsI ) then
 8:          HI .add(HsI → HtI )
 9:    HI ← merge(HI , cyc) ∀cyc ∈ Cycles(H I )
10: for each I ∈ I do
11:    for each Hj∅ ∈ H∅ do
          HjI = HkI such that V(HkI ) ⊆ V(Hj∅ )          [All variables in HkI h-node is contained in Hj∅ h-node.]
                 S
12:
                 k
13: Return: {HI : I ∈ I}


Algorithm 7 Modular Training-I(G, I, D)
 1: Input: Causal Graph G, Intervention set I, Dataset D.
 2: Initialize DCM G
      I
 3: H ← Construct-H-graphs(G, I)
                        ∅
 4: for each Hk ∈ H in partial order do
 5:    Ap̃ ← V        //Initialize with all nodes
 6:    for each S ⊆ AnG (Hk ) do
 7:       if IsRule2(Hk , S, p̃) = 1
          and |S| < |Ap̃ | then
 8:           Ap̃ ← S
 9:    for each I ∈ I ∩ Hk do
10:       AI ← V          //Initialize with all nodes
11:       for each S ⊆ AnGI (Hk ) do
12:           if IsRule2(Hk , S, I) = 1
              and |S| < |AI | then
13:               AI ← S
14:    GHk ←TrainModule(GHk , G, Hk , A, D)
15: Return: G


We run the subroutine Contruct-HI -graph() in Algorithm 6 to build H-graphs. We check the edge
condition at line 5 and merge cycles at line 7 if any. In Figure 2 step (1/3), we build the H-graph
H1 : [Z1 , Z2 , Z3 ] → H2 : [X1 , X2 ] for G.

D.2.2    T RAINING PROCESS OF MODULAR W HAT I F GAN
We construct the HI -graph for each I ∈ I at Algorithm 7 line 3. Next, we train each h-node Hk∅
of H∅ , according to its partial order T . Since we follow the partial order of H∅ -graph, we remove
the superscript to address the hnode. Next, we match alternative distributions for PI (V) c-factors
that correspond to the c-components in Hk . (lines 4-14) We initialize a set AI = {V : V ⊆
AnGI (Hk )}, ∀I ∈ I to keep track of the joint distribution we need to match to train each h-node Hk
from DI datasets. We iterate over each intervention and search for the smallest set of ancestors AI
in GI such that AI satisfies the modularity condition for Hk in DI dataset tested by Algorithm 5:
IsRule2(.) (line 7)
AI , ∀I ∈ I implies a set of joint distributions in Equation 10, which is sufficient for training the
current h-node Hk to learn the c-factors PP a(Ci )∪I (Ci ), ∀Ci ∈ Hk , ∀I ∈ I.


  Q(Hk ∪AI |do(pa(Hk ∪ AI )), do(I)) = P (Hk ∪ AI |pa(Hk ∪ AI ), do(I)), in GI , ∀I ∈ I.
                                                                                                            (10)
           Training: Hk , Pre-trained: AI , From DI dataset: pa(Hk ∪ AI ), Intervened: do(I)

Training Hk with the Ap̃ found at this step, is sufficient to learn the c-factors PP a(Ci ) (Ci ), ∀Ci ∈ Hk .
Similarly, if we have an interventional dataset with I ∈ Hk i.e., the intervened variable lies in the
current h-node, we have to match c-factors PP a(Ci )∪I (Ci ), ∀Ci ∈ Hk . To find alternatives to these


                                                      20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


c-factors, we look for the ancestor set AI in the DI dataset. For each AI , we train Hk to match the
interventional joint distribution in Equation 10. We ignore intervention on any descendants of Hk
since the intervention will not affect c-factors differently than the c-factor in the Dp̃ observational
dataset.

D.2.3    L EARN P (V)- FACTORS FROM INTERVENTIONAL DATASETS
When we need the alternative distribution for P (V) c-factor, we search for the smallest ancestor set in
D∅ dataset. However, when we have a dataset DI with I ∈ AnG (Hj∅ ), we can search for an ancestor
set in AnGI (Hk ) and train on DI to match a distribution that would be a proxy to P (V) c-factor.
This is possible because when we factorize PI (V) for I ∈ AnG (Hj∅ ), the c-factors corresponding to
the descendant c-components of I are similar to P (V) c-factors of the same c-components.
We update Theorem 4.5 for interventional datasets as below.
Theorem D.3. Let M1 = (G = (V, E), N , U, F, P (.)) be the true SCM and M2 =
(G, N ′ , U ′ , F ′ , Q(.)) be the DCM. Suppose Algorithm 7: WhatIfGAN Modular Training-I on
observational and interventional datasets DI ∼ PI (V), ∀I ∈ I converges for each h-node in the
H∅ -graph constructed from G = (V, E) and DCM induces the distribution QI (V ), ∀I ∈ I. Then,
we have i)PI (V ) = QI (V ), and ii) for any interventional or counterfactual causal query KM1 (V)
that is identifiable from DI , ∀I ∈ I, we have KM1 (V) = KM2 (V).

We provide the proof in Appendix D.6.

D.3     T RAINING

WhatIfGAN utilizes conditional Wasserstein GAN with penalized gradients (Gulrajani et al., 2017)
for adversarial training on L1 and L2 datasets in Algorithm 4. G is the DCM, a set of generators and
{Dwi } are a set of critics for each intervention dataset. Here, for intervention do(X = x), X ∈ I,
G(x) (z, u) are generated samples and v ∼ Prx are real L1 or L2 samples. We train our models
by iterating over all datasets and learn L1 and L2 distributions (lines 3-15). We produce fake
interventional samples at line 9 by intervening on the corresponding node of our architecture with
Algorithm 9 RunGAN(). Each critic Dx will obtain different losses, LX=x by comparing the
generated samples with different true datasets (line 11). Finally, at line 15, we update each variable’s
model weights located at the current hnode based on the accumulated generated loss over each
dataset at line 13. After calling Algorithm 4: TrainModule() for each of the h-nodes according to the
partial order of H∅ -graph, WhatIfGAN will find a DCM equivalent to the true SCM that matches all
dataset distributions. According to, theorem 4.2, it will be able to produce correct L1 , L2 and L3
samples identifiable from these input distributions (Appendix C.2).


D.4     I DENTIFIABLE DISTRIBUTIONS FROM W HAT I F GAN M ODULAR T RAINING

In this section, we show that WhatIfGAN modular training will match the observational joint
distribution P (V) (Proposition D.13) and the interventional joint distribution PI (V), ∀I ∈ I (Propo-
sition D.15). We start with some definitions that would be required during our proofs.
Definition D.4 (Intervention Set, I). Intervention Set, I represents the set of all available interven-
tional variables such that after performing intervention I ∈ I on G, we observe GI . I includes
I = ∅, which refers to "no intervention" and implies the original graph G and the observational data
P (V).
Definition D.5 (Sub-graph, (GI )V ). Let GV be a sub-graph of G containing nodes in V and all
arrows between such nodes. (GI )V refers to the sub-graph of GI containing nodes in V only, such
that variable I is intervened on i.e., all incoming edges to I is cut off.
Proposition D.6. Let V ∈ V, I ∈ I be some arbitrary variable sets. The set of c-components
formed from a sub-graph (GI )V with intervention I is not affected by additional interventions on
their parents from outside of the sub-graph. Formally, (GP a(V )∪I )V and (GI )V has the same set of
c-components.


                                                  21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. Let C((GI )V ) be the c-components which consists of nodes of V in graph (GI )V . In sub-
graph (GP a(V )∪I )V , no extra intervention is being done on any node in V rather only on P a(V )
where V and P a(V ) are two disjoint sets. Therefore, the c-components can be produced from this
sub-graph will be same as for GI . i.e., C(GV P a(V )∪I ) = C(GI ).


Lemma D.7. Let V ′ be a set called focus-set. V ′ and intervention I be arbitrary subsets of observable
variables V and {Ci }i be the set of c-components in GI . Let {P a(V ′ ) ∪ I} be a set called action-set.
and S be a set called remain-set, defined as S := V\{V ′ ∪ P a(V ′ ) ∪ I}, S(i)Sas S(i) = S ∩ Ci i.e.,
some part of the remain-set that are located in c-component Ci . Thus, S = S(i). We also define
                                                                                           i
active c-components Ci+ as Ci+ := Ci \ {S(i) ∪ P a(V ′ ) ∪ I} i.e., the variables in focus-set that
are located in c-component Ci . Given these sets, Tian’s factorization can be applied to a sub-graph
under proper intervention. Formally, we can factorize as below:

                                                       Y
                               PP a(V ′ )∪I (V ′ ) =         PP a(C + )∪I (Ci+ )
                                                                    i
                                                        i


Proof. (GP a(V ′ )∪I )V ′ and (GI )V ′ have the same c-components according to Proposition D.6. Ac-
cording to Tian’s factorization for causal effect identification (Tian & Pearl, 2002), we know that

                                                        Y
                                 PP a(V ′ )∪I (V) =          PP a(Ci )∪P a(V ′ )∪I (Ci )
                                                         i
                                            [let η = P a(V ′ ) ∪ I, i.e., action-set]
                                                                                                    (11)
                                                Y
                    =⇒ Pη (η) × Pη (V \ η|η) =     PP a(Ci )∪η (Ci )
                                                         i
                                                        Y
                                        ′
                  =⇒ Pη (V \ {P a(V ) ∪ I}) =                PP a(Ci )∪η (Ci )
                                                         i


We ignore conditioning on action-set η = P a(V ′ ) ∪ I since we are intervening on it. Now, we have
a joint distribution of focus-set and remain-set with action-set as an intervention.

                                            Y
                   =⇒ Pη (V ′ ∪ S) =            PP a(Ci )∪η (Ci )
                                            i
              [Here, S := V\{V ′ ∪P a(V ′ ) ∪ I} =⇒ V \ {P a(V ′ ) ∪ I} = V ′ ∪ S]
                  X                   XY
              =⇒       Pη (V ′ ∪ S) =         PP a(Ci )∪η (Ci )                                     (12)
                     S                      S    i
                    X                       YX
              =⇒         Pη (V ′ ∪ S) =              PP a(Ci )∪η (Ci )
                     S                      i S(i)

             [Since, S(i) = S ∩ Ci and ∀(i, j), i ̸= j, Ci ∩ Cj = ∅ =⇒ Si ∩ Sj = ∅]

Here, ∀i , S(i) are disjoint partitions of the variable set S and contained in only c-component Ci , i.e,
S(i) = S ∩ Ci . Since ∀i,j , Ci ∩ Cj = ∅, this implies that Si ∩ Sj = ∅ would occur as well. Intuitively,
remain-sets located in different c-components do not intersect. Therefore, each of the probability
terms at R.H.S, PP a(Ci )∪η (Ci ) is only a function of S(i) instead of whole S. This gives us the
opportunity to push the marginalization of S(i) inside the product and marginalize the probability
term. After marginalizing S(i) from the joint, we define rest of the variables as active c-components
Ci+ . The following Figure 9 helps to visualize all the sets.


                                                       22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                           Action-set

                       C-component                                      V

                         Active           C1                                            C2
                      C-component                                      Pa(V')
                                                    C1+            I1            C2+
                                                                                C1
                       Remain-set              S1
                                                                        V'
                                                                                I2
                         Focus-set                  C
                                                    C1
                                                     3
                                                      +
                                                                                C1C4+
                                                                       Pa(V')
                                          C3                                            C4


                  Figure 9: Visualization of focus-sets, action-sets, and remain-sets


We continue the derivation as follows:
                         Y
=⇒ PP a(V ′ )∪I (V ′ ) =    PP a(Ci )∪P a(V ′ )∪I (Ci+ )
                           i
                      [Here, Ci+ = Ci \ S(i), i.e., active c-component: focus-set elements located in Ci ]
                         Y
                       =    PP a(C + )∪I∪{P a(Ci )\P a(C + )}∪P a(V ′ ) (Ci+ )
                                      i                            i
                           i
                           Y
                       =       PX∪Z (Ci+ ) [Let, X = P a(Ci+ ) ∪ I and Z = {P a(Ci ) ∪ P a(V ′ )} \ X]
                           i
                                                                                                  (13)

Here, we have variable set Ci+ in the joint distribution. Now, if we intervene on the parents P a(Ci+ )
and I, rest of the intervention which is outside Ci+ becomes ineffective. Therefore, we have X =
P a(Ci+ )∪I, the intervention which shilds the rest of the interventions, Z = {P a(Ci )∪P a(V ′ )}\X.
Therefore, we can apply do-calculus rule 3 on Z and remove those interventions. Finally,
                                Y
     =⇒ PP a(V ′ )∪I (V ′ ) =        PP a(C + )∪I (Ci+ ) [We apply Rule 3 since Ci ⊥⊥ Z|XGX ]     (14)
                                           i
                                i


Corollary D.8, suggests that Tian’s factorization can be applied on the h-nodes of H I ∈ H.

Corollary D.8. Consider a causal graph G. Let {Ci }i∈[t] be the c-components of GI . For some
intervention target I, let H I = (VHI , EHI ) be the h-graph constructed by Algorithm 6 where
VHI = {HkI }k . Suppose HkI is some node in HI . We have that HkI = {Ci }i∈TkI for some TkI ⊆ [t].
With slight abuse of notation we use HkI interchangeably with the set of nodes that are in HkI . Then,
                                                           Y
                                PP a(HkI )∪I (HkI ) =              PP a(Ci )∪I (Ci )              (15)
                                                           i∈[t]


Proof. Let, V ′ = HkI , Ci+ = Ci \ ∅ = Ci . Then, this corollary is direct application of Lemma D.7.



                                                          23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                            Pr oposition D.12
                                                                            Matches P(V) by
                                                                            Mod-Training on
                                                                                 D~P(V)


                                                                            Pr oposition D.13                       Theor em D.17
        Pr oposition D.6        Lemma D.7                                                                            Convergence
                                                   Cor ollar y D.8          Matches P(V) by
       Graphs containing        Focus set to                                                                       & ID with D~P(V)
                                                     h-nodes to             Mod-Training on
      same c-components            Active
                                                   c-components                D~P(V), PI(V)
                               c-components
                                                                                                  Theor em D.16
                                                                                                      L2, L3
                                                                                                  Identification   Theor em D.18
                                                                            Pr oposition D.15
                                                 Pr oposition D.14         Matches P(V) & PI(V)                     Convergence
                                                   H-graphs have           by Mod-Training on                        & ID with
                                                 same partial order            D~P(V), PI(V)                        D~P(V), PI(V)


                                               Figure 10: Flowchart of proofs


D.5     M ATCHING D ISTRIBUTIONS WITH W HAT I F GAN M ODULAR T RAINING

We provide Definition D.2: HI -graph here again.
Definition D.9 (HI -graph). For a post-interventional graph GI , let the set of c-components in GI be
C = {C1 , . . . Ct }. Choose a partition {HkI }k of C such that the HI -graph HI = (VHI , EHI ), defined
as follows, is acyclic: VHI = {HkI }k and for any s, t, HsI → HtI ∈ EHI , iff P (HtI |do(pa(HtI ) ∩
HsI )) ̸= P (HtI |pa(HtI ) ∩ HsI ), i.e., do-calculus rule-2 does not hold. Note that one can always
choose a partition of C to ensure HI is acylic: The HI graph with a single node H1I = C in GI . Even
though HI for different I might have different partial order, during training, every HI follows the
partial order of H∅ . Since its partial order is valid for other H-graphs as well.
Training order, T : We define a training order, T = {σ0 , . . . , σm } where σi = {Hk }k . If HkI1 →
HkI2 , HkI1 ∈ σi , HkI2 ∈ σj then i < j.
Definition D.10 (Notation for distributions). Q(.) is the observational distribution induced by the
deep causal SCM. P (.) is the true (observational/interventional) distribution. With a slight abuse of
notation, if we have P (V) and intervention I, then PI (V) indicates PI (V \ I). Algorithm 7 is said
to have converged if training attains zero loss every time line 14 is visited.
                                                                                         S
Definition D.11 (Ancestor set AI in GI ). Let parents of a variable set V be P a(V) =        P a(V ) \
                                                                                                                   V ∈V
V. Now, for some h-node HkI ∈ HI -graph, we define AI := the minimal subset of ancestors exists
in the causal graph GI with intervention I such that the following holds,
                 p(HnI ∪ AI |do(pa(HnI ∪ AI )), do(I) = p(HnI ∪ AI |pa(HnI ∪ AI ), do(I))                                           (16)

For training any h-node in the training order T = {σ0 , . . . , σm }, i.e., Hk∅ ∈ σj , 0 < j ≤ m, if only
observational data is available, i.e., I = ∅, we search for an ancestor set A∅ such that A∅ satisfies
modularity condition for Hk∅ :

                           P (Hk∅ ∪ A∅ |do(pa(Hk∅ ∪ A∅ )) = P (Hk∅ ∪ A∅ |pa(Hk∅ ∪ A∅ ))                                             (17)

Similarly, for I ∈ AnG (HkI ), i.e., intervention on ancestors, we can learn Ppa(H ∅ ) (Hk∅ ) from
                                                                                                                    k

available interventional datasets since HkI = Hk∅ , i.e., contains the same c-factors, according to
HI -graphs construction. These c-factor distributions are identifiable from PI (V ) as they can be
calculated from the c-factorization of PI (V ). Thus we have,
                                               Ppa(HkI ) (HkI ) = Ppa(H ∅ ) (Hk∅ )                                                  (18)
                                                                                 k


Therefore, to utilize ancestor interventional datasets, We search for smallest ancestor set AI ⊆
AnGI (HkI ) in GI such that do-calculus rule-2 applies,

               P (HkI ∪ AI |do(pa(HkI ∪ AI )), do(I)) = P (HkI ∪ AI |pa(HkI ∪ AI ), do(I))                                          (19)


                                                                      24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Then we can train the mechanisms in Hk∅ to learn the P (V) c-factors by matching the following
alternative distribution from DI dataset,
              P (HkI ∪ AI |pa(HkI ∪ AI ), do(I)) = Q(HkI ∪ AI |do(pa(HkI ∪ AI )), do(I))
                                                                                                  (20)
     =⇒ P (HkI ∪ AI |do(pa(HkI ∪ AI )), do(I) = Q(HkI ∪ AI |do(pa(HkI ∪ AI )), do(I))

Matching the alternative distributions with DI will imply that we match P (V) c-factor as well.
Formally:
                                   Qpa(HkI ) (HkI ) = Ppa(HkI ) (HkI )
                                                                                                  (21)
                                   Qpa(HkI ) (HkI ) = Ppa(H ∅ ) (Hk∅ )
                                                             k



D.5.1    M ATCHING O BSERVATIONAL DISTRIBUTIONS WITH M ODULAR T RAINING ON
         D ∼ P (V)
Now, we provide the theoretical proof of the correctness of WhatIfGAN Modular Training matching
observational distribution by training on observational dataset Dp̃ . Since, we have access to only
observational data we remove the intervention-indicating superscript/subscript and address Hp̃ as H,
ancestor set AI as A and dataset Dp̃ as D.
Proposition D.12. Suppose Algorithm 2: WhatIfGAN Modular Training converges for each h-node
in H∅ -graph constructed from G = (V, E). Suppose the observational distribution induced by the
deep causal model is Q(V) after training on data sets D ∼ P (V). Then,
                                            P (V) = Q(V)                                          (22)

Proof. According to Tian’s factorization we can factorize the joint distributions into c-factors as
follows:                                     Y Y
                          P (V) = P (H) =                Ppa(Ci ) (Ci )                        (23)
                                                Hk ∈H Ci ∈Hk

We can divide the set of c-components C = {C1 , . . . Ct } into disjoint partitions or h-nodes as
Hk = {Ci }i∈Tk for some Tk ⊆ [t]. Following Corollary D.8, we can combine the c-factors in each
partitions and rewrite it as:
            Y Y
                        Ppa(Ci ) (Ci ) = Ppa(H0 ) (H0 ) × Ppa(H1 ) (H1 ) × . . . × Ppa(Hn ) (Hn ) (24)
         Hk ∈H Ci ∈Hk

Now, we prove that we match each of these terms according to the training order T .
For any root h-nodes Hk ∈ σ0 :
Due to the construction of H graphs in Algorithm 6, the following is true for any root nodes, Hk ∈ σ0 .
                                 P (Hk |P a(Hk )) = PP a(Hk ) (Hk )                               (25)
WhatIfGAN training convergence for the DCM in Hk ∈ σ0 . (Algorithm 2, line 8) ensures that the
following matches:
                                   P (Hk |P a(Hk )) = QP a(Hk ) (Hk )
                                                                                                  (26)
                                =⇒ PP a(Hk ) (Hk ) = QP a(Hk ) (Hk )

Since, Equation 25 is true, observational data is sufficient for training the mechanisms in Hk ∈ σ0 .
Thus, we do not need to train on interventional data.
For the h-node Hk ∈ σ1 :
Now we show that we can train mechanisms in Hk by matching P (V) c-factors with D ∼ P (V) data
set. Let us assume, ∃A ⊆ σ0 such that A = An(Hk ),i.e., ancestors set of Hk in the H-graph that
we have already trained with available D dataset. To apply Lemma D.7 in causal graph G, consider
V ′ = Hk ∪ A as the focus-set, P a(V ′ ) as the action-set. Thus, active c-components: Cj+ := Cj ∩ V ′
Then we get the following:


                                                   25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                              Y                               Y       Y
        P (Hk ∪ A|do(P a(Hk ∪ A))) =                  Ppa(Ci ) (Ci ) ×                        PP a(C + ) (Cj+ )
                                                                                                     j
                                             Ci ∈Hk                      HS ∈{A} C + ⊆H
                                                                                      j   S

                               [Here, 1st term is the factorization of the current h-node
                                                                                          (27)
                               and 2nd term is the factorization of the ancestors set.]
                                                    Y       Y
  =⇒ P (Hk ∪ A|do(P a(Hk ∪ A))) = Ppa(Hk ) (Hk ) ∗                PP a(C + ) (Cj+ )
                                                                                          j
                                                                  HS ∈A C + ⊆H
                                                                          j       S


Here according to Corollary D.8, we combine the c-factors Ppa(Ci ) (Ci ) for c-components in Hk to
form Ppa(Hk ) (Hk ). We continue the derivation as follows:
                                                   P (Hk ∪ A|do(P a(Hk ∪ A)))
                            =⇒ PP a(Hk ) (Hk ) =
                                                                PP a(C + ) (Cj+ )
                                                      Q    Q
                                                                              j
                                                    HS ∈A C + ⊆H
                                                             j      S
                                                                                                                  (28)
                                                   Q(Hk ∪ A|do(P a(Hk ∪ A)))
                            =⇒ PP a(Hk ) (Hk ) =
                                                               QP a(C + ) (Cj+ )
                                                     Q    Q
                                                                              j
                                                   HS ∈A C + ⊆H
                                                             j      S


Here the R.H.S numerator follows from previous line according to Equation 20. For the denominator
at R.H.S, ∀HS ∈ A, we have already matched P (HS ∪ A|do(pa(HS ∪ A))), during training of
A = An(Hk ) h-nodes. According to Lemma D.7, matching these distribution is sufficient to match
the distribution at R.H.S denominator. Therefore, our DCM will produce the same distribution as
well. This implies that from Equation 28 we get,
                        Ppa(Hk ) (Hk ) = Qpa(Hk ) (Hk )
                                                                                                                  (29)
                  =⇒ Ppa(Hk ) (Hk ) = Qpa(Hk ) (Hk )             [According to Equation 18]

Similarly, we train each h-node following the training order T and match the distribution in Equa-
tion 24. This finally shows that,
                                Y                  Y
                       P (V ) =   Ppa(Hj ) (Hj ) =     Qpa(Hj ) (Hj ) = Q(V )                 (30)
                                  j≤n                      j≤n


D.5.2    M ATCHING O BSERVATIONAL DISTRIBUTIONS WITH M ODULAR T RAINING ON
         D ∼ PI (V), ∀I ∈ I
Now, we provide the theoretical proof of the correctness of WhatIfGAN Modular Training matching
observational distribution from multiple datasets DI , ∀I ∈ I.
Proposition D.13. Suppose Algorithm 7: WhatIfGAN Modular Training converges for each h-node
in H∅ -graph constructed from G = (V, E). Suppose the observational distribution induced by the
deep causal model is Q(V) after training on data sets DI , ∀I ∈ I. Then,
                                              P (V) = Q(V)                                                        (31)

Proof. According to Tian’s factorization we can factorize the joint distributions into c-factors as
follows:                                      Y      Y
                         P (V) = P (H ∅ ) =                Ppa(Ci ) (Ci )                      (32)
                                                   Hk∅ ∈H ∅ Ci ∈Hk∅

We can divide the set of c-components C = {C1 , . . . Ct } into disjoint partitions or h-nodes as
Hkp̃ = {Ci }i∈Tk for some Tk ⊆ [t]. Following Corollary D.8, we can combine the c-factors in each
partitions and rewrite it as:
           Y      Y
                        Ppa(Ci ) (Ci ) = Ppa(H ∅ ) (H0∅ ) × Ppa(H ∅ ) (H1∅ ) × . . . × Ppa(Hn∅ ) (Hn∅ )
                                              0                  1                                      (33)
         Hk∅ ∈H ∅ Ci ∈Hk∅



                                                      26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Now, we prove that we match each of these terms according to the training order T .
For any root h-nodes Hk∅ ∈ σ0 :
Due to the construction of H∅ graphs in Algorithm 6, the following is true for any root nodes,
Hk∅ ∈ σ0 .
                                  P (Hk∅ |P a(Hk∅ )) = PP a(H ∅ ) (Hk∅ )                                  (34)
                                                                  k


WhatIfGAN training convergence for the DCM in Hk∅ ∈ σ0 . (Algorithm 7, line 14) ensures that the
following matches:

                                    P (Hk∅ |P a(Hk∅ )) = QP a(H ∅ ) (Hk∅ )
                                                                      k
                                                                                                          (35)
                                 =⇒    PP a(H ∅ ) (Hk∅ ) = QP a(H ∅ ) (Hk∅ )
                                             k                   k



Since, Equation 34 is true, observational data is sufficient for training the mechanisms in Hk∅ ∈ σ0 .
Thus, we do not need to train on interventional data.
For the h-node Hk∅ ∈ σ1 :
Now we show that we can train mechanisms in Hk∅ by matching P (V) c-factors with either L1 or
L2 datasets. Let us assume, ∃AI ⊆ σ0 such that AI = AnGI (HkI ),i.e., ancestors set of HkI in the
HI -graph that we have already trained with available DI dataset. To apply Lemma D.7 in GI with
|I| ≥ 0, consider V ′ = HkI ∪ AI as the focus-set, {P a(V ′ ) ∪ I} as the action-set. Thus, active
c-components: Cj+ := Cj ∩ V ′
Then we get the following:

                                                       Y                            Y      Y
      P (HkI ∪ AI |do(P a(HkI ∪ AI )), do(I)) =                Ppa(Ci ) (Ci ) ×                    PP a(C + )∪I (Cj+ )
                                                                                                          j
                                                     Ci ∈HkI                       I ∈{A }
                                                                                  HS       +   I
                                                                                        I Cj ⊆HS


                                        [Here, 1st term is the factorization of the current h-node
                                        and 2nd term is the factorization of the ancestors set.]
                                                              Y       Y
=⇒ P (Hk ∪ AI |do(P a(Hk ∪ AI )), do(I)) = Ppa(HkI ) (HkI ) ∗
       I               I
                                                                            PP a(C + )∪I (Cj+ )
                                                                                               j
                                                                           I ∈A
                                                                          HS       +   I
                                                                                I Cj ⊆HS

                                                                                                          (36)

Here according to Corollary D.8, we combine the c-factors Ppa(Ci ) (Ci ) for c-components in HkI to
form Ppa(HkI ) (HkI ). We continue the derivation as follows:

                                            P (HkI ∪ AI |do(P a(HkI ∪ AI )), do(I))
                  =⇒ PP a(HkI ) (HkI ) =
                                                              PP a(C + )∪I (Cj+ )
                                                  Q       Q
                                                  I ∈A    +                j
                                                 HS           I
                                                       I Cj ⊆HS
                                                                                                          (37)
                                            Q(HkI ∪ AI |do(P a(HkI ∪ AI )), do(I))
                  =⇒    PP a(HkI ) (HkI ) =
                                                              QP a(C + )∪I (Cj+ )
                                                 Q       Q
                                                I ∈A    +           j
                                              HS            I
                                                     I Cj ⊆HS



Here the R.H.S numerator follows from previous line according to Equation 20. For the denominator
at R.H.S, the intervention is an ancestor of the current hnode, i.e., I ∈ {An(HkI ) \ HkI }. Now,
∀HSI ∈ AI , we have already matched P (HSI ∪ AI |do(pa(HSI ∪ AI )), do(I)), during training of
AI = An(HkI ) h-nodes. According to Lemma D.7, matching these distribution is sufficient to match
the distribution at R.H.S denominator. Therefore, our DCM will produce the same distribution as
well. This implies that from Equation 37 we get,

                      Ppa(HkI ) (HkI ) = Qpa(HkI ) (HkI )
                                                                                                          (38)
                =⇒ Ppa(H ∅ ) (Hk∅ ) = Qpa(H ∅ ) (Hk∅ )         [According to Equation 18]
                             k                  k


                                                    27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Similarly, we train each h-node following the training order T and match the distribution in Equa-
tion 33. This finally shows that,
                               Y                     Y
                      P (V ) =    Ppa(H ∅ ) (Hj∅ ) =   Qpa(H ∅ ) (Hj∅ ) = Q(V )               (39)
                                       j                     j
                                    j≤n                               j≤n


                                                                        Pr oposition D.12
                                                                        Matches P(V) by
                                                                        Mod-Training on
                                                                             D~P(V)


                                                                        Pr oposition D.13                       Theor em D.17
      Pr oposition D.6    Lemma D.7                                                                              Convergence
                                              Cor ollar y D.8           Matches P(V) by
     Graphs containing    Focus set to                                                                         & ID with D~P(V)
                                                h-nodes to              Mod-Training on
    same c-components        Active
                                              c-components                 D~P(V), PI(V)
                         c-components
                                                                                              Theor em D.16
                                                                                                  L2, L3
                                                                                              Identification   Theor em D.18
                                                                        Pr oposition D.15
                                            Pr oposition D.14          Matches P(V) & PI(V)                     Convergence
                                              H-graphs have            by Mod-Training on                        & ID with
                                            same partial order             D~P(V), PI(V)                        D~P(V), PI(V)


                                          Figure 11: Flowchart of proofs


D.5.3    M ATCHING I NTERVENTIONAL DISTRIBUTIONS WITH M ODULAR T RAINING ON
         D ∼ PI (V), ∀I ∈ I
Before showing our algorithm correctness with both observational and interventional data, we first
discuss the DAG property of H-graphs.
Proposition D.14. Any H-graph constructed according to Definition D.2 is a directed acyclic graph
(DAG) and a common partial order T , exists for all HI -graphs, ∀I ∈ I.

Proof. We construct the H-graphs following Algorithm 6. By checking the modularity condition we
add edges between any two h-nodes. However, if we find a cycle HjI , HkI → . . . → HjI , then we
combine all h-nodes in the cycle and form a new h-node in HI . This new h-node contains the union of
all outgoing edges to other h-nodes. Therefore, at the end of the algorithm, the final H-graph, HI will
always be a directed acyclic graph. Note that one can always choose a partition of the c-components
C to ensure HI is acylic: The HI graph with a single node H1I = C.
Next in Algorithm 7, training is performed according to the partial order of H∅ which corresponds to
the original graph G without any intervention. This is the most dense H-graph and thus imposes the
most restrictions in terms of the training order. Let I be an intervention set. For any intervention I,
suppose HI -graph is obtained from GI and I is located in Hk∅ h-node of Hp̃ -graph obtained from
G. The only difference between H∅ and HI is that the h-node Hk∅ might be split into multiple new
h-nodes in HI and some edges with other h-nodes that were present in H∅ , might be removed in HI .
However, according to Algorithm 7, we do not split these new h-nodes rather bind them together to
form HkI that contain the same nodes as Hk∅ . Therefore, no new edge is being added among other
h-nodes. This implies that the partial order of H∅ is also valid for HI . After intervention no new
edges are added to the constructed H-graphs, thus we can safely claim that,

                                         AnGI (HkI ) ⊆ AnG (Hk∅ ), ∀I ∈ I                                                       (40)

Since all H-graphs are DAGs and the above condition holds, any valid partial order for H∅ is also a
valid partial order for all HI , ∀I ∈ I, i.e., they have a common valid partial order.



                                                                 28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In general, for I ∈ HkI , i.e., when the intervention is inside HkI , we utilize interventional datasets and
search for minimum size variable set AI ⊆ AnGI (HkI ) in GI such that do-calculus rule-2 satisfies,
            P (HkI ∪ AI |pa(HkI ∪ AI ), do(I)) = P (HkI ∪ AI |do(pa(HkI ∪ AI )), do(I))                 (41)
Then we can train the mechanisms in HkI to match the following distribution,
               P (HkI ∪ AI |pa(HkI ∪ AI ), do(I)) = Q(HkI ∪ AI |do(pa(HkI ∪ AI )), do(I))
                                                                                                        (42)
     =⇒ P (HkI ∪ AI |do(pa(HkI ∪ AI )), do(I) = Q(HkI ∪ AI |do(pa(HkI ∪ AI )), do(I))
Proposition D.15. Suppose Algorithm 7: WhatIfGAN Modular Training converges for each h-node
in H∅ -graph constructed from G = (V, E). Suppose the interventional distribution induced by the
deep causal model is QI (V ) after training on data sets DI , ∀I ∈ I. then,
                                               PI (V ) = QI (V )                                        (43)

Proof. Suppose, intervention I belongs to a specific c-component Ci , i.e., I ∈ Ci . According to
Tian’s factorization, we can factorize the do(I) interventional joint distributions for GI causal graph,
into c-factors as follows:
                                                           Y       Y
                 PI (V ) = PI (HI ) = Ppa(Ci )∪I (Ci ) ×                  Ppa(Ci′ ) (Ci′ )          (44)
                                                              HkI ∈HI Ci′ ∈HkI

The difference between the c-factorization for P (V ) and PI (V ) is that when intervention I is located
inside c-component Ci , we have Ppa(Ci )∪I (Ci ) instead of Ppa(Ci ) (Ci ). We can divide c-components
C = {C1 , . . . Ct } into disjoint partitions or h-nodes as Hkp̃ = {Ci }i∈Tk for some Tk ⊆ [t].
Let, the c-component Ci that contains intervention I belong to hnode HkI , i.e., Ci ∈ HkI . Following
Corollary D.8, we can combine the c-factors in each partitions and rewrite R.H.S of Equation 44 as:
                    Y      Y                                               Y
 Ppa(Ci )∪I (Ci ) ×              Ppa(Ci′ ) (Ci′ ) = Ppa(HkI )∪I (HkI ) ×             Ppa(H I′ ) (HkI′ )
                                                                                                    k
                    HkI ∈HI Ci′ ∈HkI                                             HkI′ ∈{HI \HkI }
                                                                                                        (45)

Now, we prove that we match each of these terms in Equation 45 according to the training order T .
For any root h-nodes HkI ∈ σ0 :
Due to the construction of H I graphs in Algorithm 6, the following is true for any root nodes,
HkI ∈ σ0 .
                             PI (HkI |P a(HkI )) = PP a(HkI )∪I (HkI )                       (46)
WhatIfGAN training convergence for the mechanisms in HkI ∈ σ0 . Algorithm 7, line 14 ensures that
the following matches:
                                       PI (HkI |P a(HkI )) = QP a(HkI )∪I (HkI )
                                                                                                        (47)
                               =⇒ PP a(HkI )∪I (HkI ) = QP a(HkI )∪I (HkI )

For the h-node HkI ∈ σ1 with I ∈ HkI :
Now we show that we can train mechanisms in HkI by matching PI (V) c-factors with L1 and L2
datasets. Let us assume, ∃AI ⊆ σ0 such that AI = AnGI (HkI ), i.e., ancestors of HkI in the HI -graph
that we have already trained with available DI dataset, ∀I ∈ I.
To apply Lemma D.7 in GI with |I| ≥ 0, consider V ′ = HkI ∪ AI as the focus-set, {P a(V ′ ) ∪ I} as
the action-set. Thus, active c-components: Cj+ := Cj ∩ V ′ . We apply the lemma as below:
                                              Y                       Y      Y
 P (HkI ∪ AI |do(P a(HkI ∪ AI )), do(I)) =        Ppa(Ci )∪I (Ci ) ×              PP a(C +′ ) (Ci+′ )
                                                                                                    i
                                                  Ci ∈HkI                     I ∈A
                                                                             HS       +    I
                                                                                   I C ′ ∈HS
                                                                                          i
                                                                                                        (48)
Here, the 1st term is the factorization of the current h-node and the 2nd term is the factorization of the
ancestors set. The intervened variable I is located in the current h-node HkI . Therefore, the factorized


                                                       29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


c-components, i.e., Ci ∈ HkI has I as intervention along with their parent intervention. The above
equation implies:
                                                                 Y       Y
  P (HkI ∪ AI |do(P a(HkI ∪ AI )), do(I)) = Ppa(HkI )∪I (HkI ) ×               PP a(C +′ ) (Ci+′ )
                                                                 I      +
                                                                                      i            (49)
                                                                                              HS ∈AI C ′ ∈HS
                                                                                                           I
                                                                                                          i



According to Corollary D.8, we combine the c-factors Ppa(Ci )∪I (Ci ) for c-components in HkI to
form Ppa(HkI )∪I (HkI ). We continue the derivation as follows:

                                                            P (HkI ∪ AI |do(P a(HkI ∪ AI )), do(I))
                         =⇒ PP a(HkI )∪I (HkI ) =
                                                                                PP a(C + ) (Cj+ )
                                                                   Q       Q
                                                                        I ∈A    +                   j
                                                                       HS           I
                                                                             I Cj ⊆HS
                                                                                                                                          (50)
                                                    Q(HkI ∪ AI |do(P a(HkI ∪ AI )), do(I))
                         =⇒   PP a(HkI )∪I (HkI ) =
                                                                       QP a(C + ) (Cj+ )
                                                           Q      Q
                                                          I      +           j
                                                       HS ∈AI Cj ⊆HS I



Here the R.H.S numerator follows from previous line according to Equation 42 since training has
converged for the current h-node. For the R.H.S, denominator, ∀HSI ∈ AI appear before HkI in the
partial order. When we trained h-nodes HSI ∈ AI on P (V) and PI (V) datasets, we matched the joint
distribution P (HSI ∪ AI |do(pa(HSI ∪ AI )), do(I)), ∀HSI ∈ AI . According to Lemma D.7, matching
these distribution is sufficient to match the distribution at the R.H.S denominator. Therefore, our
DCM will produce the same distribution as well. This implies that from Equation 50 we get,

                                              Ppa(HkI )∪I (HkI ) = Qpa(HkI )∪I (HkI )                                                     (51)

Similarly, we train each h-node following the training order T and match the distribution in Equa-
tion 45. We train the c-factor that contains interventions with our available interventional dataset
and the c-factors that do not include any interventions can be trained with P (V ) dataset. This finally
shows that,
                                                        Y
                      PI (V ) =Ppa(HkI )∪I (HkI ) ×               Ppa(H I′ ) (HkI′ )
                                                                                                    k
                                                                        HkI′ ∈{H I \HkI }
                                                                              Y
                                      =Qpa(HkI )∪I (HkI ) ×                                 Qpa(H I′ ) (HkI′ )                            (52)
                                                                                                    k
                                                                        HkI′ ∈{H I \HkI }

                                      =QI (V )


                                                                              Pr oposition D.12
                                                                              Matches P(V) by
                                                                              Mod-Training on
                                                                                   D~P(V)


                                                                              Pr oposition D.13                           Theor em D.17
      Pr oposition D.6         Lemma D.7                                                                                   Convergence
                                                    Cor ollar y D.8           Matches P(V) by
     Graphs containing         Focus set to                                                                              & ID with D~P(V)
                                                      h-nodes to              Mod-Training on
    same c-components             Active
                                                    c-components                 D~P(V), PI(V)
                              c-components
                                                                                                        Theor em D.16
                                                                                                            L2, L3
                                                                                                        Identification   Theor em D.18
                                                                              Pr oposition D.15
                                                  Pr oposition D.14          Matches P(V) & PI(V)                         Convergence
                                                    H-graphs have            by Mod-Training on                            & ID with
                                                  same partial order             D~P(V), PI(V)                            D~P(V), PI(V)


                                                Figure 12: Flowchart of proofs


                                                                       30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.6      I DENTIFIABILITY OF A LGORITHM 7:W HAT I F GAN M ODULAR T RAINING

Theorem D.16. Let M1 be the true SCM and Algorithm 7: WhatIfGAN Modular Training converge
for each h-node in H constructed from G = (V, E) after training on data sets D = {DI }∀I∈I and
output the DCM M2 . Then for any L2 , L3 causal query KM1 (V), identifiable from D, KM1 (V) =
KM2 (V) holds.

Proof. Let M1 = (G = (V, E), N , U, F, P (.)) be the true SCM and M2 = (G, N ′ , U ′ , F ′ , Q(.))
be the deep causal generative model represented by WhatIfGAN. For any HkI ∈ HI , I ∈ I, we
observe the joint distribution P (HkI ∪ AI ∪ P a(HkI ∪ AI ), do(I)) in the input DI datasets. Thus we
can train all the mechanisms in the current h-node HkI by matching the following distribution from
the partially observable datasets:

               P (HkI ∪ AI |pa(HkI ∪ AI ), do(I)) = Q(HkI ∪ AI |do(pa(HkI ∪ AI )), do(I))                                        (53)
Now, as we are following a valid partial order of the H∅ -graph to train the h-nodes, we train the
mechanisms of each h-node to match the input distribution only once and do not update it again
anytime during the training of rest of the network. As we move to the next h-node of the partial order
for training, we can keep the weights of the Ancestor h-nodes fixed and only train the current one
and can successfully match the joint distribution in Equation 53. In the same manner, we would be
able to match the distributions for each h-node and reach convergence for each of them. WhatIfGAN
Training convergence implies that QI (V) = PI (V), ∀I ∈ I i.e., for all input dataset distributions.
Therefore, according to Theorem 4.2, WhatIfGAN is capable of producing samples from correct
interventional or counterfactual distributions that are identifiable from the input distributions.
Theorem D.17. Suppose Algorithm 2: WhatIfGAN Modular Training converges for each h-node in
the H-graph constructed from G = (V, E) and after training on observational dataset D ∼ P (V),
the observational distribution induced by the DCM is Q(V ). Then, we have i)P (V ) = Q(V ), and ii)
for any L2 or L3 causal query KM1 (V) that is identifiable from D, we have KM1 (V) = KM2 (V)

Proof. Theorem 4.5 is restated here. The first part of the theorem is proved in Proposition D.12. The
second part can be proved with Theorem D.16.
Theorem D.18. Suppose Algorithm 7: WhatIfGAN Modular Training converges for each h-node in
the H∅ -graph constructed from G = (V, E) and after training on observational and interventional
datasets DI ∼ PI (V)∀I ∈ I, the distribution induced by the DCM is QI (V ), ∀I ∈ I. Then, we
have i)PI (V ) = QI (V ), and ii) for any L2 or L3 causal query KM1 (V) that is identifiable from
DI , ∀I ∈ I, we have KM1 (V) = KM2 (V)

Proof. The first part of the theorem is proved in Proposition D.13 and Proposition D.15. Then it
is a direct implication of Theorem D.16, This theorem is equivalent to Theorem 4.5 if we consider
I = {p̃}.



                                                                       Pr oposition D.12
                                                                       Matches P(V) by
                                                                       Mod-Training on
                                                                            D~P(V)


                                                                       Pr oposition D.13                       Theor em D.17
        Pr oposition D.6    Lemma D.7                                                                           Convergence
                                              Cor ollar y D.8          Matches P(V) by
       Graphs containing    Focus set to                                                                      & ID with D~P(V)
                                                h-nodes to             Mod-Training on
      same c-components        Active
                                              c-components                D~P(V), PI(V)
                           c-components
                                                                                             Theor em D.16
                                                                                                 L2, L3
                                                                                             Identification   Theor em D.18
                                                                       Pr oposition D.15
                                            Pr oposition D.14         Matches P(V) & PI(V)                     Convergence
                                              H-graphs have           by Mod-Training on                        & ID with
                                            same partial order            D~P(V), PI(V)                        D~P(V), PI(V)


                                           Figure 13: Flowchart of proofs


                                                                 31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E          M ODULAR T RAINING ON DIFFERENT GRAPHS

E.1           M ODULAR T RAINING E XAMPLE 1

We provide an example in Figure 14 to better understand our modular algorithm.


                                                  Figure 14: Example graphs for mechanism training

           • Train the mechanism of U using D0 ∼ p(U )
           • Leverage the fact that P (z, v|do(x, w) = p(z, v|x, w) to train the networks of Z, V by
                                                             F      F        R      R
             intervening on X, W and minimize the loss L((Zx,w   , Vx,w )||(Zx,w , Vx,w ))
           • Consider that p(x, y, w, z|do(u)) = p(x, y, w, z|u) and that the mechanism of Z
             was previously trained or we have access to pre-trained network Z. Leverage this
             fact to train the networks of X, Y, W by intervening on U to minimize the loss
             L((XuF , ZuF , YuF , WuF )||(XuR , ZuR , YuR , WuR ))

E.2        M ODULAR TRAINING EXAMPLE 2


                                            H? -graph                                                                     H17 -graph

           H0                                                                                           H0
                                                                    H1                                                                                            H1
                1                  3                                4                                        1                  3                                 4
                                                      H2                                                                                            H2
                         2                                                                                            2
                                                      6     7                                                                                       6     7
                    H10                     5                                                                    H10                      5
                                                                9                                                                                             9
                                            8                                                                                             8
                                                                                   H4                                                                                            H4
                                  H3                                                                                           H3
                                                 10        11                      13                                                          10        11                      13
                              12                                                                                            12
                                                                                         do(17)


    H5                                                              17   18   19    H6            H5                                                              17   18   19    H6
         14         15        16                                                                       14        15        16


                                                                    20   21   22                                                                                  20   21   22

                             23        24        25                                                                       23         24        25


      H8      28                  26        27                                                     H8       28                 26         27
                                                           H7                                                                                            H7
      H9      29                                                                                   H9       29

                                   (a)                                                                                         (b)



                                                      Figure 15: H∅ -graph and H 17 -graph construction


In Figure 15, we construct the H∅ -graph as below. We describe the H-graph edges (thick blue edges)
and the backdoor path (thin black edges) responsible for those edges.
H10 → H0 : 3 ← 2 ← 1
H2 → H5 : 14 ← 8 ← 11 ← 10 ← 16,
H2 → H6 : 17 ← 9 ← 19,
H5 → H7 : 23 ← 14 ← 15 ← 27,
H6 → H7 : 25 ← 17 ← 27


                                                                                          32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In Figure 15, we construct the H 17 -graph as below:
H10 → H0 : 3 ← 2 ← 1
H2 → H5 : 14 ← 8 ← 11 ← 10 ← 16,
H5 → H7 : 23 ← 14 ← 15 ← 27,
Now, notice that due to do(17), H617 gets splitted into two new h-nodes, [18, 19] and [20, 21, 22] with
a new edge [20, 21, 22] → [18, 19]. However, according to our H-graph construction algorithm, we
keep these two new h-nodes of H 17 combined inside H617 same as H∅ -graph. Therefore, H∅ and
H 17 ’s common partial order does not change.
For training H7∅ node: {23, 24, 25, 26, 27}, we match the following distribution found by applying
do-calculus rule 2.
    P (23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 22, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, |do(2, 12, 13, 28, 29, 4))   (54)
In Figure 15(a), joints are shown as red nodes and their parents as green nodes. However, consider,
we have both observational and interventional datasets from P (V) and P (V|do(17)) and we have
already trained all the ancestor h-nodes of H717 . Then we can train the mechanisms that lie in H7∅
to learn both observational and interventional distribution by matching a smaller joint distribution
compared to Equation 54:
                     P (23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 8, 10, 11, 14, 15, 16|do(12, 28, 29, 5, 17))                   (55)
In Figure 15(b), joints are shown as red nodes and their parents as green nodes. We see that the
number of red nodes is less for H 17 graph compared to H∅ graph when we were matching the
mechanisms in h-node, H7∅ .

F       E XPERIMENTAL A NALYSIS
In this section, we provide implementation details and algorithm procedures of our WhatIfGAN
training.

F.1     E XPERIMENT CHECKLIST

F.1.1    T RAINING D ETAILS AND C OMPUTE
We performed our experiments on a machine with an RTX-3090 GPU. The experiments took 1-4
hours to complete. We ran each experiment for 300 epochs. We repeated each experiment multiple
times to observe the consistent behavior. Our datasets contained 20−40K samples, and the batch_size
was 200, and we used the ADAM optimizer. For evaluation, we generated 20k fake samples after a
few epochs and calculated the target distributions from these 20k fake samples and 20k real samples.
We calculated TVD and KL distance between the real and the learned distributions. For Wassertein
GAN with gradient penalty, we used LAMBDA_GP=10. We had learning_rate = 5 ∗ 1e − 4. We used
Gumbel-softmax with a temperature starting from 1 and decreasing it until 0.1. We used different
architectures for different experiments since each experiment dealt with different data types: low-
dimensional discrete variables and images. Details are provided in the code. For low-dimensional
variables, we used two layers with 256 units per layer and with BatchNorm and ReLU between each
layer. Please check our code for architectures of other neural networks such as encoders and image
generators

F.1.2    R EPRODUCIBILITY
For reproducibility purposes, we share our implementation as supplementary materials. Besides, in
the following sections, we provided explanations of each experiment along with model settings and
hyper-parameters.

F.2     I MAGE MEDIATOR EXPERIMENT

In this section, we provide additional information about the experiment described in Section 5.1. The
front-door graph has been instrumental for a long time in the causal inference literature. However,


                                                      33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


it was not shown before that modular training with high dimensional data was possible, even in the
front door graph. This is why we demonstrate the utility of our work on this graph.


                              D


                              A

                  (a) Frontdoor causal
                     graph w/ image         (b) Training converges matching P (D, A)
                        mediator                        and P (A|do(D))


    (c) MNIST Image generation       (d) MNIST Image generation       (e) MNIST Image generation
           comparison                       comparison                       comparison

    Figure 16: Modular Training on frontdoor causal graph with training order: {I} → {D, A}


We have domain D = [0, 1], Image size=3×32×32 and C = [0, 1, 2]. Let U0 , e1 , e2 , e3 are randomly
generate exogenous noise. D = U0 + e1 , Image = f2 (D, e2 ), A = f3 (Image, e3 , U0 ). f2 is a
function which takes D and e2 as input and produces different colored images showing D digit in it.
f3 is a classifier with random weights that takes U0 , e3 and Image as input and produces A such a
way that |P (A|do(D = 0)) − P (A|D = 0)|, |P (A|do(D = 1)) − P (A|do(D = 0))|and|P (A|D =
1) − P (A|D = 0)| is enough distant. The target is to make sure that the backdoor edge D ↔ A and
the causal path from D to A is active. Since we have access to U0 as part of the ground truth, we can
calculate the true value of P (A|do(D)) with the backdoor criterion:
                                              Z
                              P (A|do(D)) =       P (A|D, U0 )P (D|U0 )
                                              U0

During training, U0 is unobserved but still, the query is identifiable with the front door criterion.
Image is a mediator here.
                               Z                      X
               P (A|do(D)) =           P (Image|D)         P (A|D′ , Image)P (D′ )
                                  Image                 D′

However, this inference is not possible with the identification algorithm. But WhatIfGAN can achieve
that by producing Image samples instead of learning the explicit distribution. If we can train all
mechanisms in the WhatIfGAN DCM to match P (D, A, I), we can produce correct samples from
P (A|do(D)). We construct the WhatIfGAN architecture with a neural network GD having fully
connected layers to produce D, a deep convolution GAN GI to generate images, and a classifier GA
to classify MNIST images into variable A such that D and A are confounded. Now, for this graph,
the corresponding H-graph is [I] → [D, A]. Thus, we first train GI by matching P (I|D). Next, to


                                                   34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


train GD and GA , we should match the joint distribution P (D, A, I) since {I} is ancestor set A for
c-component {D, A}. GAN convergence becomes difficult using the joint distribution loss since the
losses generated by low and high dimensional variables are not easily comparable and it is non-trivial
to find a correct re-weighting of such different loss terms. To the best of our knowledge, no current
causal effect estimation algorithm can address this problem since there is no estimator that does not
contain explicit image distribution, which is practically impossible to estimate. To deal with this
problem, we map samples of I to a low-dimensional representation, RI with a trained encoder and
match P (D, RI, A) instead of P (D, Image, A).
Note that, we use the mechanism training order [I] → [D, A] specified by the H-graph (Algorithm 1)
to match the joint distribution P (D, Image, A). It is not feasible to follow any other sequential
training order such as [D] → [Image] → [A] as training them sequentially with individual losses
can not hold the dependence in D ↔ A.


F.3   P ERFORMANCE ON R EAL - WORLD COVID X CXR-3 DATASET


In this section, we provide some more results of our experiment on COVIDx CXR-3 dataset (Wang
et al., 2020). This dataset contains 30,000 chest X-ray images with Covid (C) and pneumonia
(N ) labels from over 16,600 patients located in 51 countries. The X-ray images are of healthy
patients (C = 0, N = 0), patients with non-Covid pneumonia (C = 0, N = 1), and patients
with Covid pneumonia (C = 1, N = 1). X-ray images corresponding to COVID non-pneumonia
(C = 1, N = 0) are not present in this dataset as according to health experts those images do not
contain enough signal for pneumonia detection. However, to make the GAN training more smooth
we replaced a few (C = 1, N = 1) real samples with (C = 1, N = 0) dummy samples. We also
normalized the X-ray images before training. To obtain the low dimensional representation of both
real and fake X-ray images, we used a Covid conditional trained encoder. Instead of training GXray
from scratch, we use a pre-trained model (Giorgio Carbone, 2023) that can be utilized to produce
Xray images corresponding to C ∈ [0, 1] input. Note that, this pre-trained model takes value 0 for
Covid, 1 for normal, and 2 for Pneumonia as input and produces the corresponding images. If a fake
Covid sample indicates Covid=1, we map it to the 0 input of the pre-trained GAN. If a fake Covid
sample indicates Covid=0, this might be either mapped to 1 (normal) or 2 (Pneumonia). Instead
of randomly selecting the value, we use the real Pneumonia sample to decide this (either 1 or 2).
After that, we produce X-ray images according to the decided input values. Since we are using the
GAN-generated fake samples for Covid=1, the computational graph for auto grad is not broken.
Rather the mentioned modification can be considered as a re-parameterization trick.


Figure 17: Total variation distance plots show WhatIfGAN converges on COVIDx CXR-3 dataset.
(consecutive 20 epochs were averaged)


                                                 35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   COVID-19                         Normal                        Pneumonia


  Real


  Fake


             Figure 18: Real images from dataset vs pre-trained GAN generated images


F.4     MNIST E XPERIMENT 2: L2 AND L3 AMPLING FROM MNIST DATASET

In this section, we provide additional information about the experiment Colored MNIST experiment.

F.4.1    MNIST EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
Here, we describe the synthetic SCM that was used for generating the dataset for this experiment.
      p(U1 ), p(U2 ) ∼ Dirichlet([0.1, 0.1, . . .])          X1 = U1 + ϵX1
      X2 = U2 %3 + X1 ∗ U nif orm[3, 6] + U1 + ϵX2           W = X1 + X2 + ϵW
      Y1 = ⌊W 2 /10⌉ + ϵY1                                   Y2 = W 2 %10 + ϵY2
      Color = U2 %3 + ϵc                                     T hick = min(⌊(W 2 /10)/2⌉, 1) + ϵt

We sample confounding variable U1 , U2 and independent exogenous noises, ϵXi , ∀i from Dirichlet
distribution. We assign X1 as a variable of binary uniform distribution in [0, 1]. X2 ∈ [0, 8], is
correlated with U2 and stays in [0, 2] when X1 = 0, and ranges in [3, 8] when X1 = 1. Also, X1
and X2 are confounded with U1 . Variable W ∈ [0, 9] is the sum of X1 and X2 . Next, Y1 ∈ [0, 9]
is the first digit of W 2 and Y2 ∈ [0, 9] is the 2nd digit of W 2 . Color ∈ [0, 2] refers to [R=red,
G=green, B=blue] respectively and is confounded with X2 by U2 . T hick ∈ [0, 1] referring to
[th=thin, Th=thick] depends on the first digit of W 2 . We introduce 25% noise with all these relations
to prevent them from becoming deterministic functions and also from having zero probabilities
for any outcomes so that the strictly positive distribution assumption holds. Finally, we employ a
procedure suggested in Castro et al. (2019) to produce Image1 by using Y1 as the digit parameter
and produce Image2 by using Y2 as the digit parameter besides using Color and T hick as color
and thickness parameters for both images. We consider we have access to one observational dataset,
D1 ∼ P (V) and two interventional datasets D2 ∼ PX=0 (V), D3 ∼ PX=1 (V).

F.4.2    MNIST LOW DIMENSIONAL VARIABLES
In Figure 19a, each blue box represent the h-nodes of H∅ . Since h-nodes of Image1 , Image2 are
disconnected from other h-nodes, we can first train the low-dimensional mechanisms and use them
later to train the Image mechanisms. On the other hand, instead of training, we can also utilize
pre-trained models for Image1 , Image2 . Without violating the training order, (step-1:) we can first
train [GX1 , GX2 , GW , GColor ] together, with both L1 , L2 datasets: D1 , D2 and D3 . Next, (step-2:)
we train [GY1 , GY2 , GT hick ] with only L1 dataset D1 . Since intervention X1 is not in these h-nodes,
according to Corollary C.5, WhatIfGAN can match both P (Y1 , Y2 , T hick) and PX1 (Y1 , Y2 , T hick).
WhatIfGAN training convergence at step-1 and step-2 is shown in Figure 19b. For each distribution in
P (V ) and PX1 (V ), TVD from the true distribution is decreasing. Moreover, both P (Y1 , Y2 , T hick)
and P (Y1 , Y2 , T hick|do(X1 ) are converging even though we trained this mechanisms with only
L1 dataset; as expected according to modular training. Furthermore, according to Theorem 4.2,


                                                  36
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


after training on D1 ,D2 and D3 , WhatIfGAN can produce correct samples from distributions that
are identifiable from P (V) and PX1 (V). In Figure 19d, WhatIfGAN illustrates this by producing
counterfactual samples from Px1 ,x2 (Color|x′1 , x′2 ) with small TVD as it is identifiable from available
distributions P (V) (see derivation Appendix F.4.4 ). This experiment verifies that WhatIfGAN can
produce interventional and counterfactual samples correctly.

                 U1          U2

          X1          X2            Color


  V                   W


            Y1        Y2    Thick


                            Image1 Image2


        (a) Causal graph G                  (b) TVD of converging distributions              (c) KL of converging distributions


                           (d) TVD for Counterfactual query               (e) KL-divergence for counterfactual query

       Figure 19: Convergence of L1 and L2 distributions of MNIST-low dimensional variables.


F.4.3       MNIST H IGH DIMENSIONAL VARIABLES


                                                     Most             Randomly chosen 10 [image1, image2] samples produced
                      Causal queries              probables           from WhatIfGAN Sorted according to probability distribution
                                                    in SCM
                                                   [2 5 GTh]     p=0.14                p=0.08 p=0.02 p=0.02 p=0.01 p=0.004 p=0.009 p=0.006
      Row 1, Layer 1: Observations                 [2 5 B Th]
      P(Y1,Y2, Color, Thick |X1=1,X2=4)            [7 5 GTh]
                                                   [2 5 B Th]    p=0.14       p=0.11          p=0.02 p=0.02 p=0.02 p=0.01 p=0.01 p=0.003
      Row 2, Layer 2: Interventions                [2 5 GTh]
      P(Y1,Y2, Color, Thick|do(X1=1,X2=4)          [7 5 B Th ]
                                                   [2 5 GTh]     p=0.17       p=0.085 p=0.03 p=0.03 p=0.02 p=0.01 p=0.01 p=0.005 p=1e-5
      Row 3, Layer 3: Counterfactuals              [2 5 B Th]
      PX1=1,X2=4(Y1,Y2, Color, Thick|X1=0,X2=1)
                                                   [7 5 GTh]
                                                   [0 1 Gth]     p=0.24       p=0.11                 p=0.01 p=0.005 p=0.005 p=0.004 p=0.001
      Row 4, Layer 1: Observations                 [0 1 GTh]
      P(Y1,Y2, Color, Thick|X1=0,X2=1)             [0 7 Gth]


               Figure 20: For each query, the top 3 occurred image samples match with true SCM


In this section, we describe the experiment in more detail. After training the mechanisms of
V ′ = {X1 , X2 , W, Color, Y1 , Y2 , T hick}, we can train Image1 , Image2 mechanisms. We can
also utilize pre-trained models of V ′ if available and use their output values as input to the image
mechanisms. After training all the mechanisms in the causal model, we observed the results shown in
Figure 20.


                                                                      37
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In row 1, for query ∈ L1 , we condition on X1 = 1, X2 = 4. Therefore, without considering
noise, according to the true SCM, we get W = 5 and Y1 = 52 /10 = 2, Y2 = 52 %10 = 5.
Color = X2 %3 = 1 due to the confounder between X2 and Color. T hick = ⌊(52 /10)/2⌉ = 1.
This represents the highest probable outcome 2,5 with green color and thick=1 which is shown as
the first outcome [2,5, G, Th] (column-2). We observe that, our trained gan also produces images of
the same outcome with the highest probability, p = 0.14. In row 2, for query ∈ L2 , we intervene
on X1 = 1, X2 = 4. So, X2 and Color are not confounded anymore and Color will have other
outcomes besides green with high probability for example, blue. And as expected, our trained GAN
also produces images with blue color with the highest probability.
In row 3, for query ∈ L3 we intervene on X1 = 1, X2 = 4 and X2 does not have any confounding
effect on Color. However, since we condition on X1 = 0, X1 = 1, we would have the correspond-
ing confounder U2 which will assign Color = X1 %3,i.e, green. Due to this, the most probable
counterfactual outcome according to true SCM is [2 5 G Th]. We also find the same outcome with
a high probability from our GAN samples. This indicates the ability of WhatIfGAN to correctly
produce counterfactual samples and differentiate between L2 and L3 queries. Finally, in the 4th
row, we convert the previous L3 query into a L1 query, by removing the intervention but keeping
the same conditions i.e., X1 = 0, X2 = 1. Our GAN produces green, thin digits of 0,1 with the
highest occurrences which is also suggested by the true SCM. This is evidence of the capability of
WhatIfGAN to separate different causal layers and produce corresponding samples from each layer.

F.4.4         MNIST D ERIVATION
We follow Shpitser & Pearl (2008) to obtain the counterfactual graph and the interventional expression
of the counterfactual query for the causal graph shown in Figure 21. For convenience, we combine
the variables {Y1 , Y2 , T hick, Image1 , Image2 } into variable Y and will consider the counterfactual
query P (Yx1 ,x2 = y|x′1 , x′2 ).

               X1                   X' 1                     X1                X' 1             X1               X' 1        X1
         U1                                     U1                                    U1
               X2                   X' 2                     X2                X' 2             X2               X' 2        X2
                                                nW

        U2 W                         W'                     Wx1,x2                            Wx1,x2                       Wx1,x2
                                                U2                                    U2
                           Y   Y'                                    Yx1,x2                             Yx1,x2                           Yx1,x2
                                                nY
                C                    C'                     Cx1,x2                             Cx1,x2                       Cx1,x2
          Original Graph
                                                                                      Counterfactual                    Counterfactual
                                           Counterfactual                                                                  Graph
  Counterfactual query:                                                                  Graph
                                              Graph


                                      Figure 21: Counterfactual graph construction


In the counterfactual graph, there are three c-components (without fixed nodes: {X1 , X2 }). They are:
{X1′ , X2′ , C}, {W } and {Y } (omitting the subscripts). Therefore, the expression is,
                                                          ′       ′
                                               P
                                                 w,c Pw (x1 , c, x2 ) ∗ Px1 ,x2 (w) ∗ Pw,c (y)
                  P (Yx1 ,x2 = y|x′1 , x′2 ) = P             ′       ′                           (56)
                                                 w,c,y Pw (x1 , c, x2 )Px1 ,x2 (w) ∗ Pw,c (y)

Using do-calculus rule 2, we can write Px1 ,x2 (w) = P (w|x1 , x2 ) and Pw,c (y) = P (y|w, c). Next
the first term,
             Pw (x′1 , c, x′2 ) = Pw (x′1 ) ∗ Pw (x′2 |x′1 ) ∗ Pw (c|x′1 , x′2 ) Factorization formula
                                    = P (x′1 ) ∗ P (x′2 |x′1 ) ∗ Pw (c|x′1 , x′2 )                        do-calculus rule 3                 (57)
                                    = P (x′1 ) ∗ P (x′2 |x′1 ) ∗ P (c|x′1 , x′2 , w)                      do-calculus rule 2
So, finally we can write,
                                         ′         ′   ′           ′    ′
                                          P
                                 w,c P (x1 ) ∗ P (x2 |x1 ) ∗ P (c|x1 , x2 , w) ∗ P (w|x1 , x2 ) ∗ P (y|w, c)
 P (Yx1 ,x2 = y|x′1 , x′2 ) = P            ′         ′   ′           ′    ′
                                w,c,y P (x1 ) ∗ P (x2 |x1 ) ∗ P (c|x1 , x2 , w) ∗ P (w|x1 , x2 ) ∗ P (y|w, c)
                                                                                                                                             (58)


                                                                          38
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Therefore, if we can train WhatIfGAN with datasets from only P (V ) then we can produce samples
from this counterfactual query.
In Shpitser & Pearl (2009), the authors claimed that the counterfactual query P (Yx1 ,x2 = y|x′1 , x′2 )
is non-identifiable only from P (V ) due to the X1 ← U1 → X2 edge. After having a conversation
with the authors we came to know that the claim was not correct. The counterfactual query is indeed
identifiable from P (V ) as shown above.


F.5       A SIA /L UNG C ANCER DATASET


                             smoke
   tub       either
                      lung

                             bronc
                      dysp
   Asia
             xray


   (a) Asia causal graph               (b) Asia Total Variation Distance   (c) KL divergence of Asia experiment

                                     Figure 22: Modular Training on Asia Dataset


Asia Dataset. We evaluate our algorithm performance on ASIA Dataset from bnlearn repository
(Scutari & Denis, 2021). The purpose of this experiment is to show that modular training can
learn the joint distribution of the Asia dataset formed as semi-Markovian and correctly produces
samples from identifiable L2 distributions. To check the effectiveness of WhatIfGAN for a semi-
Markovian causal model, we hide "smoke" and "bronc" variables in the observational dataset as
shown in Figure 22a. This action gives us a causal graph with a latent confounder between the
"lung" and the "dysp" variables. The H graph nodes are indicated by the square box containing the
variables. According to the algorithm, all H-nodes are disconnected except [either] → [lung, dysp].
Therefore, we first start training the mechanisms of asia, tub, either, xray and then separately but
in parallel train the mechanisms of lung, dysp. Here we can also use pre-trained either while we
train lung, dysp to match the distribution P (lung, dysp, either|tub). For evaluation, we generated
samples from P (dysp|do(lung)) and P (dysp|do(either)) distributions from WhatIfGAN. We can
calculated P (dysp|do(lung)) with front-door adjustment and P (dysp|do(either)) with back-door
adjustment using the real dataset samples. In Figure 22b, 22c, we can see that our partial training is
working well with all of the distributions converging to low TVD and KL loss.

F.6       R EAL - WORLD : S ACHS PROTEIN DATASET

For completeness, we test both WhatIfGAN and NCM(Xia et al., 2023) performance on a low-
dimensional real-world Sachs dataset (Sachs et al., 2005), which contains a protein signaling causal
graph and is given in Figure 23a. The goal is to illustrate WhatIfGAN’s capability of utilizing multiple
partial L1 , L2 datasets. We considered the observational dataset D1 ∼ P (P KA, M ek, Erk, Akt)
and the interventional dataset D2 ∼ P (M ek|do(P KA = 2)). The interventional dataset with
P KA = 2 is chosen since it has a large number of samples. Here we intentionally hide variable
P KC and considered it as a confounder. Hence, P (M ek|do(P KA = 2)), P (Akt|do(P KA = 2)
and P (Erk|do(P KA = 2)) are non-identifiable from only P (V ). According to Corollary C.5,
P (V ), P (M ek|do(P KA = 2)) make these distributions identifiable. More precisely, if we have
access to P (V ) and PP KA (M ek) only, then its sufficient to identify, PP KA (M ek, Erk, Akt). We
have datasets D1 , D2 that are sampled from P (V ), P (M ek|do(P KA = 2)) for training. If we
convert the Sachs graph into the train graph H in Figure 23a, we see that for only the interventional
dataset, we have to train the mechanism of Mek. This is because other variables except Mek belong


                                                           39
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         Sachs Causal Graph

                  PKC


      PKA                   Mek


      Akt                    Erk



      {P(V), P (Mek|do(PKA = 2))}

            P (Akt|do(PKA = 2)
            P (Erk|do(PKA = 2))



  (a) Causal graphs                 (b) TVD Convergence on Sachs dataset     (c) KL convergence on Sachs dataset


  (d) TVD convergence on Sachs dataset                     (e) KL convergence on Sachs dataset

                                       Figure 23: Benchmark and Real-world datasets
to different hnodes or training components. Here,
                 PP KA (M ek, Erk, Akt)
                  = PP KA (M ek)PP KA (Erk|M ek)PP KA (Akt|Erk, M ek)                                         (59)
                  = PP KA (M ek)P (Erk|M ek, P KA)P (Akt|P KA, Erk, M ek)
Therefore, we train WhatIfGAN i.e., the DCM to match both P (V ) and P (M ek|do(P KA)). We
i) first train GH0 = [GP KA , GM ek ] with both D1 and D2 , ii) next, train GH1 ∪H2 = [GErk , GAkt ]
with only D1 . In Figure 23b and 23c, WhatIfGAN converges by training on both P (V ) and
P (M ek|do(P KA = 2)) datasets. We compared the distributions P (Akt|do(P KA = 2) and
P (Erk|do(P KA = 2)) implicit in WhatIfGAN generated samples with the Sachs L2 -dataset
distributions and observed them matching with low TVD and KL loss. Even though, we dont observe
Erk and Akt in D2 , with modular training, we can still train the mechanisms with P (V ) and sample
correctly from their L2 - distributions. This reflects the transportability of WhatIfGAN. During
WhatIfGAN training, we can use pre-trained models of {P KA, M ek}, {Akt} or {Erk} since they
are located in different hnodes.
Sachs dataset performance comparison with (Xia et al., 2023): In Figure 23d and Figure 23e, we
compare and show the convergence of both WhatIfGAN and NCM (Xia et al., 2023) with respect
to total variation distance and KL-divergence. We observe that for low-dimensional variables, we
perform similarly to DCM or better in some cases. However, they do not have the ability to utilize
pre-trained models like we do. Besides, unlike NCM, we do not need to run the algorithm again and
again for each identifiable queries. Thus, when queries are identifiable, our algorithm can be utilized
as an efficient method to train on datasets involving low-dimensional variables.

F.7         S YNTHETIC E XPERIMENT

We measure the performance of the approach where we train all the mechanisms together (Algorithm
3) and WhatIfGAN Modular Training (Algorithm 2) on synthetic datasets produces from a random
SCM consistent with the causal graph in Figure 24. We produce two observational datasets from the
true causal model: D1 ∼ P (V \ {W0 , Y0 }), D2 ∼ P (V \ {Y1 }). We train the causal mechanism
of our DCM by following the H∅ -graph in Figure 24. Here, H0 = {W0 }, H1 = {W1 }, H2 =
{X0 , Y0 }, H3 = {X1 , X2 , Y1 }. Let p() be the (observational) data distribution. We perform modular
training following the H∅ -graph as following: i) Train GH0 = [GW0 ] with dataset D2 by matching


                                                              40
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


p(w0 |x0 ). ii) Train GH1 = [GW1 ] on D1 to match p(w1 |x1 , x2 , x0 ). iii) Train GH2 = [GX0 , GY0 ]
with dataset D2 by comparing p1 (x0 , w1 , w0 , y0 |do(x1 , x2 )). Here, we can use pre-trained W0 , W1 .
iv) Finally we train the mechanisms in GH3 = [GX1 , GX2 , GY1 ] together, with dataset D1 such that
after convergence, p1 (x1 , x2 , w1 , y1 |do(x0 )) matches. Here, we can use pre-trained W1 .
We show the experimental result in Figure 24. Here, P1 () represents the sample distributions from
WhatIfGAN after running Algorithm 3 (i.e. training all the mechanisms together) and P2 () represents
the distributions after running Algorithm 2, the Modular Training. We trained each H-nodes in
parallel for 150 epochs. Line 4, 5 represents the distribution convergence corresponding to H4 , H5
in terms of the total variation distance from the true distribution. Line 6 shows the convergence of
joint distribution P2 (V ) with Modular Training. Line 1, 2, 3 represent the same distributions but
with Algorithm 3. We observe that each partial sample distributions converges with very small total
variation distance loss:< 0.10 and joint distribution for modular training also converges with low
TVD loss: < 0.16. For both algorithms, the TVD loss is similarly small, proving the validity of
modular training of WhatIfGAN.


    X0       W0     Y0


    X1       X2    W1

                    Y1

    W0            X0Y0


    X1X2Y1        W1



         Figure 24: Convergence of full training and modular training on observational datasets.


Training each h-node matches the following distributions of D1 and D2 :

                             H0 =⇒ p(w0 |x0 ) = qx0 (w0 )
                             H1 =⇒ p(w1 |x0 , x1 , x2 ) = qx0 ,x1 ,x2 (w1 )
                                                                                                           (60)
                             H2 =⇒ p(x0 , w0 , y0 , w1 |x1 , x2 ) = qx1 ,x2 (x0 , w0 , y0 , w1 )
                             H3 =⇒ p(x1 , x2 , w1 , y1 |x0 ) = px0 (x1 , x2 , w1 , y1 )

Therefore, matching each distribution, we match the joint distribution.

                         p(v) = pw1 (x1 , x2 , y1 ) ∗ pw0 ,w1 (x0 , y0 ) ∗ px0 (w0 ) ∗ px0 ,x1 ,x2 (w1 )
                              = px0 ,w1 (x1 , x2 , y1 ) ∗ px1 ,x2 ,w0 ,w1 (x0 , y0 )
                              ∗ px0 (w0 ) ∗ px0 ,x1 ,x2 (w1 )
                                 px (x1 , x2 , w1 , y1 )         px1 ,x2 (x0 , w0 , y0 , w1 )
                              = 0                         ∗
                                    px0 ,x1 ,x2 (w1 )       px0 ,x1 ,x2 (w0 ) ∗ px0 ,x1 ,x2 (w1 )
                              ∗ px0 (w0 ) ∗ px0 ,x1 ,x2 (w1 )
                                 p(x1 , x2 , w1 , y1 |x0 )           p(x0 , w0 , y0 , w1 |x1 , x2 )        (61)
                              =                            ∗
                                   p(w1 |x0 , x1 , x2 )      p(w0 |x0 , x1 , x2 ) ∗ p(w1 |x0 , x1 , x2 )
                              ∗ p(w0 |x0 ) ∗ p(w1 |x0 , x1 , x2 )
                                 q(x1 , x2 , w1 , y1 |x0 )           q(x0 , w0 , y0 , w1 |x1 , x2 )
                              =                            ∗
                                   q(w1 |x0 , x1 , x2 )      q(w0 |x0 , x1 , x2 ) ∗ q(w1 |x0 , x1 , x2 )
                              ∗ q(w0 |x0 ) ∗ q(w1 |x0 , x1 , x2 )
                              = q(v)

                                                               41
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G     A LGORITHMS & P SEUDO - CODES

Algorithm 8 isIdentifiable(G, I, query)
 1: Input: Causal Graph G = (V, E), Interventions = I, Causal query distribution= query
 2: if type(query)=Counterfactual then
 3:     Return Run_IDC(G, query, I)
 4: else if type(query)=Interventional then
 5:     Return Run_ID(G, query) or hasSurrogates(G, query, I)



Algorithm 9 RunGAN(G, G, VK , I, N )
 1: Input:Causal Graph G = (V, E), DCM G, target variable set VK , Intervention I, Pre-defined noise N .
 2: for Vi , Vj ∈ VK such that i < j do
 3:    if Vi , Vj has latent confounder then
 4:       z ∼ p(z)
 5:       conf [Vi ] ← Append(conf [Vi ], z)
 6:       conf [Vj ] ← Append(conf [Vj ], z)         // Assigning same confounding noise [fix for multiple con-
          founders]
 7: for Vi ∈ VK in causal graph,G topological order do
 8:    if Vi ∈ I.keys() then
 9:       vi = I[Vi ]      // Assigning intervened value
10:    else
11:        par = get_parents(Vi , G)
12:        if Vi ∈ N.keys() then
13:            exos, conf, gumbel = N [Vi ]
14:        else
15:            exos ∼ p(z)
16:            conf = conf [Vi ]
17:            gumbel = ∅.       //New Gumbel noise will be assigned during forward pass
18:        vi = Gθi (exos, conf, gumbel, v̂par )
19:    v̂ ← Append(v̂, vi )
20: Return Samples v or Fail



Algorithm 10 Evaulate_GAN(G, G, I, query)
 1: Input:Causal Graph G = (V, E), DCM= G, Available Interventions = I, Causal query distribution=query
 2: if isIdentifiable(G, I, query) = False then
 3:     Return: Fail
 4: if type(query)= observation then
 5:     Y = Extract(query)
 6:     samples ← RunGAN(G, G, [Y ], ∅, ∅)
 7: else if type(query)= Intervention then
 8:     Y, (X, x) := Extract(query)
 9:     samples ← RunGAN(G, G, [Y ], {X : x}, ∅)
10: else if type(query)= Counterfactual then
11:     Y, (X, x), (X, x′ ) := Extract(query)
12:     exos, conf, gumbel ← RejectionSampling({X : x′ })
13:     N ← [exos, conf, gumbel]
14:     samples ← RunGAN(G, [Y ], {X : x}, N )
15: Return samples



H    F REQUENTLY A SKED Q UESTIONS

In this section, we answer some questions that might come into the reader’s mind.

      1. How does our algorithm work for complicated and larger graphs?
         Ans: In Appendix E, we use two graphs with 6 nodes and 27 nodes to show how our


                                                     42
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        algorithm works. We also show our algorithm performance on different graphs in Ap-
        pendix F. Specifically, in Appendix F.4, we show our performance on a Colored-MNIST
        experiment where the causal graph contains 7 discrete variable nodes and 2 image nodes. In
        Appendix F.5, we perform an experiment on the ASIA causal graph from the online bnlearn
        repository. In Appendix F.6, we show our algorithm performance on the real-world Sachs
        protein dataset. In Appendix F.7, we show performance on a synthetic experiment with a 7
        node causal graph.
     2. What is the benefit of a pre-trained model over training a conditional generator on
        the observed dataset? Is there a risk that the distribution the pre-trained model was
        trained on will not match the distribution of the observed dataset?
        Ans: Training a conditional GAN from scratch might require abundant data and resources
        but if pre-trained, we can use them as black boxes. This gives us the scope to utilize large
        image-generative models in causality. For example, for the graph D → Image → A,
        D ↔ A in Figure 3a, we could try to match the joint distribution P (D, Image, A) by
        training all mechanisms together with the same loss from scratch. In that case: i) we
        could not use any pre-trained models ii) it would not be easy to get convergence due to the
        contribution of both low and high dimensional variables in the same loss function.
        We assume that a pre-trained model correctly captures a part of the joint distribution of
        which other parts are captured when we train the rest of the network. Specifically, in the
        D → Image → A, D ↔ A graph, we assume the black box GImage is correctly trained
        to sample image from the inputs same as P (Image|D). Thus, we can train mechanisms
        GD , GA to match P (D, Image, A).
     3. How are the pre-trained generative models playing a role in our algorithm?
        Ans: We follow the partial order of H−graph to train our DCM in a modular fashion. While
        we are training the mechanisms in an h-node, we always use the pre-trained models of the
        ancestor variables. This gives us the flexibility to plug in any pre-trained large models in our
        training mechanism instead of training them from scratch.
     4. Can a better architecture/model be used instead of GANs for our framework?
        Ans: Our modular training routine is not specific to GANs. Essentially, if there is a way to
        train a conditional generative model such as a diffusion model, our results should apply.
     5. How does the GAN convergence impact the theory of our work?
        Ans: We proposed our theorems with the assumption that GAN will properly converge and
        our algorithm will give correct results. However, due to different issues with GAN training
        such as mode collapse or convergence failure, it is not unnatural to not converge. As a
        result, some errors will be introduced in the sampling process. Nonetheless, our algorithm is
        independent of the method used to train each module and GAN convergence can not break
        any of our theorems. Thus, one can use state-of-the-art generative models such as style-gan
        or diffusion models for training each module to improve the GAN training issues.
     6. Can our algorithm intervene with continuous values?
        Ans: Do-calculus does not require discrete variables under certain regularity conditions. One
        can easily see this from the proofs of the rules from Pearl (1995). Since the Identification
        algorithm Shpitser & Pearl (2008) and derivatives can be seen as sequential applications of
        these rules, our proofs follow identically irrespective of the data type. For example, in the
        experiment described in section 5.1, the generated images are continuous vectors of pixels.
        Here we can sample from P (C|do(D)), P (Image|do(D)), and P (C|do(Image)).


                                                 43
