Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D ISCOVERING M INIMAL R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
E NVIRONMENTS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                              A BSTRACT
         Human agents often acquire skills under conditions that are significantly different
         from the context in which the skill is needed. For example, students prepare for an
         exam not by taking it, but by studying books or supplementary material. Can arti-
         ficial agents benefit from training outside of their evaluation environment as well?
         In this project, we develop a novel meta-optimization framework to discover neu-
         ral network-based synthetic environments. We find that training contextual bandits
         suffices to train Reinforcement Learning agents that generalize well to their eval-
         uation environment, eliminating the need to meta-learn a transition function. We
         show that the synthetic contextual bandits train Reinforcement Learning agents in
         a fraction of time steps and wall clock time, and generalize across hyperparame-
         ter settings and algorithms. Using our method in combination with a curriculum
         on the performance evaluation horizon, we are able to achieve competitive results
         on a number of challenging continuous control problems. Our approach opens
         a multitude of new research directions: Contextual bandits are easy to interpret,
         yielding insights into the tasks that are encoded by the evaluation environment.
         Additionally, we demonstrate that synthetic environments can be used in down-
         stream meta-learning setups, derive a new policy from the differentiable reward
         function, and show that the synthetic environments generalize to entirely different
         optimization settings.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Reinforcement Learning (RL) agents are commonly trained and evaluated in precisely the same en-
vironment. It is well known that this approach has several significant disadvantages: RL agents
are brittle with respect to minor changes in the environment dynamics, hyperparameter choices, or
even the concrete implementation of an algorithm (Henderson et al., 2018; Engstrom et al., 2019;
Cobbe et al., 2020; Agarwal et al., 2021). Most recent research in RL has focused on improving RL
algorithms in order to alleviate these challenges. But what about the Reinforcement Learning envi-
ronment or the underlying Markov Decision Process (MDP) itself? Unlike RL agents, professional
athletes train under vastly different conditions than their final competition settings. For example,
long-distance runners do not repeatedly run the target distance, but train shorter interval runs, pro-
gressively increase their pace, and occasionally mix in long runs. Moreover, the development of
sensory circuits in the brain is initially guided by “artificial stimuli” that are internally generated,
before sensory stimuli from the environment become available (Katz & Shatz, 1996). Hence, the
optimal environment dynamics for training may be drastically different from the final evaluation
setting.
How can we apply these insights to training RL agents? Here, we leverage the recently proposed
framework of synthetic environments (Ferreira et al., 2022) and show that complex tasks with com-
plex transition dynamics and long time horizons can be greatly simplified by training agents on
synthetic contextual bandit (SCB) tasks, referring to MDPs without state transition dynamics. This
simplifies the approach of Ferreira et al. (2022), who learn a full state-transition function and omit
learning the initial state distribution. To this end, we parameterize the distribution of initial states and
the reward function of these synthetic environments by small neural networks and meta-learn their
weights using evolutionary optimization. Training standard RL algorithms on these SCBs produces
agents that generalize to the complex original task, which we refer to as the evaluation environment
in the following.


                                                     1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The SCBs train agents in a fraction of time steps compared to training on the evaluation environment
and provide a fast hardware-accelerated synthetic simulator (see Fig. 1, bottom). The individual
environment components are all differentiable and we demonstrate their interpretability. Interest-
ingly, we find that the synthetic reward function has learned which state dimensions are relevant
to the optimal policy and varying irrelevant parts of the state leaves the learned reward invariant.
The differentiable reward function encodes information about the reward-to-go in the evaluation
environment, and can therefore be used to construct an “induced” policy. Furthermore, the costly
meta-optimization process can be amortized in rapid downstream meta-learning applications and
even generalizes to evolutionary optimization of agent policies. Our contributions are:


Figure 1: Discovering synthetic RL environments via meta-evolution. Left. Conceptual overview.
We meta-evolve the parameters of a neural network-based environment using a task distribution over
agent initializations, training algorithms, and hyperparameters. Right, top. The resulting synthetic
environments are capable of training agents to high performance when evaluated on continuous con-
trol environments of Brax (Freeman et al., 2021). We report the return interquartile mean (IQM) over
50 runs. S and F: sampled & fixed inner loop tasks, respectively. R: tuned agent on the evaluation
environment. Right, bottom. The neural networks underlying the SCB leverage hardware acceler-
ation and are more compute-efficient (wall clock time) than the real dynamics, shown are steps per
second when running 10000 steps on 1000 environments (10 million steps total) with random ac-
tions on and A100. The SCBs train agents in a fraction of the environment steps needed for training
in the evaluation environment.

     1. We introduce a meta-optimization framework for synthetic environment discovery lever-
        aging contextual bandits with a learned initial state distribution and a curriculum on the
        evaluation length of the agents trained in the synthetic environment (Section 3).
     2. We show that meta-training over a large range of inner loop tasks leads to synthetic envi-
        ronments that generalize across hyperparameters and other RL algorithms (Section 4).
     3. The resulting CBs are interpretable (Section 5) and provide a direct way to probe the im-
        portance of individual state dimensions.
     4. They can also be used for a plethora of downstream applications including the rapid meta-
        learning of policy optimization objective functions, policy derivation from the reward func-
        tion, and even evolutionary optimization of agents (Section 6).
     5. We release two open-source libraries accessible to the wider community:1
           • synthetic-gymnax: A repository of synthetic environments characterized by
              neural networks with pre-trained weight checkpoints.
           • purerl: A set of hardware-accelerated RL algorithms (SAC, PPO, DQN, DDPG,
              TD3) that run entirely on GPU/TPU which enables fast meta-optimization evaluation.
   1
     The code and corresponding synthetic checkpoints will be released upon publication un-
der https://github.com/<anonymous>/purerl and https://github.com/<anonymous>
/synthetic-gym. Along this submission, we provide a single checkpoint & training in a notebook.


                                                 2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2   BACKGROUND & R ELATED W ORK


Reinforcement Learning Formalism. RL is interested in leveraging sampled agent experiences to
solve an MDP (Puterman, 1990), i.e. to extract an optimal policy that maximizes the expected dis-
                                  PT
counted cumulative return, Eπ [ t=0 γ t rt ]. An MDP is defined as the tuple ⟨I, S, A, T , R, d⟩. At
the beginning of each episode an initial state s0 ∼ I ∈ S is sampled. Afterwards, at each timestep
t, an agent samples an action from its policy at ∼ π(·|st ) (where at ∈ A and given a state st ∈ S).
The environment then issues a reward R(st , at ) and updates the next state st+1 according to the tran-
sition function st+1 ∼ T (·|st , at ). An episode termination is indicated by a boolean d(t, s, a) which
in turn leads to the reset used for the next episode rollout. Throughout meta-training and evaluation
we focus on a set of commonly used value- and policy-gradient based algorithms including DQN
(Mnih et al., 2013), SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018), PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), DDPG (Lillicrap
et al., 2015), and TD3 (Fujimoto et al., 2018).
Curricula for Reinforcement Learning. Substantial amounts of effort have been put into design-
ing curricula for RL agents. These include prioritization techniques (Schaul et al., 2015; Jiang et al.,
2021), gradually increasing goal distances (Florensa et al., 2017), or learned sequencing methods
(Narvekar & Stone, 2018). In this work, instead of manually designing a curriculum, we discover
initial state distributions and reward functions maximizing the performance in the evaluation envi-
ronment.
Training Reinforcement Learning Agents with Synthetic Data. Various methods for training
machine learning models from synthetically generated data have been proposed. For example, this
includes dataset distillation for supervised training (Wang et al., 2018) or synthetic experience replay
for RL (Lu et al., 2023b). Applications for training with synthetic data include data augmentation
and cheap data generation, which is especially important when requiring large amounts of data,
such as in RL. Most closely related to our work is the approach outlined by Ferreira et al. (2022)
which learns the reward- and state transition function while using the reset distribution of the orig-
inal environment. They highlight that their approach struggles to generalize across broad ranges of
hyperparameters and fails to scale to continuous control environments. Here, we demonstrate that it
is possible to transform large MDPs into SCBs via meta-optimization for the first time.
Meta-Optimization & Evolutionary Optimization. Meta-optimization is commonly conducted
using one of two approaches: Meta-gradient calculation with respect to a meta-objective or evolu-
tionary black-box optimization of a fitness score. The calculation of higher-order gradients may fail
for long unroll lengths and can result in myopic meta-solutions (Metz et al., 2021). Therefore, we
leverage Evolution Strategies (ES) that adapt a parameterized distribution (e.g. multivariate normal)
to iteratively find well-performing solutions. More formally, we use a search distribution N (µ, Σ)
with mean µ ∈ R|θ| and a diagonal covariance matrix Σij = σi δij , to sample candidate synthetic
environments. After sampling a population of candidates, the fitness of each population member
f (x) is estimated using Monte Carlo evaluations. We use an aggregated fitness score summarizing
the performance of the synthetic environments by evaluating a trained agent in the real environment.
The scores areR used to update the search distribution such that the expected fitness under the search
distribution x f (x)N (µ, Σ) is maximized, according to SNES (Schaul et al., 2011).
Discovering Algorithm Components via Evolutionary Meta-Learning. Recently, the general
combination of evolutionary optimization and neural network-based algorithm families has been
used to discover various powerful algorithms. This includes the meta-discovery of gradient-based
(Metz et al., 2022) and gradient-free (Lange et al., 2022; 2023) optimization algorithms, policy opti-
mization objective functions (Lu et al., 2022), or reward functions (Faust et al., 2019). Furthermore,
these synthetic artifacts can often be reverse-engineered to generate human-interpretable compo-
nents. Here, we use the same paradigm to transform real environment simulators into SCBs.
Hardware Accelerated Reinforcement Learning Environments. Commonly, RL environments
have been bound to CPUs and constrained by limited parallelism. Recently, there has been a
paradigm change with RL simulators being accelerated by accelerator parallelism. These efforts
include Brax (Freeman et al., 2021), Gymnax (Lange, 2022b), Jumanji (Bonnet et al., 2023), Pgx
(Koyamada et al., 2023), or NVIDIA Isaac Gym (Makoviychuk et al., 2021). Still, most of them
require the translation of the original step transition logic into hardware-specific coding frameworks
(e.g. JAX (Bradbury et al., 2018)). Here, we provide a means to automatically yield hardware-
accelerated neural-network-based environment proxies for training RL agents that generalize to po-
tentially non-accelerated environments.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Algorithm 1: Training Synthetic Environments with ES

Require: Evaluation environment Et
Require: Generations T , Rollouts R, ES S(µ, Σ)
Require: RL algorithms w. hyperparameters distrib.
Require: Evaluation episode length schedule s
  Initialize µ ∼ network initialization, Σ = diag(σ)
  for gen = 1, . . . , T do
      Sample population of environments P ∼ S(µ, Σ)
      for Synthetic environment Es in P do
           Select set of RL algorithms A
           Calculate evaluation length l = s(gen)
           for Algorithm algo in A do
               for r = 1, . . . , R do
                   Sample hyperparameter configuration
                   Train agent a in Es using algo /conf
                   Get falgo,r as return of a in Et (l, a).
               end for
           end for                          PR
                              1
                                   P
           Fitness of Es : |A|R      algo∈A  r=1 falgo,r
      end for
      Update µ, Σ according to ES using fitness scores
  end for
  return synthetic environment with parameters µ


3    M ETHODS

Synthetic Environment Setup. RL environments are commonly modeled as Markov decision pro-
cesses, consisting of a set of states S, a set of actions A, a distribution for the initial state I, the re-
ward function R(s, a), and the state transition function T (s′ |s, a). We parameterize Iθ and Rθ (s, a)
using a small neural network for each. To sample initial states, we calculate s0 = Iθ (z), where z is
a latent vector sampled from z ∼ Pz ∈ Rn . The choice of Pz and n are hyperparameters, which we
set to Pz = N (0, In ) and n to be the dimensionality of the state space. The set of synthetic states is
then given by the range of Iθ , while the set of synthetic actions is the same as the set of actions in
the evaluation environment.
We omit parameterizing T (s′ |s, a), such that synthetic environments become synthetic contextual
bandits. This is conceptually different from Ferreira et al. (2022), who fix the initial distribution to
be that of the evaluation environment, and learn the transition function instead. Training contex-
tual bandits has several advantages: For example, it stabilizes the meta-training process since the
recurrent forward pass of synthetic states through a neural network can lead to exploding values.
Additionally, it significantly reduces the number of parameters from O(dim(S)2 ) to O(dim(S)),
which eases the meta-training process.
Our choice of using CBs is justified by the fact that the optimal policy of any MDP can be found
by policy optimization on a separate CB. Such a CB can be constructed by setting rCB (s, a) =
Q∗MDP (s, a) and ICB = U [SMDP ]. By maximizing the reward in the CB, a policy automatically
maximizes the value function of the MDP in every state, and is therefore optimal when transferred.
However, other choices of rCB and ICB are possible to achieve optimal performance in practice. Its
not necessary to correctly estimate the value of every state in the MDP, since some states might never
be reached by an expert policy. Additionally, most policy optimization algorithms choose actions as
a = arg maxa Q(s, a), meaning that in order to perform well on the evaluation environment, the rel-
ative scale of rewards in the CB does not have to match the value estimates in the MDP. Discovering
CBs therefore leaves several degrees of freedom, as the SCB can select states which are most rele-
vant in learning evaluation task, and might scale rewards to quickly imprint a specific behavior. We
empirically confirm the advantages of using SCBs in Appendix A.1, and present a comprehensive
comparison between the meta-learned synthetic reward and the learned value function of an expert
policy in Appendix A.2.


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A list of hyperparameters for the synthetic environment can be found in Appendix B.1.
Discovery via Meta-Evolution. The parameters θ of the synthetic environment are meta-optimized
using the separable natural evolution strategy (SNES, Schaul et al., 2011), implemented by evosax
(Lange, 2022a). At each iteration of the meta-optimization algorithm (outer loop), we sample a
population of synthetic environments according to the search distribution. We evaluate the fitness
of each population member by training an agent in the synthetic environment (inner loop) and then
calculating its return on multiple initializations of the evaluation environment. Subsequently, the
fitness scores are used to update the search distribution according to SNES, such that the expected
fitness under the search distribution is maximized.
In order to achieve generalization across algorithms and hyperparameters, we train multiple RL
algorithms using a wide range of randomly sampled hyperparameter combinations in each meta-
generation. We do so by vectorizing a training algorithm and then initializing with a vector of sam-
pled hyperparameters. Thus, we are limited to parameters that can be vectorized over, i.e. whose
values don’t affect the memory layout or structure of compiled code. For a list of sampled hyperpa-
rameters see Appendix B.2.
Meta-Evolution Fitness Evaluation Curriculum. Many of the continuous control problems in
Brax (Freeman et al., 2021), such as hopper or ant, require learning balance and locomotion. When
calculating the fitness of synthetic environments using episodes of the full 1000 environment steps,
they quickly converge to a local optimum of balancing the body while not moving forward. To
address this issue, we use a curriculum on the length of the fitness evaluation rollout: We begin
meta-training using short episodes in the real environment to evaluate fitness, and gradually increase
their length. This ensures that the focus shifts towards locomotion early in meta-optimzation since
the gain from balancing is limited. The overall meta-evolution process for synthetic environment
discovery is outlined in Algorithm 1. In the following sections, we will probe and validate the
following scientific questions:

      1. Can we transform environments with multi-step MDPs into single-step SCBs with flexible
         reward and state initialization functions? What are the contributions of the meta-evolution
         design including the curriculum design and latent distribution for the initial state (Sec-
         tion 4)?
      2. What are the properties of the resulting neural network-based SCBs? Can they be inter-
         preted and potentially even provide insights into the underlying real environment dynamics
         (Section 5)?
      3. How can we amortize the computationally expensive meta-discovery process? Is it possi-
         ble to apply the synthetic environments to downstream applications with potential compu-
         tational advantages and speed-ups (Section 6)?


4   R ESULTS OF META - TRAINING

Fig. 2 shows the performance of synthetic environments that were meta-trained with multiple inner
loop RL algorithms and sampled hyperparameter configurations. We were able to train SCBs for
the challenging continuous control environments in the Brax suite, significantly extending the scope
of results in Ferreira et al. (2022). The first row visualizes the meta-learning curves, where we in-
dicate the fitness of the population mean. We noticed that for Halfcheetah, the inclusion of PPO in
the set of RL algorithms made training unstable, likely because the range of sampled learning rates
for PPO is too large for stable gradient-based optimization of the policy network. On the Swim-
mer environment, meta-training with sampled inner loop hyperparameters improves performance.
This is likely because there are several distinct modes of behavior, and sampling hyperparameters
introduces additional noise, such that new modes of behavior might be found more easily.
The second row shows the learning curves of RL agents when training in the SCB and evaluating in
the evaluation environment. Notably, the agents achieve competitive performance on the Brax suite
within 10000 time steps, whereas training in the evaluation environments typically takes several
million time steps, and requires extensive hyperparameter tuning. The performance can be improved
further by fixing the inner loop algorithm.


                                                  5
         Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                    Pendulum-v1                         brax/hopper                        brax/swimmer                           brax/halfcheetah


Return of sampled HPs Training in the SCB Meta-training
                                                       500                                  2000                                300                                   5000        Inner loop
                                                      1000                                                                      200                                                  fixed
                                                                                                                                100                                                  sampled
                                                      1500                                    0                                                                         0
                                                                0       500         1000           0       100           200           0         100          200            0            100        200
                                                                    # Generations                      # Generations                       # Generations                           # Generations
                                                                                                                                                                                 Algorithm
                                                                                                                                                                                      ddpg
                                                       500                                  2000                                250                                   5000            ppo
                                                      1000                                                                                                                            sac
                                                                                                                                                                                      td3
                                                      1500                                    0                                    0                                    0
                                                                0       5000        10000          0       5000        10000           0         5000         10000          0            5000       10000
                                                                # Environment steps                # Environment steps                 # Environment steps                   # Environment steps

                                                          td3                                td3                                 td3                                   td3
                                                          sac                                sac                                 sac                                   sac
                                                          ppo                                ppo                                ppo                                    ppo
                                                      ddpg                                  ddpg                               ddpg                                   ddpg
                                                                1500 1000 500                      0   1000 2000 3000                      200   0      200 400                    0     2500 5000 7500
                                                                     Real return                        Real return                          Real return                               Real return
                                                                                                                       Environment
                                                                                      Synthetic (sampled inner loop)           Synthetic (fixed inner loop)           Real

         Figure 2: Meta-evolution, SCB evaluation, and agent hyperparameter robustness. Top. Our pro-
         posed meta-evolution setup enables the discovery of SCBs for challenging continous control envi-
         ronments for the first time. Middle. The discovered SCBs generalize across various common RL
         algorithms and train in few step transitions. Bottom. The SCBs are much more robust across hy-
         perparameter settings than their real analogues, especially when sampling hyperparameters during
         meta-training. The evaluation results are aggregated as the IQM over 20 independent runs.


         The third row shows the return distribution of agents with fixed/sampled hyperparameters on SCBs
         with fixed/sampled hyperparameters in the inner loop, as well as the evaluation environment. While
         SCBs generalize well, the vast majority of agents trained in the evaluation environments perform
         poorly, as they are usually very brittle with respect to their parameters. Achieving a good perfor-
         mance on challenging RL environments often requires additional hacks, such as observation- and
         reward normalization, extensions of the replay buffer (Schaul et al., 2015; Andrychowicz et al.,
         2017), generalized state-dependent exploration (Raffin et al., 2021), and others. These requirements
         are completely eliminated when training in the SCB.
         Fig. 3 shows several ablations of our method. In the first row, we visualize four different meta-
         training settings, ingredients indicated by the presence of the letter
         T for a parameterized transition function
         I for a parameterized initial state distribution
         C for the application of an evaluation episode length curriculum
         The T setup acts as our main baseline, for which we closely mimic the setup of Ferreira et al. (2022)
         within our framework. This is necessary because we need to leverage our highly parallelizable
         implementation of RL algorithms to run experiments on Brax. For better comparison with different
         ablations, we increase the population size (16 to 64-256) and number of evaluation environments
         (10 to 64) to be consistent with our other ablations. Both changes are generally favorable to the
         performance (for details see Table 3).
         The plain T setup is consistently beaten by our extensions. On MountainCar-v0, it is not able to
         discover an environment in which the agent reaches the goal, achieving a mean return of -200 on all
         evaluation seeds of all meta-training runs. It is well known that even state-of-the-art RL algorithms
         such as PPO struggle with solving MountainCar, due to the extremely sparse reward of reaching the
         flag, which is very improbable to achieve through random exploration.
         Introducing a parameterized initial state distribution in TI circumvents this problem, as the envi-
         ronment can learn a distribution of relevant observations directly, without having to reach them via
         repeated application of the transition function. Omitting the transition function increases the perfor-
         mance on almost all classic control environments (see Appendix A.1).


                                                                                                                           6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                       Pendulum-v1, DDPG                                    MountainCar-v0, PPO                 brax/hopper, SAC

Return in eval. env. Return in eval. env.
                                             500                                                  150                                                                         Setup
                                                                                                                                     2000                                    IC            TI
                                            1000
                                                                                                                                                                             I             T
                                            1500                                                  200                                  0


                                                                                                                                                                          Latent dist.
                                             500                                                  150                                                                        gaussian
                                                                                                                                     2000                                    uniform
                                            1000
                                                                                                                                                                             categorical
                                            1500                                                  200                                  0                                     softmax
                                                   0          500       1000
                                                         # Generation
                                                                           Return in eval. env.   150
                                                                                                                                                                           Curriculum
                                                                                                                                                                             linear
                                                                                                                                     2000                                    linear_fast
                                                                                                                                                                             polynomial
                                                                                                  200                                  0                                     no curriculum
                                                                                                        0          500        1000          0        1000          2000
                                                                                                               # Generation                      # Generation

Figure 3: Ablation study evaluating meta-evolution ingredients on a specific environment-algorithm
combination. Top. We compare the impact of parameterizing the initial state distribution (I), tran-
sition function (T), and the evaluation length curriculum (C). All three contributions lead to robust
and scalable meta-discovery. Middle. Continuous latent distributions for the initial state distribution
perform better than categorical ones. Bottom. The meta-training setup is robust the exact choice of
evaluation episode length curriculum. The figure shows IQMs and 95% confidence intervals over
5, 20 and 1 seed for Pendulum-v1, MountainCar-v0 and Hopper, respectively. In setups which in-
clude T, nan values prohibited the visualization of Pendulum-v1’s performance early in training. For
Pendulum-v1, no curriculum was applied since we did not find any curriculum to be sensible.


For long episodes, the recurrent forward pass of synthetic states through the transition function can
lead to exploding values, which eventually overflow. This problem can be addressed by limiting
the maximum episode length. Since most episodes are already extremely short in the T and TI setup
(typically under 10 time steps) we set the maximum episode length to 1, effectively reducing the
synthetic environment to an SCB task without transition dynamics, leading to the plain I setup. We
find that this does not reduce the performance on any environment, with the exception of Pendulum-
v1. However, the best performance of the 5 runs in TI and I is equal, and training can be stabilized
by increasing the number of rollouts per population member.
A curriculum like in IC is needed to achieve competetive results on the brax environments. Simi-
lar curriculi can be introduced some to classic control environments. For example, decreasing the
evaluation length from 1000 to 200 while meta-training an environment for MountainCar improves
meta-training stability and performance.
Our setup includes two main hyperparameters: the latent distribution from which the initial states
are generated and the curriculum. The second row of Fig. 3 shows meta-training curves for different
latent distributions. We test four different latent distributions: a standard Gaussian, a uniform distri-
bution over [0, 1), a categorical uniform distribution, and a categorical distribution with probabilities
softmax([1, 2, . . . , n]), where n is the dimensionality of the latent vector. When using categorical
latent distributions, the initial state distribution becomes a categorical one as well and can be thought
of as sampling from a set of meta-learned observations. Overall, the Gaussian and uniform distri-
butions achieve a similar performance, outperforming the categorical ones. This is likely because
they can densely sample a manifold of the state space. The third row of Fig. 3 shows meta-training
curves for different curricula, showing that meta-training is robust to the choice of curriculum.


5                                           I NTERPRETABILITY OF S YNTHETIC E NVIRONMENTS

The episodes in the synthetic environment can be limited to one step without a qualitative loss of
performance (see Appendix A.1). In this case, the reward received is equal to the return, the state-,


                                                                                                                          7
   Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                           MountainCar
                         Acrobot-v1            CartPole-v1          MountainCar-v0        Continuous-v0          Pendulum-v1


                                                                               t
                         1   0     1       left          right                            left nop right         2   0    2


                                                                        h
                                                                        p
                                                                       t
                                                                    rig
                                                                    lef
                                                                    no
Optimal action
                  4                     0.75                     0.07                 0.07                  8
                     0                     0                       0                     0                  -0
                 2


                                                              x


                                                                                   x
                  4                    -0.75                  -0.07                   -0.07                 -8
                         4   0 4               -0.75 0 0.75             -1.2 -0.3
                              1                     x                         x 0.6           -1.2 -0.3
                                                                                                    x 0.6        -1 sin
                                                                                                                     -0   1

                     1
     Normalized
        var(r)


                     0                         x


                                                                             x


                                                                                                   x
                                               x


                                                                        x


                                                                                              x
                     coin 11

                                 12
                     sins 2
                                 2


                                                                                                             sin
                                                                                                               s
                     ss


                                                                                                             co
                     co


   Figure 4: Synthetic environments provide interpretable insights into RL learning dynamics. Top.
   Optimal actions given the differentiable synthetic reward function for different states and 5 envi-
   ronments. We observe that the synthetic environment has discovered a type of state-action value
   function. Black box: observation space of the evaluation environment. Black line: representative
   trajectory in the real environment. Black x-marker: episode end. Bottom. Normalized variance in
   reward when varying part of the observation. Mean value over all observations in the space visual-
   ized in the top row.


   and the state-action value function. This enables new ways to analyze the environment, such as
   easily finding the optimal action in each state via gradient descent or a simple grid search.
   We visualize the optimal actions in the top row of Fig. 4. The resulting visualizations yield insights
   into the way that the synthetic environment trains an agent to perform a task: For example, the
   SCB for MountainCar-v0 never induces nops, since the return is highest if terminating early, while
   the optimal action in the MountainCarContinuous-v0 SCB is often close to nop since it includes a
   control cost instead of a constant negative reward.
   Additionally, we can directly investigate the relationship between the observation and the return.
   We do so by fixing observation and action, and observing the variance in the reward when varying a
   single entry of the observation. The results are visualized in the bottom row of Fig. 4. We find that
   the reward is almost invariant to some parts of the observations. For example, varying the values
   of the angle in Acrobot-v1 has very little impact on the reward compared to the angular velocities.
   Similar findings hold for the position and angle CartPole-v1. Thereby we rediscover the results of
   Vischer et al. (2021); Lu et al. (2023a), who found the same invariances in the context of the lottery
   ticket hypothesis and adversarial attacks respectively, where these input channels were pruned or
   used to manipulate learning dynamics.


   6             D OWNSTREAM A PPLICATIONS POWERED BY S YNTHETIC E NVIRONMENTS

   Meta-learning with Synthetic Environments. Our experiments demonstrate that synthetic envi-
   ronments are capable of training RL agents in faster wall clock time (see Fig. 1). But can they also
   be used to speed up downstream meta-learning? Here, we consider Learned Policy Optimization
   (LPO, Lu et al., 2022) and use a trained synthetic Pendulum environment to meta-learn a new RL
   objective function. In LPO, the parameters of a policy optimization objective are meta-evolved us-
   ing the performance of trained agents. We find that the synthetic proxy is capable of training an
   objective that outperforms a PPO baseline on the original environment (see Fig. 5, left). In fact,
   the meta-training of LPO using the synthetic environment requires far fewer environment steps than
   training LPO using the real environment. Finally, the performance improvements do not only hold
   for environments used during meta-training, but also for the unseen Hopper environment.


                                                                        8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 5: Downstream usability of synthetic environments. Left. Synthetic environments can be
used for hardware-accelerated meta-learning, e.g. learned policy optimization (LPO, Lu et al., 2022)
in which all meta-training is done in the synthetic environment. Middle. The discovered synthetic
reward function can be directly used to extract an optimal policy, i.e. by computing the optimal ac-
tion via arg maxa∈A R(s, a) from the one-step synthetic environment. Data of 100 episodes. Right.
The discovered environment is capable of generalizing to non-gradient-based agent optimization us-
ing ES. IQM over 10 seeds.


Extracting Optimal Policies from Synthetic Reward Functions. A key advantage of our reward
function parametrization is that it is differentiable with respect to the action space. Furthermore,
given that the reward function was meta-optimized using single-step inner loop episodes, we find
that it encodes a type of state-action value function. In fact, next we show that this can be utilized to
decode an implicit optimal policy. More specifically, given an agent’s state, we can compute an ac-
tion choice by optimizing the reward function with respect to the action, a⋆ = arg maxa∈A Rθ (s, a).
We call the resulting policy the ‘induced’ policy. In Fig. 5 (middle) we show that the resulting agent
is capable of robustly solving the Pendulum task.
Evolutionary Optimization with Synthetic Environments. Finally, we investigated whether the
SCB is tied to the specific RL algorithms it was meta-trained on. Instead, we find that it can be used
in a very different optimization setting, using evolutionary black box optimization. In Fig. 5 (right)
we find that a Pendulum MLP controller can be successfully trained using OpenAI-ES (Salimans
et al., 2017) on an environment that was trained only with gradient based methods. Again, this
demonstrates that the synthetic environment has not learned to ’hack’ specific RL algorithms, but
that it has captured general environment characteristics useful for training agents across paradigms.

7   C ONCLUSION & D ISCUSSION
Summary. We have demonstrated the successful discovery of SCBs capable of training RL agents
that perform competitively in real environments. In order to do so we introduced various meta-
optimization improvements, which enabled the successful meta-training. The SCBs yield insights
into the relevance of individual observation entries and are easy to interpret. Furthermore, we
showed that the SCB can be successfully deployed for various downstream applications including
meta-learning, optimal policy derivation, and gradient-free agent optimization.
Limitations. While the meta-discovered environments are capable of generalizing across various
training settings (e.g. type of algorithm and RL training hyperparameters), we find that the observed
performance on the real environment can occasionally preemptively converge on more challenging
tasks. This indicates a type of overfitting of the inner loop time horizon (Lange & Sprekeler, 2022).
Hence, in these settings, the synthetic environment appears mostly suited for fast pre-training.
Future Work. Going forward we are interested in the discovery of synthetic simulators capable
of promoting a truly open-ended learning process. Furthermore, we have focused on control envi-
ronments with proprioceptive symbolic observation dimensions so far. A natural extension of our
work is to pixel-based environments leveraging deconvolutional architectures for the initial state
distribution.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E THICS S TATEMENT

We find that neural networks are capable of representing various RL simulators in a compressed
fashion. In principle, large models can therefore be capable of distilling data distributions and world
models useful for self-training. Given that these systems are ultimately black-box, practitioners need
to be careful when deploying them in real-world applications.

R EFERENCES
Rishabh Agarwal, Max Schwarzer, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aaron C Courville, and Marc Bellemare.
  Deep reinforcement learning at the edge of the statistical precipice. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 34:29304–29320, 2021.

Marcin Andrychowicz, Filip Wolski, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Rachel Fong, Peter Welinder, Bob
 McGrew, Josh Tobin, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. Hindsight experience re-
 play. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.

Clément Bonnet, Daniel Luo, Donal Byrne, Shikha Surana, Vincent Coyette, Paul Duckworth,
  Laurence I Midgley, Tristan Kalloniatis, Sasha Abramowitz, Cemlyn N Waters, et al. Ju-
  manji: a diverse suite of scalable reinforcement learning environments in jax. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.09884, 2023.

James Bradbury, Roy Frostig, Peter Hawkins, Matthew James Johnson, Chris Leary, Dougal
  Maclaurin, George Necula, Adam Paszke, Jake VanderPlas, Skye Wanderman-Milne, and Qiao
  Zhang. JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs, 2018. URL http:
  //github.com/google/jax.

Karl Cobbe, Chris Hesse, Jacob Hilton, and John Schulman. Leveraging procedural generation to
  benchmark reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2048–
  2056. PMLR, 2020.

Logan Engstrom, Andrew Ilyas, Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, Firdaus Janoos, Larry
  Rudolph, and Aleksander Madry. Implementation matters in deep rl: A case study on ppo and
  trpo. In International conference on learning representations, 2019.

Aleksandra Faust, Anthony Francis, and Dar Mehta. Evolving rewards to automate reinforcement
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.07628, 2019.

Fabio Ferreira, Thomas Nierhoff, Andreas Sälinger, and Frank Hutter. Learning synthetic environ-
  ments and reward networks for reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=C1_esHN6AVn.

Carlos Florensa, David Held, Markus Wulfmeier, Michael Zhang, and Pieter Abbeel. Reverse cur-
  riculum generation for reinforcement learning. In Conference on robot learning, pp. 482–495.
  PMLR, 2017.

C Daniel Freeman, Erik Frey, Anton Raichuk, Sertan Girgin, Igor Mordatch, and Olivier Bachem.
  Brax–a differentiable physics engine for large scale rigid body simulation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.13281, 2021.

Scott Fujimoto, Herke Hoof, and David Meger. Addressing function approximation error in actor-
  critic methods. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1587–1596. PMLR, 2018.

Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Kristian Hartikainen, George Tucker, Sehoon Ha, Jie Tan, Vikash
  Kumar, Henry Zhu, Abhishek Gupta, Pieter Abbeel, et al. Soft actor-critic algorithms and appli-
  cations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.05905, 2018.

Charles R Harris, K Jarrod Millman, Stéfan J Van Der Walt, Ralf Gommers, Pauli Virtanen, David
  Cournapeau, Eric Wieser, Julian Taylor, Sebastian Berg, Nathaniel J Smith, et al. Array program-
  ming with numpy. Nature, 585(7825):357–362, 2020.


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Peter Henderson, Riashat Islam, Philip Bachman, Joelle Pineau, Doina Precup, and David Meger.
  Deep reinforcement learning that matters. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial
  intelligence, volume 32, 2018.

John D Hunter. Matplotlib: A 2d graphics environment. IEEE Annals of the History of Computing,
  9(03):90–95, 2007.

Minqi Jiang, Edward Grefenstette, and Tim Rocktäschel. Prioritized level replay. In International
 Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4940–4950. PMLR, 2021.

Larry C Katz and Carla J Shatz. Synaptic activity and the construction of cortical circuits. Science,
  274(5290):1133–1138, 1996.

Sotetsu Koyamada, Shinri Okano, Soichiro Nishimori, Yu Murata, Keigo Habara, Haruka Kita, and
  Shin Ishii. Pgx: Hardware-accelerated parallel game simulators for reinforcement learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2303.17503, 2023.

Robert Lange, Tom Schaul, Yutian Chen, Chris Lu, Tom Zahavy, Valentin Dalibard, and Sebastian
  Flennerhag. Discovering attention-based genetic algorithms via meta-black-box optimization. In
  Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, pp. 929–937, 2023.

Robert Tjarko Lange. MLE-Infrastructure: A set of lightweight tools for distributed machine learn-
  ing experimentation, 2021. URL http://github.com/mle-infrastructure.

Robert Tjarko Lange. evosax: JAX-based evolution strategies, 2022a. URL http://github.
  com/RobertTLange/evosax.

Robert Tjarko Lange. gymnax: A JAX-based reinforcement learning environment library, 2022b.
  URL http://github.com/RobertTLange/gymnax.

Robert Tjarko Lange and Henning Sprekeler. Learning not to learn: Nature versus nurture in silico.
  In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 36, pp. 7290–7299,
  2022.

Robert Tjarko Lange, Tom Schaul, Yutian Chen, Tom Zahavy, Valentin Dallibard, Chris Lu, Satinder
  Singh, and Sebastian Flennerhag. Meta-learning black-box optimization via black-box optimiza-
  tion. 2022.

Timothy P Lillicrap, Jonathan J Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa,
  David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1509.02971, 2015.

Chris Lu, Jakub Grudzien Kuba, Alistair Letcher, Luke Metz, Christian Schroeder de Witt, and
  Jakob Nicolaus Foerster. Discovered policy optimisation. In Decision Awareness in Reinforce-
  ment Learning Workshop at ICML 2022, 2022.

Chris Lu, Timon Willi, Alistair Letcher, and Jakob Nicolaus Foerster. Adversarial cheap talk. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 22917–22941. PMLR, 2023a.

Cong Lu, Philip J Ball, and Jack Parker-Holder. Synthetic experience replay. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.06614, 2023b.

Viktor Makoviychuk, Lukasz Wawrzyniak, Yunrong Guo, Michelle Lu, Kier Storey, Miles Macklin,
  David Hoeller, Nikita Rudin, Arthur Allshire, Ankur Handa, et al. Isaac gym: High performance
  gpu-based physics simulation for robot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.10470, 2021.

Luke Metz, C Daniel Freeman, Samuel S Schoenholz, and Tal Kachman. Gradients are not all you
  need. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.05803, 2021.

Luke Metz, James Harrison, C Daniel Freeman, Amil Merchant, Lucas Beyer, James Bradbury,
  Naman Agrawal, Ben Poole, Igor Mordatch, Adam Roberts, et al. Velo: Training versatile learned
  optimizers by scaling up. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.09760, 2022.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan Wier-
  stra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.5602, 2013.
Sanmit Narvekar and Peter Stone. Learning curriculum policies for reinforcement learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1812.00285, 2018.
Martin L Puterman. Markov decision processes. Handbooks in operations research and management
 science, 2:331–434, 1990.
Antonin Raffin, Jens Kober, and Freek Stulp. Smooth exploration for robotic reinforcement learning.
  In Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL) 2021. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
  2021. URL https://elib.dlr.de/144423/.
Tim Salimans, Jonathan Ho, Xi Chen, Szymon Sidor, and Ilya Sutskever. Evolution strategies as a
  scalable alternative to reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.03864, 2017.
Tom Schaul, Tobias Glasmachers, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. High dimensions and heavy tails for
  natural evolution strategies. In Proceedings of the 13th annual conference on Genetic and evolu-
  tionary computation, pp. 845–852, 2011.
Tom Schaul, John Quan, Ioannis Antonoglou, and David Silver. Prioritized experience replay. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1511.05952, 2015.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Marc Aurel Vischer, Robert Tjarko Lange, and Henning Sprekeler. On lottery tickets and minimal
 task representations in deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.01648, 2021.
Tongzhou Wang, Jun-Yan Zhu, Antonio Torralba, and Alexei A Efros. Dataset distillation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1811.10959, 2018.
Michael L Waskom. Seaborn: statistical data visualization. Journal of Open Source Software, 6
 (60):3021, 2021.


                                                12
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Appendix
  Table of Contents
                   A Additional Baselines                                                                                         13
                     A.1 Influence of the episode step limit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                    13
                     A.2 Comparing synthetic reward and Q∗ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                          13
                     A.3 Generalization across inner loop algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                      17

                   B Hyperparameters                                                                                              18
                     B.1 Outer loop hyperparameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                       18
                     B.2 Inner loop hyperparameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                       19

                   C Software Requirements & Experiment Simulation Details                                                        21



  A            A DDITIONAL BASELINES

  A.1              I NFLUENCE OF THE EPISODE STEP LIMIT

                                                                                                    MountainCar
                      Acrobot-v1                CartPole-v1             MountainCar-v0     100     Continuous-v0             Pendulum-v1
              80                       500
                                                                 125                                                 200
IQM Return


                                       480                       150                        80
              90
                                       460                       175                        60                       400
             100                       440                       200
                   1 2 5 10 50100500         1 2 5 10 50100500         1 2 5 10 50100200         1 2 5 10 50100999         1 2 5 10 50100200
                      Max. #steps              Max. #steps                Max. #steps              Max. #steps               Max. #steps
                                                                         Algorithm
                                                       ppo       sac           dqn       ddpg        td3

  Figure 6: Return on classic control environments after training on synthetic environments with
  varying maximum episode lengths. We show the inner quantile mean with 95% confidence intervals
  of 20 agents, each evaluated on 50 seeds. The synthetic environments were meta-learned with
  sampled inner loop algorithms and hyperparameters. For exact values of the SCB (max. steps = 1)
  refer to Table 1.


                                                                                                 MountainCar
             Algorithm         Acrobot-v1         CartPole-v1          MountainCar-v0                                  Pendulum-v1
                                                                                                 Continuous-v0
             PPO                    -84.7              500.0                 -191.7                   60.7                   -235.2
             SAC                    -85.0              494.1                 -199.0                   85.9                   -201.8
             DQN                    -81.8              500.0                 -117.0                    –                       –
             DDPG                     –                  –                     –                      98.0                   -163.0
             TD3                      –                  –                     –                      97.8                   -162.9

  Table 1: Inner quantile mean of return on classic control environments after training 20 agents on
  an SCB (one step per episode). The SCB was meta-learned with sampled inner loop algorithms and
  hyperparameters.


  A.2              C OMPARING SYNTHETIC REWARD AND Q∗

  We show a comparison between optimal action in an SCB and optimal action according to an expert
  value learning algorithm in Fig. 7. While the experts achieve comparable performance, their value


                                                                          13
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                     MountainCar
                       Acrobot-v1          CartPole-v1       MountainCar-v0         Continuous-v0            Pendulum-v1
                       0   1    2      0.0 0.5 1.0               0    1     2           1   0     1          1    0    1
Qexpert(s, a)    6.7                 6.7                  0.06                   0.06                  6.7
 argmaxa

                2  0                   0                     0                      0                    0


                                                         x


                                                                                x
                -6.7                -6.7                 -0.06                  -0.06                 -6.7

                 6.7                 6.7                  0.06                   0.06                  6.7
rsynth(s, a)
argmaxa


                   0                   0                     0                      0                    0
                2


                                                         x


                                                                                x
                -6.7                -6.7                 -0.06                  -0.06                 -6.7
                         83
                          0
                           3


                                             83
                                              0
                                               3


                                                                   83
                                                                    0
                                                                     3


                                                                                          83
                                                                                           0
                                                                                            3


                                                                                                               83
                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                 3
                       0.8


                                           0.8


                                                                 0.8


                                                                                        0.8


                                                                                                             0.8
                                               x                      x                     x                    sin
                    -0.


                                      -0.


                                                             -0.


                                                                                    -0.


                                                                                                        -0.
                            1
            Environment                        Algorithm         Eval. env. expert return       SCB expert return
            Acrobot-v1                           DQN                −68.0 ± 10.2σ                 −73.0 ± 8.5σ
            CartPole-v1                          DQN                  500.0 ± 0.0σ                500.0 ± 0.0σ
            MountainCar-v0                       DQN                −102.7 ± 6.9σ                −102.1 ± 10.2σ
            MountainCarContinuous-v0            DDPG                   93.7 ± 0.1σ                 95.9 ± 0.8σ
            Pendulum-v1                         DDPG                −148.4 ± 88.0σ               −117.2 ± 84.5σ

  Figure 7: Top: Comparison between best action according to an evaluation evironment expert
  arg maxa Qexpert (s, a) (top row) and best action in the SCB arg maxa rsynth (s, a) (bottom row).
  The SCBs were trained with sampled hyperparameters and all algorithms in the inner loop. Experts
  were chosen to be value learning algorithms DQN and DDPG, respectively for discrete and con-
  tinuous action environments. The experts were trained until convergence of their performance, and
  evaluated on 50 seeds. Training took 250.000 steps for DQN and 500.000 steps for DDPG. The parts
  of the observations on x and y axis were chosen based on their empirical importance (see Fig. 4).
  Bottom: Return of experts whose value function is visualized.


  functions are not well interpretable in all cases. This is likely because the expert has a preferred
  set of trajectories from which he does not deviate often, such that it does not learn values of the
  states that are not visited (see Fig. 10). Additionally, the SCB can provide a more comprehensive
  support of the learned reward, since it can produce observations which are within the observation
  space but not within the manifold of possible observations. For example, Pendulum-v1 includes sine
  and cosine of an angle, which cannot simultaneously take a value of 1 in the evaluation environment,
  but can in the SCB.
  In Fig. 8 we show that the synthetic reward differs from the value function of an expert in both in
  scale and state-dependence. To this end, we visualize maxa Qexpert (s, a) of an expert policy and
  maxa rsynth (s, a). A visual inspection of maxa Qexpert (s, a) empirically confirms that it is close to
  the optimal state-value function. However, the values of the synthetic rewards are off by an order of
  magnitude, and it does not display the same relation to the state as Qexpert (s, a) does. While there
  seems to be some bias towards certain states, this bias might be arbitrary since the synthetic reward
  only has to consider the optimal action in order to induce optimal behavior.
  We directly compare the value estimate of an expert and the synthetic reward along a trajectory in
  Fig. 9. The figure demonstrates that the meta-learned synthetic reward differs significantly from
  the value function of an expert policy. For example, the synthetic reward harshly punished nops in
  MountainCar-v0, since they don’t lead to faster arrival at the goal. The expert value for the optimal
  action does not differ from non-optimal actions by much, since a nop does not lead to a state with
  much lower return. Another interesting observation can be made in MountainCarContinuous-v0,
  where the expert agent consistently chooses actions with a high absolute value, leading to a high
  control cost. This is punished by the synthetic reward, which shows a small increase whenever
  actions with a low control cost are chosen (clearly visible as spikes in the second row). The agent
  trained on the SCB takes much longer to reach the goal, but achieves an overall higher return by


                                                             14
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                         MountainCar
                                  Acrobot-v1                     CartPole-v1                MountainCar-v0              Continuous-v0             Pendulum-v1
                                    25          0                0               200            100         0                 50     100                  100 50
Qexpert(s, a)               6.7                          6.7                            0.06                      0.06                      6.7
  maxa

                       2      0                            0                               0                         0                        0


                                                                                   x


                                                                                                                x
                           -6.7                         -6.7                           -0.06                     -0.06                     -6.7
                                   5        0                        5       0                   0.25
                                                                                                    0.000.25            0.0        0.2                5          0
                            6.7                          6.7                            0.06                      0.06                      6.7
rsynth(s, a)
  maxa


                              0                            0                               0                         0                        0
                       2


                                                                                   x


                                                                                                                x
                           -6.7                         -6.7                           -0.06                     -0.06                     -6.7
                                    83
                                     0
                                      3


                                                                   83
                                                                    0
                                                                     3


                                                                                                  83
                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                    3


                                                                                                                           83
                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                             3


                                                                                                                                                    83
                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                      3
                                  0.8


                                                                 0.8


                                                                                                0.8


                                                                                                                         0.8


                                                                                                                                                  0.8
                                                                         x                            x                        x                           sin
                                -0.


                                                            -0.


                                                                                            -0.


                                                                                                                        -0.


                                                                                                                                             -0.
                                            1

  Figure 8: Comparison between maxa Qexpert (s, a) of an expert policy and maxa rsynth (s, a). For
  an expert with Q ≈ Q∗ , it holds approximately that maxa Qexpert (s, a) ≈ V ∗ (s). The expert
  visualized is the same as in Fig. 7, which also shows final performance.

                                                                                                                     MountainCar
                            Acrobot-v1                      CartPole-v1                 MountainCar-v0              Continuous-v0                Pendulum-v1
                      1                             right                         right                         right                       2
        a (action)


                      0                                                            nop                           nop                        0
                   1                                 left                          left                          left                       2
                0.95                                1.05                          0.95                          0.00                        0
reval(s, a)


                1.00                                1.00                          1.00                          0.05                       10
                1.05                                0.95                          1.05                          0.10
                   0                                                                 0                          100                         0
    Qexpert(s, a)


                                                    240
                                                                                       50                         50                       50
                      50                            220
                                                                                   100                                                     100
                      1                                                              0                           0.2                         0
                                                       0
       rsynth(s, a)


                      0                                                                                                                      2
                                                       1                                2                        0.0
                      1                                                                                                                      4
                            0          50                   0            500                0         100               0      250                0              200
                                Env. step                       Env. step         Env. step          Env. step                                        Env. step
                                                                 Trajectory generated by agent trained on
                                                                         evaluation environment                          SCB

  Figure 9: Comparison between Qexpert (s, a) and rsynth (s, a) along a trajectory of an agent trained
  on evaluation environment (expert) and SCB. The expert visualized is the same as in Fig. 7, which
  also shows final performance. The trajectories are generated on the same seed as the one visualized
  in Fig. 4. First row: Action taken in the evaluation environment. Second row: Reward obtained
  in the evaluation environment. Third row: State-action value estimate of a trained expert. Fourth
  row: Reward obtained in synthetic environment.


  using less control force. These examples clearly show several degrees of freedom in the realization
  of the synthetic reward, enabling increased training speed.


                                                                                            15
    Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                       MountainCar
                           Acrobot-v1                CartPole-v1               MountainCar-v0         Continuous-v0             Pendulum-v1


                                                                                   ht
                           1       0     1       left               right                             left nop right            2   0      2


                                                                                   p
                                                                                  t
                                                                               rig
                                                                               lef
                                                                               no
                       4                      0.75                          0.07                   0.07                     8
                       0                         0                            0                      0                     -0
          2


                                                                       x


                                                                                                x
                       4                     -0.75                      -0.07                    -0.07                     -8

                       4                      0.75                          0.07                   0.07                     8
                       0                         0                            0                      0                     -0
          2


                                                                       x


                                                                                                x
                       4                     -0.75                      -0.07                    -0.07                     -8
                           4       0 4               -0.75 0 0.75                  -1.2 -0.3
                                   1                           x                         x 0.6            -1.2 -0.3
                                                                                                                x 0.6           -1 sin
                                                                                                                                    -0    1

    Figure 10: State distributions of an expert policy in the evaluation environment (top row) and the
    initial state in the SCB (bottom row). States of the expert were recorded for 2000 environment steps,
    automatically resetting the episode when terminated. 2000 states were randomly sampled from the
    initial state distribution of the SCB. The background color represents the best action according to
    the expert (top row) or best action in the SCB (bottom row), for details see Fig. 4. For details on the
    expert see Fig. 7.



    We show the difference between the synthetic initial state distribution and the state distribution of
    an expert policy in Fig. 10. The expert policy only visits a small subset of possible states, while
    the distribution in the SCB is global and has a specific shape. We hypothesize that this distribution
    represents the states that are relevant to learning the task encoded by the evaluation environment,
    which can increase training speed and robustness. Additionally, the states sampled in the SCB might
    lie within the state space, but outside the manifold of possible states.


                                                                                                           MountainCar
                               Acrobot-v1                CartPole-v1               MountainCar-v0         Continuous-v0         Pendulum-v1
Return in eval. env.


                                                                                                      0
                       200                      400                                                                       500
                                                                             150                   2000
                                                200                                                                      1000
                       400
                                                     0                       200                   4000                  1500
                               0       20000             0         20000            0      20000           0     20000          0       20000
                                                                                    Algorithm
                                                         ppo            sac               dqn             ddpg       td3

    Figure 11: Training in an SCB where the synthetic reward has been replaced by the value function
    of an expert value learning agent. Dashed lines: IQM performance of an agent with sampled hyper-
    parameters after training on and SCB. Vertical line: training cutoff in the inner loop. For details on
    the expert see Fig. 7.


    Fig. 11 shows training curves for agents trained in and SCB where the synthetic reward has been
    replaced by the value function of an expert. In almost all cases, the agents achieve don’t solve the
    environment. This is likely because the value function does not reward the best action significantly
    more than others, since there are no catastrophic rewards in the shown environments. As long as it
    the reward for the optimal action is the highest, the synthetic reward function can select arbitrary
    rewards for the other actions, which can increase training speed. Additionally, the synthetic re-
    ward was specifically optimized to generalize to all downstream algorithms, while the expert value
    function is only generated by a single expert and might not generalize to different algorithms.


                                                                                     16
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                   CartPole-v1
                        PPO           ×                            ×          ×           ×
                        SAC                    ×                   ×                      ×
                        DQN                              ×                    ×           ×
                        PPO       462.6      482.6     450.6      467.6     469.7       460.7
                        SAC       245.3      445.1     196.1      422.8     255.8       408.6
                        DQN       498.5      494.4     500.0      498.4     500.0       498.2

                                                     Acrobot-v1
                    PPO            ×                                ×          ×             ×
                    SAC                        ×                    ×                        ×
                    DQN                                   ×                     ×            ×
                    PPO         -88.5        -112.3     -97.1      -89.2      -91.4        -86.5
                    SAC        -115.8         -91.3    -125.8      -92.9     -109.2        -95.0
                    DQN         -87.4        -102.1     -84.3      -88.4      -82.0        -82.8

                                                 MountainCar-v0
                   PPO            ×                            ×               ×             ×
                   SAC                        ×                ×                             ×
                   DQN                                ×                        ×             ×
                   PPO        -200.0        -184.9 -189.1 -172.5             -176.1        -173.6
                   SAC        -200.0        -156.3 -199.6 -167.2             -197.7        -177.8
                   DQN        -199.5        -151.2 -116.8 -144.0             -114.5        -122.1

                                            MountainCarContinuous-v0
         PPO        ×                                    ×     ×     ×                   ×          ×    ×
         SAC                  ×                          ×           ×                   ×          ×    ×
        DDPG                                ×                  ×                         ×               ×
         TD3                                      ×                  ×                            ×      ×
         PPO      30.6     -55.6          -55.5 -55.6 64.3 56.6 65.4                    65.7     64.4   62.4
         SAC      51.1      -0.6           -5.9  -4.5 61.8 56.7 56.3                    64.0     64.6   63.9
        DDPG      67.2      -0.0           -2.1  -1.0 93.3 89.3 96.5                    96.1     92.4   97.2
         TD3      81.0      -0.0           -1.0  -0.0 93.7 92.3 96.8                    97.4     97.2   97.2

                                                   Pendulum-v1
 PPO      ×                                               ×             ×           ×              ×      ×        ×
 SAC                ×                                     ×                         ×              ×      ×        ×
DDPG                               ×                                    ×                          ×               ×
 TD3                                            ×                                   ×                     ×        ×
 PPO   -346.6    -1397.5      -1023.4        -1178.0     -309.8     -378.2        -304.0       -328.4   -331.1   -299.9
 SAC   -490.8     -304.5       -861.8         -482.1     -345.0     -492.7        -432.4       -359.4   -382.2   -355.9
DDPG   -303.8     -984.7       -714.0         -162.5     -232.0     -231.5        -174.5       -184.0   -179.5   -169.6
 TD3   -259.6    -1018.4       -723.8         -162.2     -215.5     -214.9        -178.3       -185.8   -178.4   -169.3

 Table 2: Transfer of SCBs trained on a subset of RL algorithms. Top half: the × symbols in each
 column indicate if an algorithm was sampled while training the SCB. Bottom half: Final return
 after training an RL algorithm in the SCB, evaluated by training 100 agents and evaluating each on
 50 seeds.


 A.3   G ENERALIZATION ACROSS INNER LOOP ALGORITHMS

 We show generalization and transfer across RL algorithms in Table 2. Overall, we note that not all
 algorithms need to be sampled in the inner loop to generalize. In the discrete action environments,
 using SAC alone leads to successful learning by all algorithms, while continuous action environ-
 ments need only SAC and PPO. However, including all inner loop algorithms leads to a further
 performance increase, even beating the performance achieved by “overfitting” the SCB towards a
 single algorithm in almost all cases.


                                                         17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B     H YPERPARAMETERS

We manually set the outer loop hyperparameters informed by exploratory experiments, since the
experiments are very computationally expensive. The hyperparameters of the inner loop algorithms
were set arbitrarily to reasonable values.


B.1   O UTER LOOP HYPERPARAMETERS


                                        Classic Control       Pendulum       brax (*)
                    Init. SNES σ             0.05               0.05           0.05
                   Population size            128                64            256
                    num. rollouts               1                 8              1
                  num. eval. seeds             50                50             16
                  num. eval. seeds
                                                 64              64               64
                for population mean
                  multi algo. mode               all             all        sequential

Table 3: Hyperparameters for meta-training. multi algo. mode refers to the way the RL algorithms
are chosen in the inner loop. “All” means executing all available ones sequentially, and taking the
mean of their returns as the fitness. “Sequential” means using algorithm i where i = gen mod |A|.
(*) only applies to Hopper, Walker2D, Swimmer, Halfcheetah, Ant, the same parameters are used
as in the classic control environments otherwise.


                                                           num. generations
                                   Acrobot                       300
                                  CartPole                       300
                                MountainCar                     1000
                          ContinuousMountainCar                  300
                                 Pendulum                       1000
                             Inverted Pendulum                   300
                         Inverted Double Pendulum                300
                                   Reacher                        30
                                   Pusher                        100
                                   Hopper                       2000
                                 Walker2D                       2000
                                  Swimmer                       2000
                                Halfcheetah                     2000
                                     Ant                        2000

                      Table 4: Number of generations for each environment


                                                       MountainCar     brax (*)
                                 type                    linear         linear
                          init. eval. length              1000           100
                          final eval. length               200          1000
                           begin transition                200           200
                        num. transitions steps             600          1600

Table 5: Hyperparameters for evaluation length curriculi. (*) only applies to Hopper, Walker2D,
Swimmer, Halfcheetah, Ant, no curriculum is applied otherwise.


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                   all environments
                           network arch.              (32, ) MLP
                             activation                   tanh
                            latent dist.                N (0, In )
                             latent size    (dim. of eval. envs. obs. space)

                     Table 6: Hyperparameters for the synthetic environment


B.2   I NNER LOOP HYPERPARAMETERS


                                                Classic Control                        brax
          network arch.                          (64, 64) MLP                     (64, 64) MLP
            activation                     tanh (relu for Pendulum)                    tanh
           num. envs                                    5                                5
           num. steps                                 100                              100
          num. epochs                                  10                               10
        num. minibatches                               10                               10
            time steps                                104                              104
        max. grad. norm                                10                               10
                                     {0.01, 0.005, 0.001, 0.0005, 0.0001}
           learning rate                                                             0.005
                                  (without 0.01 for continuous environments)
             discount                      {1.0, 0.99, 0.95, 0.9, 0.8}                0.99
           λ for GAE                        {1.0, 0.95, 0.9, 0.8, 0.5}                0.95
            clipping ϵ                      {0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5}                  0.2
          entropy coef.                    {0.0, 0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.5}                0.01
       value function coef.                 {0.0, 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0}                  0.5

Table 7: Hyperparameters for PPO in the inner loop. Underlined values are used in runs with a fixed
configuration.


                                              Classic Control                       brax
              network arch.                    (64, 64) MLP                    (64, 64) MLP
                 activation              tanh (relu for Pendulum)                   tanh
                num. envs                              5                              1
                buffer size                         2000                            5000
               prefill buffer                       1000                            1000
                 batch size                          256                             250
                grad. steps                            2                              1
                time steps                           104                             104
               learning rate        {0.01, 0.005, 0.001, 0.0005, 0.0001}           0.005
                  discount               {1.0, 0.99, 0.95, 0.9, 0.8}                0.99
                 Polyak τ                {0.99, 0.95, 0.9, 0.7, 0.8}                0.95
           target entropy ratio            {0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 0.9}                 n.a.

Table 8: Hyperparameters for SAC in the inner loop. Underlined values are used in runs with a fixed
configuration.


                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                              Classic Control (discrete)
                      network arch.                 (64, 64) MLP
                        activation                        tanh
                       num. envs                           10
                       buffer size                       2000
                      prefill buffer                     1000
                        batch size                        100
                       grad. steps                          1
                        time steps                        104
                   target update freq.                     50
                    max. grad. norm                        10
                          ϵ start                           1
                    ϵ decay fraction                       0.5
                           ϵ end                 {0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2}
                      learning rate      {0.01, 0.005, 0.001, 0.0005, 0.0001}
                         discount             {1.0, 0.99, 0.95, 0.9, 0.8}
                     Double DQN τ                      {yes, no}

Table 9: Hyperparameters for DQN in the inner loop. Underlined values are used in runs with a
fixed configuration.


                                   Classic Control (continuous)             brax
             network arch.                (64, 64) MLP                 (64, 64) MLP
               activation           tanh (relu for Pendulum)                tanh
              num. envs                           1                           1
              buffer size                      2000                         5000
             prefill buffer                    1000                         1000
               batch size                       100                         100
              grad. steps                         1                           1
               time steps                       104                          104
            max. grad. norm                      10                          10
             learning rate     {0.01, 0.005, 0.001, 0.0005, 0.0001}        0.005
                discount            {1.0, 0.99, 0.95, 0.9, 0.8}             0.99
                Polyak τ            {0.99, 0.95, 0.9, 0.7, 0.8}             0.95
              expl. noise          {0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 0.9}            0.2

Table 10: Hyperparameters for DDPG in the inner loop. Underlined values are used in runs with a
fixed configuration.


                                               20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                    Classic Control (continuous)            brax
             network arch.                 (64, 64) MLP                (64, 64) MLP
                activation           tanh (relu for Pendulum)               tanh
                num. envs                          1                          1
                buffer size                     2000                        5000
              prefill buffer                    1000                        1000
                batch size                       100                        100
                grad. steps                        1                          1
                time steps                       104                         104
            max. grad. norm                       10                         10
              learning rate     {0.01, 0.005, 0.001, 0.0005, 0.0001}       0.005
                 discount            {1.0, 0.99, 0.95, 0.9, 0.8}            0.99
                 Polyak τ            {0.99, 0.95, 0.9, 0.7, 0.8}            0.95
               expl. noise          {0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 0.9}           0.2
               target noise         {0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 0.9}           0.2
            target noise clip       {0.1, 0.4, 0.5, 0.7, 1.0, 1.3}           0.5

Table 11: Hyperparameters for TD3 in the inner loop. Underlined values are used in runs with a
fixed configuration.


C    S OFTWARE R EQUIREMENTS & E XPERIMENT S IMULATION D ETAILS
Software. All training loops and ES are implemented in JAX (Bradbury et al., 2018). All visu-
alizations were done using Matplotlib (Hunter, 2007) and Seaborn (Waskom, 2021, BSD-3-Clause
License). Finally, the numerical analysis was supported by NumPy (Harris et al., 2020, BSD-3-
Clause License). Furthermore, we used the following libraries: Evosax: Lange (2022a), Gymnax:
Lange (2022b), Brax: Freeman et al. (2021).
Data Availability. We provide access to two open source libraries in order to easily replicate our
work:

      • synthetic-gymnax: A repository of synthetic environments characterized by neural
        networks with pre-trained weight checkpoints.
      • purerl: A set of hardware-accelerated RL algorithms (SAC, PPO, DQN, DDPG, TD3)
        that run entirely on GPU/TPU which enables fast meta-optimization evaluation.

Compute Requirements & Experiment Organization. The experiments were organized using the
MLE-Infrastructure (Lange, 2021, MIT license) training management system.
Simulations were conducted on a high-performance cluster using between 1 and 20 independent
runs (random seeds). We mainly rely on individual V100S and A100 NVIDIA GPUs.
The individual random search experiments last between 30 minutes and 48 hours, depending on
the considered environment and choice of evolutionary optimization hyperparameters. The final
evaluation of a tuned configuration, on the other hand, only requires a few minutes.
The tasks were chosen so that executing the entire benchmark only requires 2.5 days given 16 suit-
able GPUs. Furthermore, the open-data availability of the benchmark results allows researchers to
focus on their method, instead of having to spend computing resources in order to collect baseline
results.


                                               21
