Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EVERSE C HAIN : A G ENERIC -RULE FOR LLM S TO
M ASTER M ULTI -API P LANNING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         While enabling large language models to implement function calling (known as
         APIs) can greatly enhance the performance of LLMs, function calling is still a
         challenging task due to the complicated relations between different APIs, espe-
         cially in a context-learning setting without fine-tuning. This paper proposes a
         simple yet controllable target-driven approach called Reverse Chain to empower
         LLMs with capabilities to use external APIs with only prompts. Given that most
         open-source LLMs have limited tool-use or tool-plan capabilities, LLMs in Re-
         verse Chain are only employed to implement simple tasks, e.g., API selection and
         argument completion, and a generic rule is employed to implement a controllable
         multiple functions calling. In this generic rule, after selecting a final API to han-
         dle a given task via LLMs, we first ask LLMs to fill the required arguments from
         user query and context. Some missing arguments could be further completed by
         letting LLMs select another API based on API description before asking user.
         This process continues until a given task is completed. Extensive numerical ex-
         periments indicate an impressive capability of Reverse Chain on implementing
         multiple function calling. Interestingly enough, the experiments also reveal that
         tool-use capabilities of the existing LLMs, e.g., ChatGPT, can be greatly improved
         via Reverse Chain.



1   I NTRODUCTION

Recently, there has been an impressive wave in the progress made in Large Language Models
(LLMs), allowing them to demonstrate excellent performance in a variety of tasks, such as pow-
erful conversation, in-context learning, and code generation (Chowdhery et al., 2022; Brown et al.,
2020; Scao et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022a). However, LLMs still face difficulties with some special-
ized tasks because they are fundamentally limited by the information they stored and learned. The
learned information can become outdated and may not be suitable for all applications. A simple
way to overcome these limitations is to integrate LLMs with external tools (known as APIs) so that
LLMs can access up-to-date knowledge, run computations or use other external services. In this
scenario, LLMs can be regarded as a controller which not only needs to understand user intent but
more importantly, they are required to be able to select the appropriate tools and orchestrating them
to accomplish the given task.
Although LLMs demonstrate excellent language comprehension and reasoning abilities, unfortu-
nately they still lack the sophistication to fully understand human instructions and effectively im-
plement function calling. In order to augment the ability of LLMs on function calling, the existing
solutions can be categorized into two main approaches: fine-tuning and in-context learning. In the
fine-tuning approach, instruction tuning datasets for function calling are needed which often requires
extensive human annotations or demonstrations. Additionally, the fine-tuned LLMs is likely to be
restricted to a predefined external tools and might be hard to adapt to the newly registered APIs
Liang et al. (2023); Qin et al. (2023b); Li et al. (2023); Schick et al. (2023). Unlike the expensive
fine-tuning approach, in-context learning paradigm only needs to provide the instructions with a few
shots of demonstrations, which allows developers easily to register new APIs to the LLM platform.
In this work, we mainly focus on augmenting the existing capabilities of LLMs on function calling
in an in-context learning setting.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Task Type                           Example                                  API planning
       Single-tool             What’s the weather in New York ?             getWearther(city=’New York’)
                               What’s the weather in New York?              getWearther(city=’New York’)
 Independent multi-tool
                                  When’s my next meeting?                showCalendar(event=’next meeting’)
                                I have headache, can you help                makeAppointment ( hospital=
 Composition multi-tool
                                  me make an appointment?                 getHospital(symptom=’headache’))

   Table 1: Different types of API planning based on the number of tools and tool dependency.


          (a) Planning   (b) Reverse Chain           (c) ReACT


                              Query


             API               API            API                            API   API Call in Path

                                                                                   Fail to Enter the Next Step


             API               API           API             API                   Execution Path

                                                                                   Reverse Chain of Thought

                                                                                   Potential Path
              API              API           API            API    API


                               Goal                Wrong Goal



            Fail              Success                Fail


Figure 1: A comparison of our Reverse Chain with one-step function Planning and ReAct for multi-
API planning.


The emergence of multiple external APIs adds complexity to the task of function calling for LLMs,
especially for in-context learning. Different from the existing work (Li et al., 2023; Qin et al.,
2023b; Tang et al., 2023) which mainly focuses on single-tool tasks or independent multi-tool tasks
as shown in Table 1, this paper targets at empowering LLMs to be able to handle a much more
complicated type of tasks (called composition task) where multiple possibly dependent APIs are
needed. The single-tool task and independent multi-tool tasks can be regarded as special cases of
composition multi-tool task, thus the proposed approach has the ability to handle them as well with
minor change.
To solve composition multi-tool task, one straightforward solution is to let LLMs directly output a
multi-function planning in one step as shown in Figure 1. Apparently, the accuracy of the one-step
planning algorithm tends to be low, particularly in complex scenarios that involve ambiguity (Shen
et al., 2023). In order to alleviate these issues, CoT (Chain of Thought) (Wei et al., 2022b) proposes
a step-by-step intermediate reasoning process that involves decomposing tasks into individual and
simpler sub-tasks. This decomposition enhances the reasoning abilities, ultimately leading to a better
accuracy to some extent. In addition to taking advantage of reasoning, a more advanced approach
called ReAct(Yao et al., 2022) also employs actions to gather additional information to improve
reasoning performance. However, as shown in Figure 1, in a multi-function calling scenario, ReAct
might not necessarily follow the right reasoning path to achieve goal. Our experiments indicate
hard-to-control issues with the CoT and ReAct approaches: each step of these methods exhibit
a high level of unpredictability and uncertainty, where errors might propagate due to a wrong
thought or action, leading to an incorrect solution path.
In order to alleviate these issues, we propose a controllable yet general approach called Reverse
Chain. Different from CoT which requires LLMs to have certain level of reasoning abilities, the
proposed Reverse Chain is a combination of a generic rule and LLMs where LLMs are employed to
implement API selection and argument completion based on API description and a generic rule is to


                                                       2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


decompose multi-API planning into API selection and argument completion such that the strengths
and capabilities of LLMs can be fully leveraged without expecting LLMs to have strong reason-
ing abilities. Specifically, Reverse Chain performs a multi-API planning task in a reverse manner:
Starting from selecting the final API of a given task, each preceding step is inferred backward. Ad-
ditional rule-based constraints are employed to limit the order of planning: first API selection, then
argument completion from query and context, and finally backward inference to figure out which
API’s output can properly complete the missing arguments before asking user that information. This
process continues until a given task is completed. In summary, the contributions of this paper are

      1. A target-driven approach called Reverse Chain is proposed to enhance the API planning
         capability of LLMs in an in-context learning setting. This approach utilizes step-by-step
         problem-solving solution, making it manageable for LLM to handle. Additionally, by em-
         ploying a generic rule to limit the specific order of function planning, the process becomes
         more controllable, which is suitable to deploy in production.
      2. Extensive experiments are conducted to demonstrate the superiority of the Reverse Chain
         approach over the state-of-the-art in-context learning approaches, e.g., CoT and ReAct.
         Furthermore, we have also shown the effectiveness of applying the Reverse Chain technique
         to empower the ability of LLMs on multi-API calling.

2     O UR MULTI-API PLANNING A PPROACH
In order to address the limitations of the CoT and ReAct method, here we introduce a controllable
yet general approach called Reverse Chain. Different from CoT and ReAct, a step-by-step problem-
solving path in Reverse Chain is predefined using a generic rule. However, this generic rule is not
restricted with a certain type of tasks. Interestingly Reverse Chain performs a task decomposition
in a reverse manner: Starting from selecting the final API for a given task, following by argument
completion, then selecting a proper API again to complete the missing argument. This process is
repeated until all arguments in the involved APIs are completed. Note that driven by the target, each
preceding step in Reverse Chain is inferred backward, which makes it less prone to deviate from the
intend path, unlike ReAct shown in Figure 1. Given conversation context, user query and a set of
APIs, the generic rule on specifying the multi-function planning order in Reverse Chain is outlined
as follows:

      1. The first step is to employ LLMs to select a proper API which can directly handle a task of
         interest. This step is referred to as API Selection.
      2. After finding the required arguments of the API, the second step is to utilize LLMs to
         implement argument completion. This step is referred to as Argument Completion.

Note that if LLMs could not complete all the required arguments at Step 2, instead of directly
asking user for the value of the missing argument, the generic rule will first pre-select some APIs
with whose output matches the type of the required arguments and then redefine selecting a proper
API to complete the missing argument as the current task of interest. The generic rule let LLMs go
back to Step 1 to continue the process. It is worth mentioning that Step 1 and Step 2 are executed
iteratively until the termination condition is met, e.g., none of APIs could be selected to complete
the missing arguments or all of the required arguments are completed. For the first case, the generic
rule will take an extra step to ask user that missing information directly such that all involved APIs
are ready to be executed. In the following we will use a specific example to introduce the workflow
of Reverse Chain to better interpret its concept.

2.1   W ORKFLOW OF R EVERSE C HAIN

Assume our current task is to satisfy user query “Please help Jack book a meeting room from 9:00am
to 10:00am.” , and we have three APIs in our API store with their descriptions, arguments, and output
shown in Table 2. Note that the ground truth API planning is shown as follows:
       BookRoom(person ID = Name2ID(person name=‘Jack’),
                 room ID = RecommendRoom(start time=‘9am’, end time=‘10am’),
                start time = ‘9am’, end time=‘10am’)


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The workflow of Reverse Chain is provided as follows:

                API                           Description                        Arguments          Output
              Name2ID                 Convert user name to user ID               person name       person ID
                                                                                  start time
                                          Recommend the ID of
         RecommendRoom                                                                              room ID
                                        an available meeting room
                                                                                   end time
                                                                                   person ID
                                                                                    room ID
             BookRoom                      Book a meeting room                                     room Info
                                                                                   start time
                                                                                   end time

Table 2: The definition of APIs to handle a given user query “Please help Jack book a meeting room
from 9am to 10am”.


                            Query: Please help Jack book a meeting room for 9am-10am


                                      Select API         API: BookRoom


                         person_ID                    room_ID               start_time       end_time
       Complete          ⍉                             ⍉                    Value: 9am          Value: 10am
       Argument                  1213                       005

                                                        API :
                       API :Name2ID
                                                   RecommendRoom

                                                                                           Reverse Chain of Thought

                                                                                           Forward Execution

                       person_name          start_time           end_time                  Filled Argument
       Complete
       Argument
                        Value: Jack         Value: 9am            Value: 10am        ⍉     Unfilled Argument


                  Figure 2: Workflow of Reverse Chain to satisfy a specific user query

     1. API Selection. Firstly, LLM identifies the ultimate API based on conversation context, user
        query and API description, and then select a matching API. In this example, LLM select an
        API named BookRoom to match “booking a meeting room”. The prompt used in this step
        is illustrated in Figure 3.(a).
     2. Argument Completion. Before implementing argument completion, the required argu-
        ments of the API are identified through engineering guidance. In this example, BookRoom
        has four required arguments, that is, person ID, room ID, start time, and end time. Based
        on the query and the description of the candidate APIs, LLMs is used to complete these
        four arguments at the current step. There are three possible outcomes:
        Case 1. The argument value extracted directly from the context and user query.
        Case 2. Another API name with whose output could complete the missing argument, indi-
        cating LLMs could not obtain the argument value directly. Note that the arguments of this
        new API has to been completed before function calling execution.
        Case 3. None, representing the inability to obtain the argument value from context, user
        query and the possible API output. In this case, the generic rule will request the argument
        value directly from the user.


                                                             4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            In this example, plugging in Reverse Chain with ChatGPT leads to the following results:
                          Extract the argument person ID − − − − > API: Name2ID.
                          Extract the argument room ID − − − − > API: RecommendRoom.
                          Extract the argument start time − − − − > Value: 9:00am.
                          Extract the argument end time − − − − > Value: 10:00am.
           Thus, the completed arguments are start time = “9:00am” and end time = “10:00am”, while
           the required arguments for person ID and room ID remain unfilled since the selected APIs
           Name2ID and RecommendRoom still have missing arguments.
           The specific prompt used in this step is illustrated in Figure 3.(b). It is worth noting that
           some prompt optimizations work might be needed at this step, and we further investigate
           different argument completion approaches in the ablation study of Section 4.3.
        3. Argument completion for internal selected APIs Although LLMs have figured out the right
           internal APIs to complete missing arguments at Step 2, in order to execute these APIs, the
           required arguments of these internal APIs still needs to be completed at the current step.
           Specifically, the process starts with completing argument person ID and then proceeds to
           argument room ID where each argument is completed in a similar way as introduced at
           Step 2. The generic rule first queries the required argument of API Name2ID, which is
           person ID, and then let LLMs extract possible values to complete this argument:
                                 Extract the argument person name − − − − > Value: Jack.
           Note that now all required arguments of Name2ID are filled successfully, and the API
           Name2ID is ready to be executed. As a result, the arguments of person ID in API Book-
           Room is filled successfully. Since the values of the required arguments of Recommend-
           Room are already found at Step 2, RecommendRoom is now ready to be executed as well.
           As a result, the arguments of room ID in API BookRoom is filled successfully.
        4. Multi-API Execution. All of the required arguments for the related APIs BookRoom,
           RecommendRoom and person ID have been completed. Execution can be started by a
           bot engine.

                     (a) API Selection                                        (b) Argument Completion

    We have N APIs:                                       You are an argument extractor. For each argument, you need to
    =====                                                 determine whether you can extract the value from user input
    {"name": BookRoom, "description": Book a meeting      directly or you need to use an API to get the value. The output
    room}                                                 should be in Json format, key is the argument, and value is the
    ......                                                value of argument or the API name, return None if you cannot get
    {"name": Weather, "description": Query weather}       value or API name.
    =====                                                 The Arguments to be extracted are:
    If someone is saying: "Please help Jack book a        person_ID: {"description": person's employee ID, "type": Integer}
    meeting room for 9:00-10:00"                          room_ID: {"description": person's employee ID, "type": Integer}
    Which final API should we use for this instruction?   start_time: {"description": start time of meeting, "type": Time}
    Only return API code. Only return one word!           end_time: {"description": end time of meeting, "type": Time}

                                                          The API you can use includes:
                                                          {"name": RecommendRoom, "description": Recommend the ID of
                                                          an available meeting room}
                                                          ......
                                                          Now, Let's start.
                                                          =>
                                                          If someone is saying: "Please help Jack book a meeting room for
                                                          9am-10am"
                                                          Arguments :



Figure 3: The details of prompts used in Reverse Chain for API Selection and Argument Completion.


3     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, extensive experiments are conducted to investigate the performance of Reverse Chain.
We start with generating an evaluation dataset, benchmarking different LLM methods on function


                                                          5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


calling and defining the evaluation metrics. In Section3.1, to benchmark Reverse Chain, we com-
pare its API planning capabilities with the current state-of-the-art in-context learning solutions. In
Section3.2, a series of ablation experiments are conducted to illustrate the rationale behind Reverse
Chain with further analysis on the effectiveness of Reverse Chain provided in Section 3.3.
Dataset The dataset construction starts from selecting several APIs from the public API repository,
e.g., API-Bank Li et al. (2023). Subsequently, we manually construct a set of queries associated
with those selected APIs, along with their corresponding ground truth API plannings. Then, these
manually constructed samples were provided as in-context examples for GPT-4 to generate more
complicated new labeled samples. Furthermore, the generated samples by GPT-4 were manually
verified. The prompt for dataset construction is in Appendix A.1. Note that the final dataset consists
of 126 APIs and 492 labeled samples, encompassing various domain types.
In the dataset, each API is represented as a JSON object with the following fields: {name, de-
scription, arguments, output, format}. Each argument contains information about “description” and
“type”. One example of APIs is provided in the Appendix A.2.
According to the nesting level of API, samples in the generated dataset are categorized into three
levels: level-1, which has two levels of API nesting, 352 in total; level-2, which has three levels of
API nesting, 90 in total; level-3, which has four levels of API nesting, 43 in total. There are still
seven samples with only one API.
Baseline To benchmark Reverse Chain, we compare its performance with the other five in-context
learning approaches, namely Zero-Shot, Few-Shot, Zero-Shot-CoT, Few-Shot-CoT, and ReAct
with ChatGPT being a base LLM model. In all six approaches, we incorporate API information
into the prompt and rely solely on the in-context learning capability of the LLM for API planning.
In the Zero-Shot approach, the prompt include all the information from the API candidate set and
the user query. In addition to that, we add examples to the prompt in the Few-Shot approach. In
comparison to zero-shot, the Zero-Shot-CoT approach includes a ”think step by step” instruction
in the prompt, guiding the LLM to decompose the problem into intermediate steps. Similarly, the
Few-Shot-CoT approach augmented the few-shot approach by including explanations of the step-
by-step execution of APIs in the provided examples. Lastly, we employ the langchain framework to
implement the ReAct approach, which utilizes a (thought, action, observation) format template to
guide the LLM in accomplishing tasks via reasoning and action. This framework enables the LLM
to generate responses by following a logical sequence of thinking, taking action, and observing the
results.
The examples of prompt for zero-shot and few-shot are presented in Appendix A.3. All experiments
are conducted on the state-of-the-art Large language model GPT-3.5-turbo with the gpt-3.5-turbo-
0301 checkpoint. The temperature is set to 0.1.
Metrics We use accuracy as a metric to evaluate API planning, which consists of two aspects: API
name and API arguments. The argument consists of direct value filling or another API calling.
In Reverse Chain, we ensure that the output follows the aforementioned format. Consequently,
character matching is employed to automatically compare the predictions with the corresponding
label in terms of API name and arguments. A prediction is correct only if it matches exactly the
corresponding label. Nevertheless, in other methods except Reverse Chain, the predictions may not
strictly adhere to the aforementioned format, for example, they may contain thoughts,action or other
details. where human evaluation is utilized to provide further assessment.

3.1   M AIN R ESULTS

Throughtout the experiments, the given API candidates set only includes the needed APIs for a given
task since the focus of this paper is primarily on evaluating the capability of LLMs on generating
a proper API calling. The accuracy of various in-context learning methods is provided in Table 3.
The results in Table 3 indicate that LLM exhibits limited ability on API planning in a Zero-Shot
setting, with an accuracy around 61.0%. It is not surprising that the use of Few-Shot methods
can enhance performance to some extent, increasing the accuracy to 88.6% compared to Zero-
Shot. Furthermore, the incorporation of CoT has shown to be able to improve the performance
of API planning with accuracy being 82.5% in Zero-Shot-CoT, highlighting the effectiveness of
decomposing complex tasks into simple subtasks in API planning. In contrast, the Reverse Chain


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          Method         level 1        level 2   level 3   Overall
                         Zero-Shot        66.8           51.1      28.0      61.0
                         Few-Shot         93.2           75.6      76.7      88.6
                       Zero-Shot-CoT      87.8           66.7      69.8      82.5
                       Few-Shot-CoT       93.2           72.2      48.8      85.1
                           ReAct          44.2           24.8      2.58      38.9
                       Reverse Chain      96.9           92.2      83.7      94.9

Table 3: Evaluation results on various in-context learning methods. We can observe that the pro-
posed Reverse Chain outperforms all other approaches. T represents the temperature of GPT-3.5.


achieves the best performance. This makes sense since the proposed Reverse Chain approach not
only decomposes a complicated multi-API calling problem into two types of simple tasks to let
LLMs handle but also provides a target-driven nature to mitigate uncertainty. Notably, even in
a zero-shot setting, Reverse Chain surpasses the performance of Few-Shot-CoT and Few-Shot.
Although the ReAct method adopts reasoning and action in a step-by-step way, it relies only on
the preceding observations without a global perspective, resulting in a relatively lower accuracy for
multi-API planning.
Additionally, Table 3 presents the results at different levels of API planning (higher level means
more difficult to planning). In Table 3, it is expected that as API planning becomes more challeng-
ing, the error rate of Reverse Chain increases. However, in more difficult scenarios, the Reverse
Chain approach shows a more significant improvement (larger gap) compared to other methods,
highlighting its crucial role in addressing complex multi-API calling tasks.

3.2     A BLATION S TUDY

In this section, we mainly focus on exploring the impact of creativity of LLMs and different argu-
ment completion order on the performance of Reverse Chain.

3.2.1    CREATIVITY AND IMAGINATION OF LLM S ON R EVERSE C HAIN

We first investigate the impact of LLM’s temperature on Reverse Chain. Temperature controls the
randomness of the LLM’s output. A lower temperature results in more focused and deterministic
responses from LLM, while a higher temperature generates more diverse and creative answers. Table
4 shows that Reverse Chain performs better at lower temperatures as we require it to make rational
and accurate decisions, whereas the accuracy decreases when it seeking more creative responses.

                          Method          level 1       level 2   level 3   Overall
                      Temperature=0.1      96.9          92.2      83.7      94.9
                      Temperature=0.5      93.2          90.0      76.7      91.3
                       Temperature=1       84.1          74.4      76.7      81.9

  Table 4: The impact of different temperatures of LLMs on the performance of Reverse Chain.


3.2.2    A RGUMENT C OMPLETION O PTIMIZATION

              Reverse Chain    Reverse Chain one-by-one           Reverse Chain three-step
                  94.9                   72.2                              46.9

          Table 5: Ablation study for the design of Argument Completion in Reverse Chain.

As presented in Table 5, a series of ablation studies are performed to examine various optimizations
during the development of the Reverse Chain Algorithm. As described in Section 2, the Reverse
Chain approach comprises two steps: API Selection and Argument Completion. The optimizations
discussed in this section primarily concentrate on enhancing the Argument Completion step.


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Reverse Chain one-by-one In the current Reverse Chain approach, LLM returns extraction re-
sults of all arguments at once, while an alternative approach is to have the LLM process one ar-
gument completion at a time. This parallized extraction of all arguments is referred to as Reverse
Chain one-by-one. According to the results shown in Table 5, Reverse Chain achieves an accuracy
of 94.9%, outperforming Reverse Chain one-by-one, which only achieves an accuracy of 72.2%.
This difference in performance can be attributed to the fact that, unlike Reverse Chain one-by-one,
LLM in Reverse Chain has access to all information about unfilled arguments during the argument
completion process. This access to comprehensive information allows for a more accurate filling of
arguments. This can be illustrated through the following example, which presented in Table 6:
User query is “help me book a flight from London to Los Angeles”, and the API FlightBooking
requires two arguments to be filled: departure point and destination. In Reverse Chain one-by-one,
both arguments are completed with value ’London’, since the LLM tend to interpret the location
information in the query as the destination. However, in Reverse Chain, the LLM is aware that there
exists two arguments departure point and destination, so it will differentiate the meaning of the two
locations in the query.

                                             departure point        destination
               Reverse Chain one-by-one         London          London (incorrect)
                    Reverse Chain               London             Los Angeles

               Table 6: Examples of Reverse Chain one-by-one and Reverse Chain

Furthermore, in addition to its superior performance, Reverse Chain is also more efficient in terms
of time and computational resources since it only requires one interaction with the LLM.

Reverse Chain three-step In the current Reverse Chain scheme, both query and API candidate
sets are provided to the LLM for Argument Completion. The LLM can either extract values directly
from the query or select a suitable API. However, in the Reverse Chain three-step setting, argument
completion is split into two steps: 1. Only the query is given for value extraction by the LLM; 2. If
the LLM returns ”None”, it proceeds to the API selection stage, where the LLM chooses from the
API candidate set. However, this method only achieved a 46.9% accuracy rate. The reason behind
this is the lack of API information in the value extraction step, which often results in forcefully
extracting incorrect argument values even with low certainty. By incorporating API information,
the LLM can make an informed decision between utilizing the APIs or forcefully extracting the
argument value, resulting in significantly improved accuracy. There is an example:
User query is “help Jack book a meeting room”, and one of arguments of the API BookRoom is
person ID. In Reverse Chain three-step setting, LLM identifies ‘Jack’ as the value of person ID,
since person id is a confusing concept, the answer ‘Jack’ is not surprising. However, in Reverse
Chain, when LLM recognizes a more reliable option and discovers that the argument person ID can
be obtained using the API PersonName2ID, it disregards the extracted value ‘Jack’ directly.

3.3   W HY R EVERSE C HAIN WORKS ?

                    Wrong Final Tool     Wrong Argument API        Wrong Argument Value        Others
   Zero-Shot              20                    138                         25                   9
   Few-Shot               17                     19                         16                   4
 Zero-Shot-CoT            39                     29                         10                   8
 Few-Shot-CoT             29                     29                          9                   6
     ReAct                84                    139                         18                  59
 Reverse Chain            14                      3                          8                   0

                            Table 7: Error cause statistics all methods.

In this section, we analyze common errors in API planning individually and explain how Reverse
Chain effectively addresses them for optimal outcomes. We manually go through and count the
mistakes in API planning, which are categorized into three main types. The results are presented in
Table 7.


                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The first type of mistake is called Wrong Final Tool. This occurs when the answer lacks the final
API, resulting in termination at a wrong API and the inability to complete the instruction. As shown
in Table 7, this is common in all comparison methods, as they all involve planning from scratch,
which increases the likelihood of deviating from the final goal. ReAct, in particular, is more prone
to this error due to its thought-action-observation approach that lacks global planning. In contrast,
Reverse Chain reduces this error by starting from the final goal in a reverse manner, errors only
occur when the query’s final intention is unclear.
The second mistake is Wrong Argument API, which occurs when the ground truth argument
is the output of another API, but the predicted result does not use the API, instead fills in
an incorrect value that does not meet the requirements. For example, if the argument is per-
son ID=PersonName2ID(name=’Jack’), but the prediction is person ID=’Jack’. This type of error
occurs due to potential errors in the intermediate steps during planning, thought, and action. How-
ever, in the argument completion phase of the Reverse Chain, we can avoid forcefully extracting an
incorrect value for the argument by using the optimization approach in Section 3.2.2, i.e., the LLM
can choose whether to use the API or extract the argument value.
The third type of error is the Wrong Argument Value, which refers to incorrect extracted values for
the argument. Specific cases and optimization proposals for Reverse Chain are discussed in Section
3.2.2.

4    R ELATED W ORK
Tool Learning The discussion of tool usage in LLMs has grown significantly, with models like
Toolformer leading the way (Schick et al., 2023; Lazaridou et al., 2022; Nakano et al., 2021). Current
approaches can be divided into two categories. The first category focuses on enhancing the tool-
specific capabilities of compact language models through fine-tuning with specialized datasets (Patil
et al., 2023; Qin et al., 2023b; Schick et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2023; Parisi et al., 2022; Qin et al.,
2023a). The second category leverages the capabilities of LLMs to interact with various tools,
ranging from highly specialized ones like code interpreters (Gao et al., 2023) and AI models Shen
et al. (2023) to more versatile tool sets (Li et al., 2023; Liang et al., 2023). Generally, the fine-tuning
method produces better results than the prompting method, however, there is still significant room
for improvement in the prompting method for API planning. This work is proposed to enhance the
API planning capability of prompting methods.
Prompting LLMs Prompting facilitates LLMs to decompose high-level tasks into sub-tasks. There
are several methods to enhance prompting capabilities, such as CoT (Wei et al., 2022b) for decom-
posing high-level tasks, ReAct (Yao et al., 2022) for integrating reasoning and acting, and DFSDT
(Qin et al., 2023b) for selecting the most promising reasoning path. All of these methods start
planning or executing from scratch to the final goal, which results in high unpredictability and un-
certainty. Therefore, this paper proposes a new Reverse Chain prompting approach for performing
API planning, which is controllable yet feneral approcah.

5    CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Traditional fine-tuning LLMs with tool demonstration data can be costly and hard to generalize to
new registered APIs. In this paper we have proposed a target-driven approach called Reverse Chain
to empower LLMs with capabilities to use external APIs in an in-context learning setting. In Reverse
Chain, a generic rule was employed to decompose a complicated multi-function calling problem
into two types of simple tasks for LLMs, that is API selection and argument completion. Extensive
experiments have shown that Reverse Chain could efficiently improve the tool-use capabilities of
the existing LLMs, e.g., ChatGPT. Moreover, combination of a generic rule with LLMs enabled
reverse-chain to attain a better performance compared to CoT and ReAct. Exploring reverse-chain
with multiple different reasoning paths seems to be an interesting direction for future work.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.

Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.

Luyu Gao, Aman Madaan, Shuyan Zhou, Uri Alon, Pengfei Liu, Yiming Yang, Jamie Callan, and
  Graham Neubig. Pal: Program-aided language models. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 10764–10799. PMLR, 2023.

Angeliki Lazaridou, Elena Gribovskaya, Wojciech Stokowiec, and Nikolai Grigorev. Internet-
  augmented language models through few-shot prompting for open-domain question answering.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.05115, 2022.

Minghao Li, Feifan Song, Bowen Yu, Haiyang Yu, Zhoujun Li, Fei Huang, and Yongbin Li. Api-
 bank: A benchmark for tool-augmented llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.08244, 2023.

Yaobo Liang, Chenfei Wu, Ting Song, Wenshan Wu, Yan Xia, Yu Liu, Yang Ou, Shuai Lu, Lei Ji,
  Shaoguang Mao, et al. Taskmatrix. ai: Completing tasks by connecting foundation models with
  millions of apis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.16434, 2023.

Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christo-
  pher Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, et al. Webgpt: Browser-assisted
  question-answering with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09332, 2021.

Aaron Parisi, Yao Zhao, and Noah Fiedel. Talm: Tool augmented language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2205.12255, 2022.

Shishir G Patil, Tianjun Zhang, Xin Wang, and Joseph E Gonzalez. Gorilla: Large language model
  connected with massive apis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15334, 2023.

Yujia Qin, Shengding Hu, Yankai Lin, Weize Chen, Ning Ding, Ganqu Cui, Zheni Zeng, Yufei
  Huang, Chaojun Xiao, Chi Han, et al. Tool learning with foundation models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.08354, 2023a.

Yujia Qin, Shihao Liang, Yining Ye, Kunlun Zhu, Lan Yan, Yaxi Lu, Yankai Lin, Xin Cong, Xiangru
  Tang, Bill Qian, et al. Toolllm: Facilitating large language models to master 16000+ real-world
  apis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.16789, 2023b.

Teven Le Scao, Angela Fan, Christopher Akiki, Ellie Pavlick, Suzana Ilić, Daniel Hesslow, Roman
  Castagné, Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, François Yvon, Matthias Gallé, et al. Bloom: A 176b-
  parameter open-access multilingual language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.05100, 2022.

Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessı̀, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Luke Zettlemoyer,
  Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to
  use tools. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04761, 2023.

Yongliang Shen, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Dongsheng Li, Weiming Lu, and Yueting Zhuang.
  Hugginggpt: Solving ai tasks with chatgpt and its friends in huggingface. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2303.17580, 2023.

Qiaoyu Tang, Ziliang Deng, Hongyu Lin, Xianpei Han, Qiao Liang, and Le Sun. Toolalpaca:
  Generalized tool learning for language models with 3000 simulated cases. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.05301, 2023.

Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yo-
  gatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, et al. Emergent abilities of large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07682, 2022a.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022b.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629,
  2022.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A      A PPENDIX
A.1     P ROMPT FOR DATASET CONSTRUCTION

                                          Dataset Construction Prompt
    Your task is to first generate multiple APIs with their descriptions, and then generate a pair of user query and the
    corresponding system response only using the predefined APIs in a nested manner, which means the output of one
    API is the input of another API. Note that for each user query, system response had better employ at least four APIs.
    Here is an example:
    Example:
    "APIs": [
            {
               "name": "GetWeatherForecast",
               "Description": "This API returns the weather forecast of a specified city on a specific date.",
               "input_params": {
                  "city": {
                     "description": "the name of the city",
                     "type": "String"
                  },
                  "date": {
                     "description": "the specific date",
                     "type": "Date"
                  }
               },
               "output_params": {
                  "weather report": {
                     "description": "the weather forecast",
                     "type": "String"
                  }
               },
               "format": "GetWeatherForecast(city, date) -> weather report"
            },
            {
               "name": "RecommendOutfit",
               "Description": "This API recommends an outfit based on the weather conditions.",
               "input_params": {
                  "weather": {
                     "description": "the weather condition",
                     "type": "String"
                  }
               },
               "output_params": {
                  "outfit details": {
                     "description": "the recommended outfit",
                     "type": "String"
                  }
               },
               "format": "RecommendOutfit(weather) -> outfit details"
            }
         ],

    "Query": "What should I wear in London on July 5th?",
    "System response":"RecommendOutfit(weather=GetWeatherForecast(city='London', date='July 5th'))"

    Given above example, please assume you are a professional assistant who generate multiple reasonable APIs with
    their descriptions (not limited to above mentioned ones), User query and system response using at least four APIs in a
    nested manner. Let's take a deep breadth and start generating APIs with their descriptions, user query and the
    corresponding system response using APIs in a nested manner, please note that the format is the same as the example.


A.2     API FORMAT

{
        ” name ” : ” PersonName2ID ” ,


                                                             12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        ” D e s c r i p t i o n ” : ” T h i s API i s t o c o n v e r t u s e r name t o u s e r ID . ” ,
        ” input params ”: {
                ” person name ” : {
                       ” d e s c r i p t i o n ” : ” t h e name o f t h e p e r s o n ” ,
                       ” type ”: ” String ”
                }
        },
        ” output params ”: {
                ” person ID ”: {
                       ” d e s c r i p t i o n ” : ” t h e ID o f t h e p e r s o n ” ,
                       ” type ”: ” Integer ”
                }
        },
        ” f o r m a t ” : ” PersonName2ID ( p e r s o n n a m e ) −> p e r s o n I D ”
}


A.3     P ROMPTS FOR BASELINE METHOD


                                                 Zero-Shot Prompt
    We have the following functions. Please return function calling according to user instruction with the following
    format.
    APIs: {api info}
    user instruction: {user instruction}
    please generate the function calling:


                                                 Few-Shot Prompt
    We have a list of APIs. Please return function calling according to user instruction.

    Here is an example :

    APIs:
    {"Name": "MakeAppointment", "Description": "This API is to make an appointment.", "input_params":
    {"hospital_name": {"description": "hospital name", "type": "String"}, "department_name": {"description":
    "department name", "type": "String"}}, "output_params": {"appointment_status": {"description": "the status of
    the appointment", "type": "String"}}, "format": "MakeAppointment(hospital_name, department_name) ->
    appointment status"}
    {"Name": "GetDepartment", "Description": "This API is to find the corresponding department given user
    symptom.", "input_params": {"symptom": {"description": "patient's symptom", "type": "String"}},
    "output_params": {"department_name": {"description": "department name", "type": "String"}}, "format":
    "GetDepartment(symptom) -> department_name"}

    user instruction: I'm in zheyi hospital, I have a stomachache and want to make an appointment to see a doctor.
    function calling: MakeAppointment (hospital_name='zheyi', department_name= GetDepartment (symptom =
    'stomachache')) "

    Given above example, Please generate function calling according to user instruction and the given apis.
    APIs: {api info}
    user instruction: {user instruction}
    please generate the function calling,the format must be the same as example:


                                                             13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                              Zero-Shot-CoT Prompt
  We have the following functions. Please return function calling according to user instruction with the following
  format.
  APIs: {api info}
  user instruction: {user instruction}
  please generate the function calling, let's think step by step:


                                              Few-Shot-CoT Prompt
  We have a list of APIs. Please return function calling according to user instruction.

  Here is an example :

  APIs:
  {"Name": "MakeAppointment", "Description": "This API is to make an appointment.", "input_params":
  {"hospital_name": {"description": "hospital name", "type": "String"}, "department_name": {"description":
  "department name", "type": "String"}}, "output_params": {"appointment_status": {"description": "the status of
  the appointment", "type": "String"}}, "format": "MakeAppointment(hospital_name, department_name) ->
  appointment status"}
  {"Name": "GetDepartment", "Description": "This API is to find the corresponding department given user
  symptom.", "input_params": {"symptom": {"description": "patient's symptom", "type": "String"}},
  "output_params": {"department_name": {"description": "department name", "type": "String"}}, "format":
  "GetDepartment(symptom) -> department_name"}

  user instruction: I'm in zheyi hospital, I have a stomachache and want to make an appointment to see a doctor.
  thought:
    1. you choose the API named 'GetDepartment', the value for reqiured parameter 'symptom' is 'stomachache',
  then you will get the output parameter department_name.
    2. then you get hospital_name='zheyi'.
    3. Finally, you choose the API named 'MakeAppointment'.

  so the function calling:
  MakeAppointment (hospital_name='zheyi', department_name= GetDepartment (symptom = 'stomachache')) "

  Given above example, Please generate function calling according to user instruction and the given apis.
  APIs: {api info}
  user instruction: {user instruction}
  please generate the function calling,the format must be the same as example:


                                                           14
