Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F EDERATED CONTRASTIVE GF LOW N ETS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                              A BSTRACT
         Generative flow networks (GFlowNets) are powerful samplers for distributions
         supported in spaces of compositional objects (e.g., sequences and graphs), with
         applications ranging from the design of biological sequences to causal discovery.
         However, there are no principled approaches to deal with GFlowNets in feder-
         ated settings, where the target distribution results from a combination of (possibly
         sensitive) rewards from different parties. To fill this gap, we propose federated
         contrastive GFlowNet (FC-GFlowNet), a divide-and-conquer framework for fed-
         erated learning of GFlowNets, requiring a single communication step. First, each
         client learns a GFlowNet locally to sample proportionally to their reward. Then,
         the server gathers the local policy networks and aggregates them to enforce feder-
         ated balance (FB), which provably ensures the correctness of FC-GFlowNet. Ad-
         ditionally, our theoretical analysis builds on the idea of contrastive balance, that
         imposes necessary and sufficient conditions for the correctness of general (non-
         federated) GFlowNets. We empirically attest the performance of FC-GFlowNets
         in four settings, including grid-world, sequence, multiset generation, and Bayesian
         phylogenetic inference. Experiments also suggest that, in some cases, enforcing
         the contrastive balance can accelerate the training of conventional GFlowNets.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Generative flow networks (GFlowNets, Bengio et al., 2021; 2023) is a family of reward-driven gen-
erative models for compositional objects (e.g., sequences or graphs). While GFlowNets were origi-
nally designed to increase diversity of candidates in active learning settings, they have found appli-
cations in a variety of domains, such as causal discovery (Deleu et al., 2022; 2023; da Silva et al.,
2023), combinatorial optimization (Zhang et al., 2023b), design of biological sequences (Jain et al.,
2022), drug discovery (Bengio et al., 2021), and multiobjective optimization (Jain et al., 2023).
In essence, GFlowNets cast the problem of sampling from an unnormalized distribution/reward as
a network flow problem (Bazaraa et al., 2004). Starting from an initial state, GFlowNets iteratively
draw actions according to a (forward) policy which, in turn, increments the state βÄî eventually
creating valid samples. This process can be interpreted as spreading the total mass of the distribution
(flow at the source) through trajectories that lead to elements in the target distributionβÄôs support (sink
nodes). In practice, GFlowNets are learned by enforcing balance conditions (Malkin et al., 2022;
Pan et al., 2023a) that ensure the correctness of the sampling distribution.
There are many applications where the target reward decomposes as a product of (local) reward
functions held by different clients/parties. For instance, this appears in distributed Bayesian infer-
ence (Neiswanger et al., 2014; El Mekkaoui et al., 2021), where the reward involves a likelihood
function, which is typically log-additive on data shards βÄî the posterior (i.e., target reward) is pro-
portional to a product of the prior and the local likelihoods defined on each clientβÄôs data, each of
which can be seen as a local reward. Another relevant application is multi-objective active learning
(Daulton et al., 2021), where we wish to obtain a collection of diverse designs with high values un-
der a pool of utility functions. For instance, in drug discovery, a key challenge is finding molecules
that satisfy multiple constraints (e.g., affinity, solubility, safety). In a setting where different experts
work independently to obtain property-specific models using GFlowNets, this challenge can be cast
as sampling from the product of these local GFlowNets (Garipov et al., 2023). Furthermore, in both
cases, when the local rewards are of a sensitive nature, clients might be reluctant to share them di-
rectly (e.g., as it may incur sharing data). While this falls into the realm of Federated Learning (FL,
McMahan et al., 2017), so far, there are no works on FL of GFlowNets.                                          Reviewer: wWFS,
                                                                                                               Npeg, rsSg


                                                     1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


This paper extends the theory of GFlowNets to develop a simple divide-and-conquer algorithm for
federated learning of GFlowNets, in which clients learn locally GFlowNets to sample from their
individual rewards and, subsequently, send them to the server for aggregation. Importantly, this pro-
cedure requires a single round of communication between the client and server sides. More specifi-
cally, we derive the federated balance condition to ensure the GFlowNet samples from the product
of (the marginal distribution over terminal states induced by) the local GFlowNets. Furthermore,
on our path towards federated balance, we derive a novel balance criterion to train non-federated
GFlowNets, the contrastive balance (CB) condition. Informally, the CB encapsulates the idea i)
that we can βÄ‰estimateβÄô the normalizing constant of a reward given a terminal trajectory using the
trajectory balance condition (Malkin et al., 2022), and ii) if a GFlowNet is perfectly trained, the
estimate should be independent of the trajectory used. Enforcing the CB induces a loss that, in ex-
pectation, is equivalent to the variance of an estimator of the log-partition, whose minimization was
first proposed by Zhang et al. (2023a).                                                                      Reviewer: Xj4h

Our experiments on four different federated tasks show that our method, federated contrastive
GFlowNet (FC-GFlowNet), can accurately sample from the combined rewards without direct access
to each clientβÄôs reward βÄî only to their locally trained GFlowNets. For conventional (non-federated)
settings, we also show that using the contrastive balance as a training criterion leads to better con-
vergence when the intersection of the GFlowNetβÄôs sets of terminal and intermediate states is void.
In summary, our contributions are:
1. We propose the first algorithm for federated learning of GFlowNets. Our method incurs a divide-
   and-conquer framework, in which clients learn GFlowNets based on their private rewards and
   send their policies to a server for aggregation. We provide a theory that guarantees its correct-
   ness, and also analyze its robustness to errors in the estimation of local GFlowNets;
2. We present the contrastive balance condition, which can be used to train general GFlowNets.
   We show it is a sufficient and necessary condition for sampling proportionally to a reward and
   analyze its connection to variational inference (VI);
3. We substantiate our methodological contributions with experiments on four different tasks.
   Notably, our empirical results i) demonstrate the accuracy of our federated framework for
   GFlowNets; ii) show that, in some cases, using the contrastive balance as a training criterion
   leads to faster convergence rates compared to using trajectory and detailed balances; iii) illus-
   trate the potential of GFlowNets in a novel application: Bayesian phylogenetic inference.

2    P RELIMINARIES
Notation. We represent a directed acyclic graph (DAG) over nodes V and with adjacency matrix
A βàà {1, 0}|V |Ο½|V | as G = (V, A). A forward policy over V in G is a function p : V Ο½ V βÜ£ R+
such that (i) p(v, ¬Ζ) is a probability measure over V for every v βàà V and (ii) p(v, w) > 0 if and
only if Avw = 1; we alternatively write p(v βÜ£ w) to represent p(v, w). Characteristically, a
transition kernel p induces a conditional probability measure over the space Qof trajectories in G: if
œ³ = (v1 βÜ£ v2 βÜ£ ¬Ζ ¬Ζ ¬Ζ βÜ£ vn ) is a trajectory of length n in G, then p(œ³ |v1 ) = 1βâΛiβâΛnβà£1 p(vi+1 |vi ).
A backward policy in G is a forward policy on the transpose graph GβäΚ = (V, AβäΚ ).
Generative flow networks. GFlowNets are a family of amortized variational algorithms trained to
sample from an unnormalized distribution over discrete and compositional objects. More specifi-
cally, let R : X βÜ£ R+ be an unnormalized distribution over a finite space X . We call R a reward
due to terminological inheritance from the reinforcement learning literature. Define a finite set S
and a variable so . Then, let G be a weakly connected DAG with nodes V = {so } βàΣ {sf } βàΣ S βàΣ X
such that (i) there are no incoming edges to so , (ii) there are no outgoing edges exiting sf and (iii)
there is an edge from each x βàà X to sf . We call the elements of V states and refer to X as the set of
terminal states; so is called the initial state and sf is an absorbing state designating the end of a tra-
jectory. We denote by T the space of trajectories in G starting at so and ending at sf . Illustratively,
X could be the space of biological sequences of length 32; S, the space of sequences of lengths up
to 32; and so , an empty sequence. The training objective of a GFlowNet is to learn a forward policy
pF over G such that the marginal distribution pT over X satisfies
                                                X
                                pT (x) :=               pF (œ³ |so ) βàù R(x).                            (1)
                                          œ³ : œ³ leads to x


                                                       2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We usually parameterize pF as a neural network and select one among the diversely proposed train-
ing criteria to estimate its parameters, which we denote by œïF . These criteria typically enforce a
balance condition on the Markovian process defined by pF that provably imposes the desired prop-
erty on the marginal distribution in Equation 1. For example, the trajectory balance (TB) criterion
introduces a parameterization of the target distributionβÄôs partition function ZœïZ and of a backward
policy pB (¬Ζ, ¬Ζ; œïB ) with parameters œïZ and œïB , respectively, and is defined as
                                                                                           !2
                                                                X         pF (s, sβÄ≤ ; œïF )
           LT B (œ³, œïF , œïB , œïZ ) = log ZœïZ βà£ log R(x) +             log                     . (2)
                                                                  βÄ≤
                                                                          pB (sβÄ≤ , s; œïB )
                                                                  sβÜ£s βààœ³


Minimizing Equation 2 enforces the TB condition: pF (œ³ ; œïF ) = Zœïβà£1 R(x) pB (sβÄ≤ , s; œïB ), which
                                                                         Q
                                                                   Z
implies Equation 1 if valid for all œ³ βàà T . This is the most widely used training scheme for
GFlowNets. In practice, some works set pB as a uniform distribution to avoid learning œïB , as
suggested by Malkin et al. (2022).
Another popular approach for training GFlowNets uses the notion of detailed balance (DB). Here,
we want to find forward and backward policies and state flows F (with parameters œïS ) that satisfy
the DB condition: F (s; œïS )pF (s, sβÄ≤ ; œïF ) = F (sβÄ≤ ; œïS )pB (sβÄ≤ , s; œïB ) if s is an non-terminal state and
F (s; œïS )pF (sf |s; œïF ) = R(s) otherwise. Again, satisfying the DB condition for all edges in G
entails Equation 1. Naturally, this condition leads to a transition-decomposable loss
                                         οΘ±                                           2
                                                        βÄ≤
                                         οΘ≤ log pF (s,s
                                         οΘ¥
                                                      βÄ≤
                                                          ;œïF )
                                                                +   log   F (s;œïS )
                                                                              βÄ≤        if sβÄ≤ ΧΗ= sf ,
                                                pB (s ,s;œïB )            F (s ;œïS )
           LDB (s, sβÄ≤ , œïF , œïB , œïS ) =                                   2                               (3)
                                                            F (sf |s;œïF )
                                         οΘ≥ log F (s;œïS )pR(s)
                                         οΘ¥                                    otherwise.

In recent work, Pan et al. (2023a) proposed a novel residual parameterization of the state flows that
achieved promising results in terms of speeding up the training convergence of GFlowNets. More
specifically, the authors assumed the existence of a function E : S βÜ£ R such that (i) E(so ) = 0
and (ii) E(x) = βà£ log R(x) for each terminal state x βàà X and reparameterized the state flows as
log F (s, œïS ) = βà£E(s) + log FΧÉ (s, œïS ). This new training scheme was named forward looking (FL)
GFlowNets due to the inclusion of partially computed rewards in non-terminal transitions.
To learn GFlowNet parameters, we need to average LDB or LT B over some exploratory policy œÄ
fully supported in T . In practice, œÄ is typically a œΒ-mixture between pF and a uniform forward
policy, (1 βà£ œΒ) ¬Ζ pF + œΒ ¬Ζ uF , or a tempered version of pF . We use the former definition for œÄ in this
work. We review alternative training schemes for GFlowNets in the supplementary material.
Problem statement. We are interested in the federated setting where there is a set of clients n =
1, . . . , N , each with reward function Rn , and we want to learn a GFlowNet to sample proportionally
to a global reward function R defined as a product of the local rewards R1 , . . . , RN βÄî under the
restriction that clients are not willing to openly disclose their rewards. This might be the case when,
e.g., R is an unnormalized Bayesian posterior or when it encodes a multi-objective criterion. While
                                          QN
we focus on sampling from R(x) := n=1 Rn (x) in the main paper, our supplementary material
also provides extensions of our theoretical results to exponentially weighted rewards of the form
             QN
R(x) := n=1 Rn (x)wn with w1 , . . . , wN > 0. For related works, see Appendix D.                                Reviewer: wWFS

Overview of the solution. To circumvent the restrictions imposed by the problem statement, we
propose a divide-and-conquer scheme. First, each client trains their own GFlowNet to sample pro-
portionally to their local reward. Next, each client n sends the forward and backward policies
  (n)      (n)
pF and pB to a centralizing server. Then, the server estimates the policies (pF , pB ) of a novel
                                                                                   (n) (n)
GFlowNet that approximately samples from R solely based on the local policies {(pF , pB )}N   n=1 .
More specifically, the server learns a GFlowNet whose marginal distribution pT over terminal states
                                                          (1)          (N )
is proportional to the product of those from the clients pT , . . . , pT .

3    M ETHOD
This section derives a provably correct framework for federated GFlowNets (Section 3.1). Towards
this end, we introduce the contrastive balance condition, a new balance condition that requires mini-


                                                      3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


mal parameterization. Additionally, Section 3.2 further explores this condition as a general objective
for training conventional GFlowNets, which stems naturally from our theoretical developments.

3.1   F EDERATED GF LOW N ETS

Recall that we are interested in sampling proportionally to a product of the rewards from users
                                                                QN
n = 1, . . . , N , i.e., we want to sample from R(x) := n=1 Rn (x). However, users might be
reluctant to openly disclose Rn due to its possibly sensitive nature. Therefore, we are prevented
from centralizing R1 , . . . , RN and directly training a network to sample from their product. To
circumvent this limitation, we propose a simple divide-and-conquer strategy. First, each user n
                                                                           (n)         (n)
trains independently a GFlowNet with forward/backward policies pF and pB to sample from Rn .
Then, the users send their policies to a server for a single aggregation step, in which the server
combines the local GFlowNets into a new one, with forward/backward policies pF and pB , that
induces a distribution pT over final states x βàà X proportional to R. Toward this end, Theorem 1
delineates a necessary and sufficient condition that guarantees the correctness of the aggregation
phase, which we call Federated balance condition. It is worth mentioning that Theorem 1 builds
directly on Lemma 1. However, we postpone discussing the latter to Section 3.2.

                                                           (1) (1)             (N ) (N )
Theorem 1 (Federated balance condition). Let pF , pF , . . . , pF , pF                       : V 2 βÜ£ R+ be
pairs of forward and backward policies from N GFlowNets sampling respectively proportionally to
R1 , . . . , RN : X βÜ£ R+ . Then, another GFlowNet with forward and backward policies pF , pB βàà
                                                         QN
V 2 βÜ£ R+ samples proportionally to R(x) := n=1 R(x) if and only if the following condition
holds for all terminal trajectories œ³, œ³ βÄ≤ βàà T :
                                             (i)

                                            pF (s,sβÄ≤ )
                                                                           pF (s,sβÄ≤ )
                                  Q                            Q
                          Y         sβÜ£sβÄ≤ βààœ³ p(i) (sβÄ≤ ,s)          sβÜ£s βÄ≤ βààœ³ p (sβÄ≤ ,s)
                                             B                               B
                                                           =  Q                         .              (4)
                                  Q           (i)
                                             pF (s,s ) βÄ≤                    pF (s,sβÄ≤ )
                      1βâΛiβâΛN                                        sβÜ£sβÄ≤ βààœ³ βÄ≤ pB (sβÄ≤ ,s)
                                   sβÜ£sβÄ≤ βààœ³ βÄ≤ p(i) (sβÄ≤ ,s)
                                               B



Based on Theorem 1, we can naturally derive a loss function that enforces Equation 4 and can be
used to combine the locally trained GFlowNets. To guarantee the minimum of our loss achieves
federated balance, it suffices to integrate Equation 4 against a distribution that attributes non-zero
mass to every element in T 2 . It is important to note the federated balance loss is agnostic to which
loss was used to learn the local GFlowNets, as it only requires their transition functions.
                                                   (i)       (i)
Corollary 1 (Federated balance loss). Let pF and pB be forward and backward transition func-
                  (i)
tions such that pT (x) βàù Ri (x) for arbitrary reward functions Ri over terminal states x βàà X .
Also, let ΈΫ : T 2 βÜ£ R+ be some full-support probability distribution over pairs of terminal trajecto-
ries. Moreover, assume that pF (¬Ζ, ¬Ζ; œïF ) and pB (¬Ζ, ¬Ζ; œïB ) denote the forward/backward policies of a
GFlowNet, parameterized by œïF and œïB . The following statements are equivalent:
                   Q
 1. pT (x; œïF ) βàù i Ri (x) for all x βàà X ;
2. E(œ³,œ³ βÄ≤ )βàΦΈΫ [LFed (œ³, œ³ βÄ≤ , œïF , œïB )] = 0 where for trajectories œ³ β΅ù x and œ³ β΅ù xβÄ≤
                         οΘΪ                                                                         οΘΕ2
                                                  βÄ≤ βÄ≤                                   βÄ≤ βÄ≤
                                p F (œ³ ; œï  )p
                                           F B (œ³  |x ; œï B )   X     p F (œ³ ; œï  )p
                                                                                 F B (œ³  |x ; œï  )
                                                                                                B οΘΗ
 LF ed (œ³, œ³ βÄ≤ , œïF , œïB )=οΘ≠log                               +   log                                 . (5)
                                pB (œ³ |x; œïB )pF (œ³ βÄ≤ ; œïF )          pB (œ³ |x; œïB )pF (œ³ βÄ≤ ; œïF )
                                                               1βâΛiβâΛN


Remark 1 (Imperfect local inference). In practice, the local balance conditions often cannot be
                                                              (1)     (N )
satisfied by the local GFlowNets and the distributions pT , . . . , pT over terminal states are not
proportional the the rewards R1 , . . . , RN . In this case, federated balance implies the aggregated
model samples proportionally to
                                                οΘ°                 οΘΙ
                                                   Y p(i) (œ³ )
                                                           F      οΘΜ.
                                 Eœ³ βàΦpB (¬Ζ|x) οΘΑ           (i)
                                                                                                  (6)
                                                 1βâΛiβâΛN pB (œ³ |x)



                                                         4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              Client 1 (correct)        Client 2 (incorrect)                        FC-GFlowNet


                Target


                                                                                   (1) (2)


                                                                                                           R1 R2
                                                                                     pT pT
                         R1


                                                   R2
                                                                Empirical distribution


Figure 1: FC-GFlowNet samples proportionally to a pool of locally trained GFlowNets. If a
client correctly trains their local model (green) and another client trains theirs incorrectly (red), the
distribution inferred by FC-GFlowNet (mid-right) differs from the target product distribution (right).


Interestingly, the value of Equation 6 equals the expectation of a non-deterministic random variable
                                                                              (i)
only if the local balance conditions are not satisfied. Otherwise, the ratio pF (œ³ )/p(i)
                                                                                      B (œ³ |x) equals R(x),
a constant wrt œ³ conditioned on œ³ having x as its final state. Furthermore, Equation 6 also allows us
to assess the probability mass function the global GFlowNet is truly drawing samples from.

As mentioned in Remark 1, in practice, the local GFlowNets may not be balanced with respect to
their rewards, incurring errors that propagate to our aggregated model. In this context, Theorem 2
quantifies the extent to which these local errors impact the overall result.
                                                                                                         (n)       (n)
Theorem 2 (Influence of local failures). Let œÄn := Rn /Zn and pF and pB be the forward and
backward policies of the n-th client. We use œ³ β΅ù x to indicate that œ³ βàà T is finished by x βÜ£ sf .
Suppose that the local balance conditions are lower- and upper-bounded βàÄ n = 1, . . . , N as per
                                                          (n)                                            (n)
                                                        pF (œ³ )                                         pF (œ³ )
            1 βà£ Έ±n βâΛ                min                                        βâΛ             max                    βâΛ 1 + Έ≤n   (7)
                                xβààX ,œ³ β΅ùx p(n) (œ³ |x)œÄ (x)                         xβààX ,œ³ β΅ùx p(n) (œ³ |x)œÄ (x)
                                           B          n                                       B          n

where Έ±n βàà (0, 1) and Έ≤n > 0. The Jeffrey divergence DJ between the global model œÄΧ²(x) that
                                                                   QN
fulfills the federated balance condition in Equation 4 and œÄ(x) βàù n=1 œÄn (x) then satisfies
                                                N
                                               X         1 + Έ≤n
                                  DJ (œÄ, œÄΧ²) βâΛ     log            .                         (8)
                                               n=1
                                                         1 βà£ Έ±n

There are two things worth highlighting in Theorem 2. First, if the local models are accurately
learned (i.e., Έ≤n = Έ±n = 0 βàÄn), the RHS of Equation 8 equals zero, implying œÄ = œÄΧ². Second, if
either Έ≤n βÜ£ βàû or Έ±n βÜ£ 1 for some n, the bound in Equation 8 goes to infinity βÄî i.e., it degenerates
if one of the local GFlowNets are poorly trained. This is well-aligned with the catastrophic failure
phenomenon (de Souza et al., 2022), which was originally observed in the literature of parallel
MCMC (Neiswanger et al., 2014; Nemeth and Sherlock, 2018; Mesquita et al., 2019) and refers to
the incorrectness of the global model due to inadequately estimated local parameters and can result
in missing modes or misrepresentation of low-density regions. Figure 1 shows a case where one of
the local GFlowNets is poorly trained (Client 2βÄôs). Note that minimizing the FB objective leads to
a good approximation of the product of marginal distributions over terminal states (encoded by the
local GFlowNets). Nonetheless, the result is far from we have envisioned at first, i.e., R βàù R1 R2 .

3.2   C ONTRASTIVE BALANCE

Contrastive balance. As a stepping stone towards proving Theorem 1, we developed the contrastive
balance condition, a condition that is both necessary and sufficient to guarantee a GFlowNetβÄôs
marginal over terminal states is proportional to its target reward, as formalized in Lemma 1.
Lemma 1 (Constrastive balance condition). If pF , pB βàà V 2 βÜ£ R+ are the forward and backward
policies of a GFlowNet sampling proportionally to some arbitrary reward function R : X βÜ£ R+
with finite support, then, for any pair of terminal trajectories œ³, œ³ βÄ≤ βàà T with œ³ β΅ù x and œ³ β΅ù xβÄ≤ ,
                                   Y pF (s, sβÄ≤ )               Y pF (s, sβÄ≤ )
                          R(xβÄ≤ )                     = R(x)                                         (9)
                                     βÄ≤
                                         pB (sβÄ≤ , s)             βÄ≤   βÄ≤
                                                                       pB (sβÄ≤ , s)
                                              sβÜ£s βààœ³                                           sβÜ£s βààœ³

Conversely, if a GFlowNet with forward and backward policies pF , pB abide by Equation 9, it
induces a marginal distribution over x βàà X proportional to R.


                                                                               5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. Note that CB is satisfied for all (œ³, œ³ βÄ≤ ) iff the quotient c(œ³ ) = pB (œ³pF|x)R(x)
                                                                                    (œ³ )   does not depend
upon œ³ . This is equivalent to (pF , pB ) satisfying TB with log Z = c(œ³ ) and, hence, the result follows
directly from (Malkin et al., 2022, Proposition 1). See Appendix A for a self-contained proof.                   Reviewer: Xj4h


Enforcing Lemma 1 results in a loss that does not depend on estimates of the intractable partition
function present in the TB condition. The next corollary guarantees that an instantiation of the
GFlowNet parameterized by a global minimizer of LCB (Eq. 8) correctly samples from p(x) βàù
R(x). We call LCB the contrastive balance loss as it measures the contrast between randomly
sampled trajectories. Notably, the expected value of the CB loss is proportional to the variance of
a TB-based estimate of the partition function, which has been used as training objective by Zhang
et al. (2023a). Additionally, in practice, we observed that in some cases the contrastive balance loss
leads to better results than the TB and DB losses, as we will see in Section 4.5.                                Reviewer: Xj4h
Corollary 2 (Contrastive balance loss). Let pF (¬Ζ, ¬Ζ; œïF ) and pB (¬Ζ, ¬Ζ; œïB ) denote forward/backward
policies, and ΈΫ : T 2 βÜ£ R+ be some full-support probability distribution over pairs of terminal
trajectories. Then, pT (x; œïF ) βàù R(x) βàÄx βàà X iff E(œ³,œ³ βÄ≤ )βàΦΈΫ [LCB (œ³, œ³ βÄ≤ , œïF , œïB )] = 0 where
                                                               pF (œ³ βÄ≤ ; œïF )       R(xβÄ≤ )

                                            pF (œ³ ; œïF )
              LCB (œ³, œ³ βÄ≤ , œïF , œïB ) = log              βà£ log                + log               (10)
                                            pB (œ³ ; œïB )       pB (œ³ βÄ≤ ; œïB )       R(x)

To gain further intuition regarding Equation 10, let us define ΈΨ(œ³ ; œïF , œïB ) as ΈΨ(œ³ ; œïF , œïB ) :=
log pF (œ³ ) βà£ log R(x) βà£ log pB (œ³ |x). Then, if the GFlowNet   P        is perfectly trained, TB implies
ΈΨ(œ³ ; œïF , œïB ) should be exactly the constant log Z = log xβààX R(x), which does not depend on
œ³ . Furthermore, note that LCB (œ³, œ³ βÄ≤ , œïF , œïB ) equals (ΈΨ(œ³ ; œïF , œïB ) βà£ ΈΨ(œ³ βÄ≤ ; œïF , œïB ))2 . Thus, Equa-
tion 9 can be seen as the distance between two βÄ€estimatesβÄù of Z, each based on a terminal trajectory.
Computational advantages of LCB . Importantly, note that LCB incurs learning fewer parameters
than TB and DB losses. Besides requiring the forward and backward policies pF and pB , TB
requires parameterizing the partition function of R. Alternatively, DB implies using a neural network
to approximate the flow through each node. In contrast, CB requires only learning pF and pB .
LCB and VI. Notably, the next proposition ties the CB lossβÄô gradient to that of a variational objec-
tive, extending the characterization of GFlowNets as VI started by Malkin et al. (2023) for the TB
loss. More specifically, Theorem 3 states that the on-policy gradients of the CB objective coincide
in expectation to the gradient of the KL divergence between the forward and backward policies.
Theorem 3 (VI and CB). Let pF βä½ pF be the outer product distribution that assings probability
pF (œ³ )pF (œ³ βÄ≤ ) to each pair (œ³, œ³ βÄ≤ ) of trajectories. The criterion in Equation 10 satisfies
                                              1
                    βà΅œïF DKL [pF ||pB ] = E(œ³,œ³ βÄ≤ )βàΦpF βä½pF [βà΅œïF LCB (œ³, œ³ βÄ≤ , œïF , œïB )] .
                                              4

Proof. Let ΈΨT B (œ³ ; œïF , Z) = log pBZp      F (œ³ )                  βÄ≤                        βÄ≤ 2
                                         (œ³ |x)R(x) . Note LCB (œ³, œ³ ) = (ΈΨT B (œ³ )  βà£ ΈΨT B (œ³ ))  and
ΈΨT B (œ³ )2 = LT B (œ³ ) is the TB loss. Thus, Eœ³,œ³ βÄ≤ [βà΅œïF LCB (œ³, œ³ βÄ≤ )] = 2Eœ³ βà΅œïF ΈΨT B (œ³ )2 βà£
4Eœ³ [ΈΨT B (œ³ )]Eœ³ [βà΅œïF ΈΨT B (œ³ )]. Also, Prop. 1 of Malkin et al. (2023) ensures Eœ³ [βà΅œïF ΈΨT B (œ³ )] = 0
and Eœ³ [βà΅œïF ΈΨT B (œ³ )2 ] = 2DKL [pF ||pB ], implying our statement. See Appendix A for a self-
contained proof.                                                                                                 Reviewer: Xj4h


4    E XPERIMENTS
The main purpose of our experiments is to verify the empirical performance of FC-GFlowNets,
i.e., their capacity to accurately sample from the combination of local rewards. To that extent, we
consider four diverse tasks: sampling states from a grid world in Section 4.1, generation of multi-
sets (Bengio et al., 2023; Pan et al., 2023a) in Section 4.2, design of sequences (Jain et al., 2022)
in Section 4.3, and Bayesian phylogenetic inference (Zhang and Matsen IV, 2018) in Section 4.4.
Since FC-GFlowNet is the first of its kind, we propose two baselines to compare it against: a central-
ized GFlowNet, which requires clients to openly disclose their rewards, and a divide-and-conquer
algorithm in which each client approximates its local GFlowNet with a product of categorical dis-
tributions, which is then aggregated via a product in the server. We call the latter approach parallel
categorical VI (PCVI). Additionally, Section 4.5 explores the CB criterion as a loss for conventional
(non-federated) GFlowNets. Notably, in all experiments, clients contribute with distinct rewards.                Reviewer: wWFS


                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Quality of the federated approximation to the combined reward. The table shows i)
the L1 distance between the distribution induced by each method and the ground truth and ii) the
average log reward of the top-800 scoring samples. Our FC-GFlowNet is consistently better than the
PCVI baseline regarding L1 distance, showing approximately the same performance as a centralized
GFlowNet. Furthermore, FC-GFlowNetβÄôs Top-800 score perfectly matches the centralized model,
while PCVIβÄôs differ drastically. Values are the average and standard deviation over three repetitions.

                                                  Grid World                Multisets                       Sequences
                                                L1 βÜ™   Top-800 βÜë         L1 βÜ™   Top-800 βÜë                L1 βÜ™   Top-800 βÜë
                                                0.027    βà£6.355          0.100         27.422            0.003      βà£1.535
                           Centralized
                                              (¬±0.016)   (¬±0.000)       (¬±0.001)      (¬±0.000)         (¬±0.001)     (¬±0.000)

                                               0.038     βà£6.355         0.130         27.422             0.005      βà£1.535
                 FC-GFlowNet (ours)
                                              (¬±0.016)   (¬±0.000)       (¬±0.004)      (¬±0.000)         (¬±0.002)     (¬±0.000)
                                                0.189    βà£6.355          0.834         26.804            1.872      βà£16.473
                             PCVI
                                              (¬±0.006)   (¬±0.000)       (¬±0.005)      (¬±0.018)         (¬±0.011)     (¬±0.007)



                Client 1                 Client 2            Client 3              Theoretical product


                                                                                                                 FC-GFlowNet
      Target


                                                                                                                                   Probability (10βà£2 )
                                                                                                                               2



                                                                                                                               1
      Learned


                                                                                   Empirical product


Figure 2: Grid world. Each heatmap represents the target distribution (first row), based on the
normalized reward, and ones learned by local GFlowNets (second row). Results FC-GFlowNet are
in the rightmost pannel. As established by Theorem 1, the good fit of the local models results in an
accurate fit to the combined reward.

4.1    G RID WORLD

Task description. Our grid world environment consists of a Markov decision process over an 18Ο½18
square grid in which actions consist of choosing a direction (βÜ£, βÜë) or stopping. The reward for
each state R is the sigmoid transform of its minimum distance to a reward beacon (bright yellow
in Figure 2). For the federated setting, we consider the problem of combining the rewards from
different clients, each of which has two beacons placed in different positions.
Results. Figure 2 shows that FC-GFlowNet accurately approximates the targeted distribution, even
in cases where combining the client rewards leads to multiple modes. Furthermore, Table 1 shows
that FC-GFlowNet performs approximately on par with the centralized model in terms of L1 distance
(within one standard deviation), but is three orders of magnitude better than the PCVI baseline. This
is also reflected in the average reward over the top 800 samples βÄî identical to the centralized version
for FC-GFlowNet, but an order of magnitude smaller for PCVI. Again, these results corroborate our
theoretical claims about the correctness of our scheme for combining GFlowNets.

4.2    M ULTISET GENERATION

Task description. Here, the the support of our Reward comprises multisets of size S. A multiset S
is built by iteratively including elements from a finite dictionary U to an initially empty set. Each
client n assigns a value run to each word u βàà U and defines the log-reward of a multiset S as the sum
                                             P      (n)                              (n)
of its elementsβÄô values; i.e., log Rn (S) = uβààS ru . In practice, the quantities ru are uniformly
picked from the interval [0, 1] for each client. We use S = 8 and |U | = 10 in our experiments.
Results. Figure 3 provides further evidence that our algorithm is able to approximate well the
combined reward, even if only given the local GFlowNets. This is further supported by the results
in Table 1. Notably, FC-GFlowNet is βâà 8 times more accurate than the PCVI baseline.


                                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                                                               FC-GFlowNet
                     Ο½10βà£4                             Ο½10βà£4   Client 2                 Ο½10βà£4   Client 3                 Ο½10βà£4   Client 4                 Ο½10βà£4   Client 5                 Ο½10βà£4
                 4                                 4                                4                                4                                4                                4


        Target
                 2                                 2                                2                                2                                2                                2


                                2           4                   2            4                   2            4                   2            4                   2            4                 2           4
                                           Ο½10βà£4                            Ο½10βà£4                            Ο½10βà£4                            Ο½10βà£4                            Ο½10βà£4                         Ο½10βà£4
                                                                                                             Learned


Figure 3: Multisets: learned Ο½ ground truth distributions. Plots compare normalized rewards vs.
distributions learned by GFlowNets. The five plots to the left show local GFlowNets were accurately
trained. Thus, a well-trained FC-GFlowNet (right) approximates well the combined reward.

4.3   D ESIGN OF SEQUENCES

Task description. This tasks revolves around building sequences of maximum size S. We start with
an empty sequence S and proceed by iteratively appending an element from a fixed dictionary U .
The process halts when (i) we select a special terminating token or (ii) the sequence length reaches
                                                                  (n)
S. In the federated setting, we assume each client n has a score ps to each of the S positions within
                             (n)
the sequence and a score tu to each of the |U | available tokens, yielding the reward of a sequence
                                               PM (n) (n)
sequence S = (u1 , . . . , uM ) as Rn (S) = exp i=1 pi tui .
Results. Again, Figure 4 follows what we expect given Theorem 1 and shows that FC-GFlowNet ac-
curately samples from the product of individual rewards. Table 1 further reinforces this conclusion,
showing a small gap in L1 distance between FC-GFlowNet and the centralized GFlowNet trained
with access to all rewards. Notably, our method is βâà 8 times more accurate than PCVI. Furthermore,
the Top-800 average reward of FC-GFlowNet perfectly matches the centralized model.
                                                                                                                                                                                                FC-GFlowNet
                       Ο½10βà£3                             Ο½10βà£3 Client 2                   Ο½10βà£3 Client 3                   Ο½10βà£3 Client 4                   Ο½10βà£3 Client 5                   Ο½10βà£3

                 1.2                               1.2                              1.2                              1.2                              1.2                              1.2
        Target


                 0.6                               0.6                              0.6                              0.6                              0.6                              0.6


                               0.6   1.2                       0.6    1.2                       0.6    1.2                       0.6    1.2                       0.6    1.2                     0.6   1.2
                                           Ο½10βà£3                            Ο½10βà£3                            Ο½10βà£3                            Ο½10βà£3                            Ο½10βà£3                         Ο½10βà£3
                                                                                                             Learned


Figure 4: Sequences: learned Ο½ ground truth distributions. . Plots compare normalized rewards
to distributions learned by GFlowNets. The five leftmost plots show local GFlowNets were well
trained. Hence, as implied by Theorem 1, FC-GFlowNet approximates well the combined reward.
4.4   BAYESIAN PHYLOGENETIC INFERENCE

Task description. In this task, we are interested on inferring a phylogeny T = (t, b), which is a
characterization of the evolutionary relationships between biological species and is composed by a
tree topology t and its (2N βà£ 1)-dimensional vector of non-negative branch lengths b. The topology
t is as a leaf-labeled complete binary tree with N leaves, each corresponding to a species. Notably,
T induces a probability distribution P over the space of nucleotide sequences Y1 , . . . , YM βàà β³ΠN ,
where β³Π is a vocabulary of nucleobases and Ym denote the nucleobases observed at the m-th site
for each species. Assume t is a rooted in some node r and that œÄ βàà βàÜ|β³Π| is the prior probability
distribution over the nucleobasesβÄô frequencies at r. Then, the marginal likelihood of a nucleobase
Ym occurring site m for node n is recursively defined by (Felsenstein, 1981) as

                          One-Hot(Y )                                           if n is a leaf,
         Pn (Ym |T) =   bn,n Q m,n                                         βäΚ
                           e l Pnl (Ym |T)βäΚ βäô ebn,nr Q Pnr (Ym |T)βäΚ             otherwise,
in which nl and nr are respectively the left and right children of n; bn,a is the length of the branch
between nodes n and a; and Q βàà R|β³Π|Ο½|β³Π| is an instantaneous rate-conversion matrix for the under-
lying substitution rates between nucleotides, which is given beforehand. In this context, the marginal
likelihood of the observed data within the site m is Pr (Ym |T)βäΚ œÄ and, assumingQ conditional indepen-
dence of the sites given T , the overall likelihood of the data is P(Y|T) = 1βâΛiβâΛM (P(Yi |T)T œÄ)
βÄî which is naturally log-additive on the sites. For our experiments, œÄ is a uniform distribution. For
simplicity, we consider constant branch length, fixed throughout the experiments. For the federated
setting, we place a uniform prior over t and split 2500 nucleotide sites across five clients. In parallel
MCMC (Neiswanger et al., 2014) fashion, each client trains a GFlowNet to sample from its local
posterior, proportional to the product of its local likelihood and a scaled version of the prior.


                                                                                                                8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Results. Figure 5 shows that Federated GFlowNet accurately learns the posterior distribution over
the treeβÄôs topologies: the L1 error between the learned distribution and the targeted product dis-
tribution is 0.088, whereas the average L1 error among the clients is 0.083(¬±0.041). Noticeably,
this indicates the modelβÄôs aptitude to learn a highly sparse posterior distribution in a decentralized
manner. Moreover, our results suggest the potential usefulness of GFlowNets as an alternative to
the notoriously inefficient MCMC-based algorithms (Zhang and Matsen IV, 2018) in the field of
evolutionary biology. Importantly, our method is also the first provably correct algorithm enabling
distributed Bayesian inference over discrete objects, which may be invaluable in real-world prob-
lems with millions of sites. Notably, naive strategies, like the PCVI baseline, consistently lead to
sampling elements that do not belong to the support of our posterior (i.e., are invalid) βÄî which is
why we do not compare against it. In future endeavors, we plan to investigate joint parallel inference
on the treeβÄôs topology and its branchβÄô lengths using hybrid-space GFlowNets (Deleu et al., 2023).
                                                                                                                                                                               FC-GFlowNet
                          Ο½10βà£3                         Ο½10βà£3 Client 2               Ο½10βà£3 Client 3               Ο½10βà£3 Client 4               Ο½10βà£3 Client 5               Ο½10βà£3

                    1.2                           1.2                          1.2                          1.2                          1.2                          1.2
           Target


                    0.6                           0.6                          0.6                          0.6                          0.6                          0.6


                                  0.6   1.2                   0.6    1.2                   0.6    1.2                   0.6    1.2                   0.6    1.2                 0.6    1.2
                                          Ο½10βà£3                        Ο½10βà£3                        Ο½10βà£3                        Ο½10βà£3                        Ο½10βà£3                      Ο½10βà£3
                                                                                                      Learned



Figure 5: Bayesian phylogenetic inference: learned Ο½ ground truth distributions. Following the
pattern in Figures 2-4, the goodness-of-fit from local GFlowNets (Clients 1-5) is directly reflected
in the distribution learned by FC-GFlowNet.
4.5    E VALUATING THE CB LOSS

Section 3.2 presents the CB loss as a natural development            Phylogenetic inference     Multiset generation
                                                                    1.0                      1.0
given the theory of FC-GFlowNets. To evaluate its util-
ity as a criterion to train GFlowNets in the conventional           0.5                      0.5

centralized (non-federated) setting, we report the evolu-               0     250      500       0      250     500

tion during training of the L1 error of the GFlowNet wrt
                                                                                                                                   L1


                                                                          Grid World                Sequences
the normalized reward for models trained using DB, TB,              1.5                     1.00
                                                                    1.0
and our CB. We do so for all tasks in our experiments,              0.5                     0.75
with all GFlowNets using the same architectures for the                 0     250      500       0      250     500

forward and backward policies (more details in supple-                                  Epochs
ment). While we did not see any noticeable difference for Figure 6: LCB performs competitively
the tasks in which all states are also terminal (grid world or better than LT B , LDB and LF L .
and design of sequences), CB led to better convergence in
the multiset generation and phylogeny tasks (Figure 6). An explanation is that CB incurs a consid-
erably simpler parameterization than DB and TB βÄî as we do not require estimating the flow nor the
partition function. In practice, it can be challenging to optimize the log partition in TB. Therefore,
our appendix shows more results comparing the CB to TB w/ different learning rates for log ZœïZ in
the multiset experiments (Figure 8). Noticeably, CB outperforms TB for all rates we have tested. A
rigorous understanding, however, of the diversely proposed balance conditions is still lacking in the
literature and is an important course of action for future research.                                                                                                                             Reviewer: Xj4h


5     C ONCLUSIONS
We proposed FC-GFlowNet as a simple and elegant solution for federated learning of GFlowNets,
which we validate on a suite of experiments. Our method enjoys theoretical guarantees and builds
on the concept of contrastive balance (CB). Our theoretical analysis i) guarantees correctness when
local models are perfectly trained and ii) allows us to quantify the impact of errors of local models
on the federated one. Additionally, we observed that using CB loss led to faster convergence for the
local clients when intermediate states are not terminal βÄî while being competitive in other scenarios.
We believe FC-GFlowNets pave the way for a range of applications of federated Bayesian inference
over discrete parameter spaces. We also believe FC-GFlowNets might be useful to scale up Bayesian
inference by amortizing the cost of expensive likelihood computations over different clients. In the
realm of multi-objective optimization, FC-GFlowNets enable sampling from a combination of re-
wards by leveraging pre-trained GFlowNets βÄî even without direct access to the rewards, as recently
explored by Garipov et al. (2023).                                                                                                                                                               Reviewer: Xj4h



                                                                                                        9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
The experiments in this work are reproducible. Upon acceptance, we will make our code publicly
available on GitHub.

R EFERENCES
Lazar Atanackovic, Alexander Tong, Jason Hartford, Leo J. Lee, Bo Wang, and Yoshua Bengio. DynGFN:
  Towards bayesian inference of gene regulatory networks with gflownets. In Advances in Neural Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), 2023.
Mokhtar S. Bazaraa, John J. Jarvis, and Hanif D. Sherali. Linear Programming and Network Flows. Wiley-
 Interscience, 2004.
Emmanuel Bengio, Moksh Jain, Maksym Korablyov, Doina Precup, and Yoshua Bengio. Flow network based
  generative models for non-iterative diverse candidate generation. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Yoshua Bengio, Salem Lahlou, Tristan Deleu, Edward J. Hu, Mo Tiwari, and Emmanuel Bengio. Gflownet
  foundations. Journal of Machine Learning Research (JMLR), 2023.
Q. Chang, H. Qu, Y. Zhang, M. Sabuncu, C. Chen, T. Zhang, and D. N. Metaxas. Synthetic learning: Learn
  from distributed asynchronized discriminator gan without sharing medical image data. In 2020 IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2020.
Tiago da Silva, Eliezer Silva, AdeΧÄle Ribeiro, AntoΧ¹nio GoΧ¹is, Dominik Heider, Samuel Kaski, and Diego
   Mesquita. Human-in-the-loop causal discovery under latent confounding using ancestral gflownets. arXiv
   preprint:2309.12032, 2023.
S. Daulton, M. Balandat, and E. Bakshy. Parallel bayesian optimization of multiple noisy objectives with
   expected hypervolume improvement. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
   2021.
D. de Souza, D. Mesquita, S. Kaski, and L. Acerbi. Parallel MCMC without embarrassing failures. In Artificial
   Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), 2022.
Tristan Deleu and Yoshua Bengio. Generative flow networks: a markov chain perspective, 2023.
Tristan Deleu, AntoΧ¹nio GoΧ¹is, Chris Chinenye Emezue, Mansi Rankawat, Simon Lacoste-Julien, Stefan Bauer,
   and Yoshua Bengio. Bayesian structure learning with generative flow networks. In Uncertainty in Artificial
   Intelligence (UAI), 2022.
Tristan Deleu, Mizu Nishikawa-Toomey, Jithendaraa Subramanian, Nikolay Malkin, Laurent Charlin, and
   Yoshua Bengio. Joint Bayesian inference of graphical structure and parameters with a single generative
   flow network. In Advances in Neural Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023.
Khaoula El Mekkaoui, Diego Mesquita, Paul Blomstedt, and Samuel Kaski. Federated stochastic gradient
  langevin dynamics. In Uncertainty in artificial intelligence (UAI), 2021.
Joseph Felsenstein. Evolutionary trees from DNA sequences: A maximum likelihood approach. Journal of
   Molecular Evolution, 1981.
Matthias Fey and Jan E. Lenssen. Fast graph representation learning with PyTorch Geometric. In ICLR Work-
  shop on Representation Learning on Graphs and Manifolds, 2019.
Timur Garipov, Sebastiaan De Peuter, Ge Yang, Vikas Garg, Samuel Kaski, and Tommi Jaakkola. Composi-
  tional sculpting of iterative generative processes. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS), 2023.
Alex Graves and Alex Graves. Long short-term memory. Supervised sequence labelling with recurrent neural
  networks, pages 37βÄ™45, 2012.
Alex Hernandez-Garcia, Nikita Saxena, Moksh Jain, Cheng-Hao Liu, and Yoshua Bengio. Multi-fidelity active
  learning with gflownets, 2023.
Junyuan Hong, Zhuangdi Zhu, Shuyang Yu, Zhangyang Wang, Hiroko H. Dodge, and Jiayu Zhou. Federated
  adversarial debiasing for fair and transferable representations. In ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge
  Discovery & Data Mining (KDD), 2021.


                                                     10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Edward J Hu, Nikolay Malkin, Moksh Jain, Katie E Everett, Alexandros Graikos, and Yoshua Bengio.
  Gflownet-em for learning compositional latent variable models. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning (ICLR), 2023.
Moksh Jain, Emmanuel Bengio, Alex Hernandez-Garcia, Jarrid Rector-Brooks, Bonaventure F. P. Dossou,
 Chanakya Ajit Ekbote, Jie Fu, Tianyu Zhang, Michael Kilgour, Dinghuai Zhang, Lena Simine, Payel Das,
 and Yoshua Bengio. Biological sequence design with GFlowNets. In International Conference on Machine
 Learning (ICML), 2022.
Moksh Jain, Sharath Chandra Raparthy, Alex Hernandez-Garcia, Jarrid Rector-Brooks, Yoshua Bengio, San-
 tiago Miret, and Emmanuel Bengio. Multi-objective GFlowNets. In International Conference on Machine
 Learning (ICML), 2023.
Salem Lahlou, Tristan Deleu, Pablo Lemos, Dinghuai Zhang, Alexandra Volokhova, Alex HernaΧ¹ndez-GarcΡ±a,
  LeΧ¹na NeΧ¹hale Ezzine, Yoshua Bengio, and Nikolay Malkin. A theory of continuous generative flow networks.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In International Conference on
   Learning Representations (ICLR), 2019.
Andrew L Maas, Awni Y Hannun, Andrew Y Ng, et al. Rectifier nonlinearities improve neural network acoustic
  models. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2013.
Nikolay Malkin, Moksh Jain, Emmanuel Bengio, Chen Sun, and Yoshua Bengio. Trajectory balance: Improved
  credit assignment in GFlownets. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
Nikolay Malkin, Salem Lahlou, Tristan Deleu, Xu Ji, Edward Hu, Katie Everett, Dinghuai Zhang, and Yoshua
  Bengio. GFlowNets and variational inference. International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2023.
H. Brendan McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. AguΧàera y Arcas. Communication-efficient
   learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), 2017.
D. Mesquita, P. Blomstedt, and S. Kaski. Embarrassingly parallel MCMC using deep invertible transformations.
   In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI), 2019.
W. Neiswanger, C. Wang, and E. P. Xing. Asymptotically exact, embarrassingly parallel MCMC. In Uncer-
  tainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI), 2014.
C. Nemeth and C. Sherlock. Merging MCMC subposteriors through Gaussian-process approximations.
  Bayesian Analysis, 13(2):507βÄ™530, 2018.
Ling Pan, Nikolay Malkin, Dinghuai Zhang, and Yoshua Bengio. Better training of GFlowNets with local
  credit and incomplete trajectories. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023a.
Ling Pan, Dinghuai Zhang, Aaron Courville, Longbo Huang, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative augmented flow
  networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023b.
Ling Pan, Dinghuai Zhang, Moksh Jain, Longbo Huang, and Yoshua Bengio. Stochastic generative flow net-
  works. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI), 2023c.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen,
  Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward Yang, Zachary
  DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and
  Soumith Chintala. PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance Deep Learning Library. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2019.
Mirko Polato. Federated variational autoencoder for collaborative filtering. In International Joint Conference
  on Neural Networks (IJCNN), 2021.
Hui Qu, Yikai Zhang, Qi Chang, Zhennan Yan, Chao Chen, and Dimitris Metaxas. Learn distributed gan with
  temporary discriminators. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2020.
Lorenz Richter, Ayman Boustati, Nikolas NuΧàsken, Francisco Ruiz, and Omer Deniz Akyildiz. Vargrad: A low-
  variance gradient estimator for variational inference. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS), 2020.
Steven L. Scott, Alexander W. Blocker, Fernando V. Bonassi, Hugh A. Chipman, Edward I. George, and
   Robert E. McCulloch. Bayes and big data: The consensus monte carlo algorithm. International Journal
   of Management Science and Engineering Management, 11, 2016.


                                                      11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Max W Shen, Emmanuel Bengio, Ehsan Hajiramezanali, Andreas Loukas, Kyunghyun Cho, and Tommaso
  Biancalani. Towards understanding and improving gflownet training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.07170,
  2023.
Maxime Vono, Vincent Plassier, Alain Durmus, Aymeric Dieuleveut, and Eric Moulines. Qlsd: Quantised
  langevin stochastic dynamics for bayesian federated learning. In Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AIS-
  TATS), 2022.
Xiangyu Wang, Fangjian Guo, Katherine A. Heller, and David B. Dunson. Parallelizing MCMC with random
  partition trees. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2015.

Keyulu Xu, Weihua Hu, Jure Leskovec, and Stefanie Jegelka. How powerful are graph neural networks?
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2019.

Cheng Zhang and Frederick A Matsen IV. Variational bayesian phylogenetic inference. In International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2018.

David W Zhang, Corrado Rainone, Markus Peschl, and Roberto Bondesan. Robust scheduling with gflownets.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023a.

Dinghuai Zhang, Ricky TQ Chen, Nikolay Malkin, and Yoshua Bengio. Unifying generative models with
  gflownets and beyond. ICML Beyond Bayes workshop, 2022a.
Dinghuai Zhang, Nikolay Malkin, Zhen Liu, Alexandra Volokhova, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio.
  Generative flow networks for discrete probabilistic modeling. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning (ICML), 2022b.
Dinghuai Zhang, Hanjun Dai, Nikolay Malkin, Aaron Courville, Yoshua Bengio, and Ling Pan. Let the flows
  tell: Solving graph combinatorial optimization problems with gflownets. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023b.
Dinghuai Zhang, Ling Pan, Ricky TQ Chen, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Distributional gflownets
  with quantile flows. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05793, 2023c.


                                                      12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     P ROOFS
A.1   P ROOF OF L EMMA 1

It stems directly from the trajectory balance that, for any trajectory œ³ β΄Ü βàà T :
                                 Y                              Y
                            Z          pF (s βÜ£ sβÄ≤ ) = R(x)            pB (sβÄ≤ βÜ£ s)                    (11)
                                 sβÜ£sβÄ≤ βààœ³ β΄Ü                               sβÜ£sβÄ≤ βààœ³ β΄Ü
                                                Y         pB (sβÄ≤ βÜ£ s)
                      β΅êβ΅£ Z = R(x)                                                                    (12)
                                                          pF (s βÜ£ sβÄ≤ )
                                              sβÜ£sβÄ≤ βààœ³   β΄Ü


Therefore, applying this identity to œ³ and œ³ βÄ≤ and equating the right-hand-sides (RHSs) yields Equa-
tion 9. We are left with the task of proving the converse. Note we can rewrite Equation 9 as:
                               Y pB (sβÄ≤ βÜ£ s)                 Y pB (sβÄ≤ βÜ£ s)
                                                         βÄ≤
                      R(x)                        = R(x    )                     .              (13)
                                 βÄ≤
                                     pF (s βÜ£ sβÄ≤ )              βÄ≤  βÄ≤
                                                                    pF (s βÜ£ sβÄ≤ )
                             sβÜ£s βààœ³                                   sβÜ£s βààœ³
                                          βÄ≤                     βÄ≤
If Equation 9 holds for any pair (œ³, œ³ ), we can vary œ³ freely for a fixed œ³ βÄî which implies the RHS
of the above equation must be a constant with respect to œ³ βÄ≤ . Say this constant is c, then:
                                     Y pB (sβÄ≤ βÜ£ s)
                            R(x)                        =c                                       (14)
                                           pF (s βÜ£ sβÄ≤ )
                                   sβÜ£sβÄ≤ βààœ³
                                     Y                        Y
                       β΅êβ΅£ R(x)             pB (sβÄ≤ βÜ£ s) = c          pF (s βÜ£ sβÄ≤ ),                (15)
                                        sβÜ£sβÄ≤ βààœ³                       sβÜ£sβÄ≤ βààœ³

and summing the above equation over all œ³ βàà T yields:
                     X           Y                     X                       Y
                         R(x)          pB (sβÄ≤ βÜ£ s) = c                                pF (s βÜ£ sβÄ≤ )   (16)
                          œ³ βààT          sβÜ£sβÄ≤ βààœ³                        œ³ βààT sβÜ£sβÄ≤ βààœ³
                          X               Y
                  =β΅£             R(x)             pB (sβÄ≤ βÜ£ s) = c                                    (17)
                          œ³ βààT          sβÜ£sβÄ≤ βààœ³

Furthermore, note that:
                                    X               X           Y
                                           R(x)                       pB (sβÄ≤ βÜ£ s) = c                (18)
                                    xβààX            œ³ βààT (x) sβÜ£sβÄ≤ βààœ³
                                    X
                             =β΅£            R(x) = c                                                  (19)
                                    xβààX
                             =β΅£ Z = c                                                                (20)
Plugging Z = c into Equation 14 yields the trajectory balance condition.

A.2   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

The proof is based on the following reasoning. We first show that, given the satisfiability of the
federated balance condition, the marginal distribution over the terminating states is proportional to
                                              οΘ°                 οΘΙ
                                                 Y p(i) (œ³ )
                                                         F      οΘΜ,
                                 Eœ³ βàΦpB (¬Ζ|x) οΘΑ         (i)
                                                                                                 (21)
                                               1βâΛiβâΛN B (œ³ |x)
                                                      p

as stated in Remark 1. Then, we verify that this distribution is the same as
                                                  Y
                                      pT (x) βàù          Ri (x)                                       (22)
                                                           1βâΛiβâΛN

if the local balance conditions are satisfied. This proves the sufficiency of the federated balance
condition for building a model that samples from the correct product distribution. The necessity
follows from Proposition 16 of Bengio et al. (2023) and from the observation that the local balance
                              (i)
conditions are equivalent to pF (œ³ )/p(i)
                                      B (œ³ |x) = Ri (x) for each i = 1, . . . , N .


                                                           13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Next, we provide a more detailed discussion about this proof. Similarly to subsection A.1, notice
that the contrastive nature of the federated balance condition implies that, if

                                                      (i)

                                                    pF (s,sβÄ≤ )
                                                                                          pF (s,sβÄ≤ )
                                      Q                                     Q
                           Y              sβÜ£sβÄ≤ βààœ³    (i)
                                                    pB (sβÄ≤ ,s)                sβÜ£sβÄ≤ βààœ³     pB (sβÄ≤ ,s)
                                                                     =  Q                               ,   (23)
                                      Q                 (i)
                                                    pF (s,sβÄ≤ )                            pF (s,sβÄ≤ )
                          1βâΛiβâΛN                                               sβÜ£sβÄ≤ βààœ³ βÄ≤   pB (sβÄ≤ ,s)
                                       sβÜ£sβÄ≤ βààœ³ βÄ≤     (i)
                                                    pB (sβÄ≤ ,s)



then
                                                    οΘΪ                         οΘΕ
                                                        (i)
                                                       pF (œ³ ) οΘΗ
                                                          Y
                                  pF (œ³ ) = c οΘ≠        (i)
                                                                 pB (œ³ |x)                                  (24)
                                                1βâΛiβâΛN pB (œ³ |x)



for a constant c > 0 that does not depend either on x or on œ³ . Hence, the marginal distribution over
a terminating state x βàà X is

                                              X          Y
                               pT (x) :=                         pF (s βÜ£ sβÄ≤ )                               (25)
                                             œ³ β΅ùx sβÜ£sβÄ≤ βààœ³
                                                        οΘΪ                        οΘΕ
                                                                          (i)
                                               X               Y         pF (œ³ ) οΘΗ
                                          =c            οΘ≠
                                                                     (i)
                                                                                     pB (œ³ |x)              (26)
                                               œ³ β΅ùx           1βâΛiβâΛN pB (œ³ |x)
                                                                 οΘ°                   οΘΙ
                                                                              (i)
                                                                      Y      pF (œ³ ) οΘΜ
                                          = cEœ³ βàΦpB (¬Ζ|x) οΘΑ               (i)
                                                                                            .               (27)
                                                                   1βâΛiβâΛN pB (œ³ |x)


                    (i)
Correspondingly, pF (œ³ )/p(i)B (œ³ |x) βàù Ri (x) for every i = 1, . . . , N and every œ³ leading to x due to
the satisfiability of the local balance conditions. Thus,

                                                         οΘ°                   οΘΙ
                                                               Y                     Y
                          pT (x) βàù Eœ³ βàΦpB (¬Ζ|x) οΘΑ                     Ri (x)οΘΜ =                 Ri (x),     (28)
                                                              1βâΛiβâΛN               1βâΛiβâΛN



which attests the sufficiency of the federated balance condition for the distributional correctness of
the global model.


A.3    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

Initially, recall that the Jeffrey divergence, known as the symmetrized KL divergence, is defined as

                                      DJ (p, q) = DKL [p||q] + DKL [q||p]                                   (29)

for any pair p and q of equally supported distributions. Then, let

                                                                     οΘ°                     οΘΙ
                                                                   (i)
                                                                  pF (œ³ ) οΘΜ
                                                                         Y
                                  œÄΧ²(x) = ZΧ² Eœ³ βàΦpB (¬Ζ|x) οΘΑ       (i)
                                                                                                            (30)
                                                           1βâΛiβâΛN pB (œ³ |x)



                                                                 14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


be the marginal distribution over the terminating states of a GFlowNet satisfying the federated bal-
ance condition (see Remark 1 and subsection A.2). On the one hand, notice that

                                œÄ(x)
      DKL [œÄ||œÄΧ²] = ExβàΦœÄ log                                                                    (31)
                                œÄΧ²(x)
                           οΘ°                              οΘ°                         οΘΙοΘΙ
                                                               Y p(i) (œ³ )
                                                                          F
                  = ExβàΦœÄ οΘΑlog œÄ(x) βà£ log ZEœ³ βàΦpB (¬Ζ|x) οΘΑ                 (i)
                                                                                    οΘΜοΘΜ          (32)
                                                             1βâΛiβâΛN B    p    (œ³ |x)
                             οΘ°               οΘ°                              οΘΙοΘΙ
                                                              (i)
                                                 Y          p F   (œ³ )
                  = βà£ExβàΦœÄ οΘΑlog Eœ³ βàΦpB (¬Ζ|x) οΘΑ           (i)
                                                                            οΘΜοΘΜ βà£ log ZΧ² + log Z (33)
                                               1βâΛiβâΛN B p    (œ³ |x)œÄ   i (x)
                             οΘ°                    οΘΙ
                                    Y
                  βâΛ βà£ExβàΦœÄ οΘΑlog           (1 βà£ Έ±i )οΘΜ βà£ log ZΧ² + log Z                            (34)
                                      1βâΛiβâΛN

                         Z         X                  1
                 = log        +           log                    ,                                          (35)
                         ZΧ²                         1 βà£ Έ±i
                                  1βâΛiβâΛN
                 P       Q                     βà£1
in which Z :=      xβààX        1βâΛiβâΛN œÄi (x)           is œÄβÄôs normalization constant. On the other hand,

                                 œÄΧ²(x)
         DKL [œÄ||œÄΧ²] = ExβàΦœÄΧ² log                                                                            (36)
                                 œÄ(x)
                            οΘ°                              οΘ°                   οΘΙ              οΘΙ
                                                                        (i)
                                                                 Y     pF (œ³ ) οΘΜ
                     = ExβàΦœÄΧ² οΘΑlog ZEœ³ βàΦpB (¬Ζ|x) οΘΑ                      (i)
                                                                                     βà£ log œÄ(x)οΘΜ            (37)
                                                             1βâΛiβâΛN pB (œ³ |x)
                                  οΘ°                    οΘ°                              οΘΙοΘΙ
                                                                            (i)
                                                             Y             pF (œ³ )    οΘΜοΘΜ + log ZΧ² βà£ log Z
                     = ExβàΦœÄΧ² οΘΑlog Eœ³ βàΦpB (¬Ζ|x) οΘΑ                     (i)
                                                                                                            (38)
                                                        1βâΛiβâΛN pB (œ³ |x)œÄi (x)
                                  οΘ°                       οΘΙ
                                          Y
                     βâΛ ExβàΦœÄΧ² οΘΑlog               (1 + Έ≤i )οΘΜ + log ZΧ² βà£ log Z                                 (39)
                                       1βâΛiβâΛN

                              ZΧ²   X
                     = log       +   log (1 + Έ≤i ) .                                                        (40)
                              Z
                                      1βâΛiβâΛN

Thus, the Jeffrey divergence between the targeted product distribution œÄ and the effectively learned
distribution œÄΧ² is
            DJ (œÄ, œÄΧ²) = DKL [œÄ||œÄΧ²] + DKL [œÄΧ²||œÄ]                                                          (41)

                            Z      X             1           ZΧ²  X
                       βâΛ log +           log            + log +       log (1 + Έ≤i )                         (42)
                            ZΧ² 1βâΛiβâΛN           1 βà£ Έ±i        Z
                                                                1βâΛiβâΛN

                           X          1 + Έ≤i
                       =       log             .                                                            (43)
                                      1 βà£ Έ±i
                         1βâΛiβâΛN


A.4   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3

We firstly recall the construction of the unbiased REINFORCE gradient estimator (Williams 1992),
which was originally designed as a method to implement gradient-ascent algorithms to tackle asso-
ciative tasks involving stochastic rewards in reinforcement learning. Let pΈΗ be a probability density
(or mass function) differentiably parametrized by ΈΗ and fΈΗ : X βÜ£ R be a real-value function over X
possibly dependent on ΈΗ. Our goal is to estimate the gradient
                                                βà΅ΈΗ ExβàΦpΈΗ [fΈΗ (x)],                                          (44)


                                                           15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


which is not readily computable due to the dependence of pΈΗ on ΈΗ. However, since
                                 Z
          βà΅ΈΗ ExβàΦpΈΗ [fΈΗ (x)] = βà΅ΈΗ        fΈΗ (x)pΈΗ (x)dx                                               (45)
                              Z xβààX                         Z
                            =      ((βà΅ΈΗ fΈΗ (x))pΈΗ (x)) dx +       ((βà΅ΈΗ pΈΗ (x))fΈΗ (x)) dx             (46)
                                  xβààX                                 xβààX
                             = ExβàΦpΈΗ [βà΅ΈΗ fΈΗ (x) + fΈΗ (x)βà΅ΈΗ log pΈΗ (x)] ,                             (47)
the gradient of fΈΗ βÄôs expected value under pΈΗ may be unbiasedly estimated by averaging the quantity
βà΅ΈΗ fΈΗ (x)+fΈΗ (x)βà΅ΈΗ log pΈΗ (x) over samples of pΈΗ . We use this identity to compute the KL divergence
between the forward and backward policies of a GFlowNet. In this sense, notice that

                                                 pF (œ³ )
            βà΅ΈΗ DKL [pF ||pB ] = βà΅ΈΗ Eœ³ βàΦpF log                                                   (48)
                                                 pB (œ³ )

                                                                 pF (œ³ )
                                = Eœ³ βàΦpF βà΅ΈΗ log pF (œ³ ) + log              βà΅ΈΗ log pF (œ³ )       (49)
                                                                 pB (œ³ )

                                                pF (œ³ )
                                = Eœ³ βàΦpF    log           βà΅ΈΗ log pF (œ³ ) ,                      (50)
                                                pB (œ³ )
as Eœ³ βàΦpF [βà΅ΈΗ log pF (œ³ )] = βà΅ΈΗ Eœ³ βàΦpF [1] = 0. In contrast, the gradient of the contrastive balance
loss with respect to ΈΗ is
                                                            2
                                                 pF (œ³ βÄ≤ )

                                   pF (œ³ )
     βà΅ΈΗ LCB (œ³, œ³ βÄ≤ , ΈΗ) = βà΅ΈΗ log          βà£ log                                                 (51)
                                   pB (œ³ )       pB (œ³ βÄ≤ )
                                               pF (œ³ βÄ≤ )

                                 pF (œ³ )
                         = 2 log         βà£ log             (βà΅ΈΗ log pF (œ³ ) βà£ βà΅ΈΗ log pF (œ³ βÄ≤ )) , (52)
                                 pB (œ³ )       pB (œ³ βÄ≤ )
whose expectation under the outer product distribution pF βä½ pF equals the quantity
4βà΅ΈΗ DKL [pF ||pB ] in Equation 48. Indeed, as
                                          pF (œ³ βÄ≤ )

                           Eœ³ βàΦpF     log             βà΅ΈΗ log pF (œ³ ) = 0,    (53)
                                          pB (œ³ βÄ≤ )
with an equivalent identity obtained by interchanging œ³ and œ³ βÄ≤ ,
                                                                  E        [βà΅ΈΗ LCB (œ³, œ³ βÄ≤ , ΈΗ)] =   (54)
                                                           (œ³,œ³ βÄ≤ )βàΦpF βä½pF

                                             pF (œ³ βÄ≤ )

                               pF (œ³ )                                                     βÄ≤
               E        2 log          βà£ log             (βà΅ΈΗ log pF (œ³ ) βà£ βà΅ΈΗ log pF (œ³ )) =         (55)
       (œ³,œ³ βÄ≤ )βàΦpF βä½pF         pB (œ³ )       pB (œ³ βÄ≤ )
                                                                  pF (œ³ βÄ≤ )

                              pF (œ³ )                                                        βÄ≤
               E       2 log            βà΅ΈΗ log pF (œ³ ) + 2 log                βà΅ΈΗ log pF (œ³ ) =       (56)
      (œ³,œ³ βÄ≤ )βàΦpF βä½pF        pB (œ³ )                              pB (œ³ βÄ≤ )

                                             pF (œ³ )
                                E 4 log                 βà΅ΈΗ log pF (œ³ ) = 4βà΅ΈΗ DKL [pF ||pB ].         (57)
                              œ³ βàΦpF          pB (œ³ )
Thus, the on-policy gradient of the contrastive balance loss equals in expectation the gradient of the
KL divergence between the forward and backward policies of a GFlowNet.

B    E XPONENTIALLY WEIGHTED DISTRIBUTIONS
This section extends our theoretical results and shows how to train a FC-GFlowNet to sample from
a logarithmic pool of locally trained GFlowNets. Henceforth, let R1 , . . . , RN : X βÜ£ R+ be non-
negative functions over X and assume that each client n = 1, . . . , N trains a GFlowNet to sample
proportionally to Rn . The next propositions show how to train a GFlowNet to sample proportionally
                                           QN
to an exponentially weighted distribution n=1 Rn (x)œân for non-negative weights œâ1 , . . . , œâN . We
omit the proofs since they are essentially identical to the ones presented in Appendix A.
Firstly, Theorem 1βÄ≤ below proposes a modified balance condition for the global GFlowNet and shows
that the satisfiability of this condition leads to a generative model that samples proportionally to the
exponentially weighted distribution.


                                                    16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Training of Federated GFlowNets

            (1) (1)            (K) (K)
Require: pF , pB , . . . , pF , pB       clientsβÄô policies, R1 , . . . , RK clientsβÄô rewards, (pF , pB )
                             Q E number of epochs for training, uF uniform policy
  parameterized global policies,
Ensure: pβäΚ (x) βàù R(x) := 1βâΛkβâΛK Rk (x)
  parfor k βàà {1, . . . , K}
                            do                               β•Ζ Train the clientsβÄô models in parallel
                                (k)    (k)
        train the policies pF , pB to sample proportionally to Rk
    end parfor
    for e βàà {1, . . . , E} do                                                            β•Ζ Train the global model
        B βÜê {(œ³, œ³ βÄ≤ ) : œ³, œ³ βÄ≤ βàΦ 1/ 2 ¬Ζ pF n  + 1/2 ¬Ζ uF }                        β•Ζ Sample
                                                                                     o      a batch of trajectories
                1
                  P                        βÄ≤       (1) (1)                 (K) (K)
        L βÜê |B|                L
                       œ³,œ³ βÄ≤ βààB F B   œ³, œ³   ;    pF   , pB   , . . . ,   pF  , pB
        Update the parameters of pF and pB through gradient descent on L
    end for


                                                          (1) (1)           (N ) (N )
Theorem 1βÄ≤ (Federated balance condition). Let pF , pF , . . . , pF , pF                   : V 2 βÜ£ R+ be
pairs of forward and backward policies from N GFlowNets sampling respectively proportional to
R1 , . . . , RN : X βÜ£ R+ . Then, another GFlowNet with forward and backward policies pF , pB βàà
                                                     QN
V 2 βÜ£ R+ samples proportionally to R(x) := n=1 R(x)œân if and only if the following condition
holds for any terminal trajectories œ³, œ³ βÄ≤ βàà T :
                                            (i)
                                                       œâi
                                           pF (s,sβÄ≤ )
                                                                          pF (s,sβÄ≤ )
                              Q                                Q
                      Y          sβÜ£sβÄ≤ βààœ³ p(i) (sβÄ≤ ,s)                 βÄ≤        βÄ≤
                                                                  sβÜ£s βààœ³ pB (s ,s)
                                            B
                                                       œâi =  Q                        .            (58)
                              Q             (i)
                                           pF (s,s )βÄ≤                     pF (s,sβÄ≤ )
                        1βâΛiβâΛN                                        βÄ≤  βÄ≤    sβÜ£s βààœ³ pB (sβÄ≤ ,s)
                                      sβÜ£sβÄ≤ βààœ³ βÄ≤ p(i) (sβÄ≤ ,s)
                                                    B



Secondly, Theorem 2βÄ≤ provides an upper bound on the discrepancy between the targeted and the
learned global distributions under controlled local errors βÄî when the local distributions are hetero-
geneously pooled. Notably, it suggests that the effect of the local failures over the global approxi-
mation may be mitigated by reducing the weights associated with improperly trained local models.
                                                                 (n)      (n)
Theorem 2βÄ≤ (Influence of local failures). Let œÄn := Rn /Zn and pF and pB be the forward and
backward policies of the nth client. We use œ³ β΅ù x to indicate that œ³ βàà T is finished by x βÜ£ sf .
Suppose that the local balance conditions are lower- and upper-bounded βàÄ n = 1, . . . , N as per
                                              (n)                                    (n)
                                             pF (œ³ )                                pF (œ³ )
              1 βà£ Έ±n βâΛ       min                               βâΛ      max                        βâΛ 1 + Έ≤n     (59)
                          xβààX ,œ³ β΅ùx p(n) (œ³ |x)œÄ (x)                xβààX ,œ³ β΅ùx p(n) (œ³ |x)œÄ (x)
                                     B          n                              B          n

where Έ±n βàà (0, 1) and Έ≤n > 0. The Jeffrey divergence DJ between the global model œÄΧ²(x) that
                                                                 QN
fulfills the federated balance condition in Equation 4 and œÄ(x) βàù n=1 œÄn (x)œân then satisfies
                                                        N
                                                        X                  1 + Έ≤n
                                      DJ (œÄ, œÄΧ²) βâΛ            œân log                    .                     (60)
                                                        n=1
                                                                           1 βà£ Έ±n

Interestingly, one could train a conditional GFlowNet (Bengio et al., 2021) to build an amortized
                                                          QN
generative model able to sample proportionally to n=1 Rn (x)œân for any non-negative weights
(œâ1 , . . . , œâN ) within a prescribed set. This is a promising venue for future research.

C      A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS AND IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
This section is organized as follows. First, Appendix C.1 describes the experimental setup under-
lying the empirical evaluation of FC-GFlowNets in section 4. Second, Appendix C.2 exhibits the
details of the variational approximations to the combined distributions used as baselines in Table 1.
Third, Appendix C.3 specifies our settings for comparing the training convergence speed of different
optimization objectives. Algorithm 1 illustrates the training procedure of Federated GFlowNets.                       Reviewer: wWFS


                                                               17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 7: An illustration of the generative process for phylogenetic treesβÄô topologies. We itera-
tively select two trees to join their roots. The final state corresponds to a single, connected graph.



C.1   E XPERIMENTAL SETUP

In the following, we applied the same optimization settings for each environment. For the stochas-
tic optimization, we minimized the contrastive balance objective using the AdamW optimizer
(Loshchilov and Hutter, 2019) for both local and global GFlowNets. We trained the models for
5000 epochs (20000 for the grid world) with a learning rate equal to 3 ¬Ζ 10βà£3 with a batch size de-
pendent upon the environment. Correspondingly, we define the L1 error betweenP      the distributions œÄ
and œÄΧ² as two times the total variation distance between them, βàΞœÄ βà£ œÄΧ²βàΞ1 := xβààX |œÄ(x)βà£ œÄΧ²(x)|. For
the grid world and design of sequences setups, all intermediate GFlowNet states are also terminal,
since they lie on the path from the initial state to another terminal state. For the remaining setups,
the intersection between terminal and intermediate states is empty.                                       Reviewer: rsSg

Grid world. We considered a two-dimensional grid with length size 12 as the environment for the
results of both Table 1 and Figure 2. To parametrize the forward policy, we used an MLP with two
64-dimensional layers and a LeakyReLU activation function between them (Maas et al., 2013). For
inference, we simulated 106 environments to (i) compute the L1 error between the targeted and the
learned distributions. and (ii) select the 800 most rewarding samples. We utilized a batch size equal
to 1024 during both the training and inference phases.
Design of sequences. We trained the GFlowNets to generate sequences of size up to 6 with elements
selected from a set of size 6. We parametrized the forward policies with a single 64-dimensional
layer bidirectional LSTM network followed by an MLP with two 64-dimensional layers (Graves and
Graves, 2012). For training, we used a batch size of 512. For inference, we increased the batch size
to 1024 and we sampled 106 sequences to estimate the quantities reported in Table 1 and Figure 4.
Multiset generation. We designed the GFlowNet to generate multisets of size 8 by iteratively se-
lecting elements from a set U of size 10. Moreover, we endowed each element within U with a
learnable and randomly initialized 10-dimensional embedding. To estimate the transition proba-
bilities at a given state s, we applied an MLP with two 64-dimensional layers to the sum of the
embeddings of the elements in s. During training, we used a batch size of 512 to parallely gener-
ate multiple multisets and reduce the noiseness of the backpropagated gradients. During inference,
we increased the batch size to 1024 and generated 106 samples to generate the results reported in
Table 1 and Figure 3.
Bayesian phylogenetic inference. We devised a GFlowNet to learn a posterior distribution over the
space of rooted phylogenetic trees with 7 leaves and fixed branch lengths. Each state is represented
as a forest. Initially, each leaf belongs to a different singleton tree. An action consists of picking
two trees and joining their roots to a newly added node. The generative process is finished when all
nodes are connected in a single tree (see Figure 7).To estimate the policies at the (possibly partially   Reviewer: Xj4h
built) tree t, we used a graph isomorphism network (GIN; Xu et al., 2019) with two 64-dimensional
layers to generate node-level representations for t and then used an MLP to project the sum of these
representations to a probability distribution over the viable transitions at t. We used a tempered
version of the likelihood to increase the sparsity of the targeted posterior. Importantly, we selected
a batch size of 512 for training and of 1024 for inference. Results for Table 1 and Figure 5 are
estimates based on 105 trees drawn from the learned distributions.
Our implementations were based on PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) and on PyTorch
Geometric (Fey and Lenssen, 2019).


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C.2    PARALLEL C ATEGORICAL VARIATIONAL I NFERENCE

As a simplistic approach to combining the locally learned distributions over compositional objects,
we variationally approximate them as the product of categorical distributions over the objectsβÄô com-
ponents. For this, we select the parameters that minimize the reverse Kullback-Leibler divergence
between the GFlowNetβÄôs distribution pT and the variational family Q,
                        qΧ² = arg min KL[pT ||q] = arg min βà£ExβàΦpT [log q(x)],                             (61)
                                qβààQ                         qβààQ

which, in asymptotic terms, is equivalent to choosing the parameters that maximize the likelihood of
the GFlowNetβÄôs samples under the variational model. Then, we use a logarithmic pool of these local
variational approximations as a proxy for the global model. In the next paragraphs, we present the
specific instantiations of this method for the domains we considered throughout our experiments.
We used the same experimental setup of subsection C.1 to train the local GFlowNets.
Grid world. An object in this domain is composed of its two coordinates in the grid. For a grid of
width W and height H, we consider the variational family
                 Q = {(œï, œà) βàà βàÜW +1 Ο½ βàÜH+1 : qœï,œà (x, y) = Cat(x|œï)Cat(y|œà)},                           (62)
             d
in which βàÜ is the d-dimensional simplex and Cat(œï) (Cat(œà)) is a categorical distribution over
{0, . . . , W } ({0,  . . . , H}) parametrized
                                               by œï (œà). Then, given the N variational approxima-
tions qœï(1) ,œà(1) , . . . , qœï(N ) ,œà(N ) individually adjusted to the distributions learned by the local
GFlowNets, we estimate the unnormalized parameters œïΧÉ and œàΧÉ of the variational approximation to
the global distribution over the positions within the grid as
                                           K                   K
                                     œïΧÉ =       œï(i) and œàΧÉ =        œà (i) .                         (63)
                                         1βâΛiβâΛN                    1βâΛiβâΛN

Then, we let œï = œïu/œïβäΚ 1W +1 and œà = œàu/œàβäΚ 1H+1 , with 1
                        u                        u                d as the d-dimensional vector of 1s, be the
parameters of the global model.
Design of sequences. We represent sequences of size up to T over a dictionary V as a tuple
(S, (x1 , . . . , xS )) denoting its size S and the particular arrangement of its elements (x1 , . . . , xS ).
This is inherently modeled as a hierarchical model of categorical distributions,
                                                             S βàΦ Cat(ΈΗ),                                 (64)
                                    xi βàΦ Cat(œïi,S |S) for i βàà {1, . . . , S},                            (65)
which is parametrized by ΈΗ βàà βàÜT and œï¬Ζ,S βàà RSΟ½|V | for S βàà {1, . . . , T }. We define our family
of variational approximations as the collection of all such hierarchical models       and estimate the
parameters ΈΗ and œï accordingly to Equation 61. In this case, let ΈΗ(1) , œï(1) , . . . , ΈΗ(N ) , œï(N )
be the parameters associated with the variational approximations to each of the N locally trained
GFlowNets. The unnormalized parameters ΈΗΧÉ and œïΧÉ of the combined model that approximates the
global distribution over the space of sequences are then
                           K                      K (i)
                     ΈΗΧÉ =        ΈΗ(i) and œïΧÉ¬Ζ,S =      œï¬Ζ,S for S βàà {1, . . . , T },              (66)
                            1βâΛiβâΛN                     1βâΛiβâΛN

whereas the normalized ones are ΈΗ = ΈΗΧÉ/ΈΗΧÉβäΚ 1T and œï¬Ζ,S = diag(œïΧÉ¬Ζ,S 1|V | )βà£1 œïΧÉ¬Ζ,S .
Multiset generation. We model a multiset S of size S as a collection of independently sampled
elements from a warehouse W with replacement. This characterizes the variational family
                               (                               )
                                                  Y
                          Q = q(¬Ζ|œï) : q(S|œï) =       Cat(s|œï) ,                         (67)
                                                              sβààS

in which œï is the parameter of the categorical distribution over W estimated through Equation 61.
Denote by œï(1) , . . . , œï(N ) the estimated parameters that disjointly approximate the distribution of
N locally trained GFlowNets. We then variationally approximate the logarithmically pooled global
distribution as q(¬Ζ|œï) βàà Q with œï = œïΧÉ/œïΧÉβäΚ 1|W| , in which
                                                    K
                                             œïΧÉ =        œï(i) .                                    (68)
                                                     1βâΛiβâΛN


                                                       19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: Quality of the federated approximation. The global modelβÄôs performance does not criti-
cally depend on the clientsβÄô training objective; it relies only on the goodness-of-fit of their models.

                                Grid World                   Multisets              Sequences
                              L1 βÜ™   Top-800 βÜë            L1 βÜ™   Top-800 βÜë       L1 βÜ™   Top-800 βÜë
                              0.038      βà£6.355           0.130     27.422       0.005      βà£1.535
   FC-GFlowNet (CB)
                            (¬±0.016)     (¬±0.000)        (¬±0.004)   (¬±0.000)    (¬±0.002)    (¬±0.000)
                              0.039      βà£6.355           0.131     27.422       0.006      βà£1.535
   FC-GFlowNets (TB)
                            (¬±0.006)     (¬±0.000)        (¬±0.018)   (¬±0.000)    (¬±0.005)    (¬±0.000)



Notably, the best known methods for carrying out Bayesian inference over the space of phyloge-
netic trees are either based on Bayesian networks (Zhang and Matsen IV, 2018) or MCMC, neither
of which are amenable to data parallelization and decentralized distributional approximations. More
precisely, the product of Bayesian networks may not be efficiently representable as a Bayesian net-
work, and it is usually not possible to build a global Markov chain whose stationary distribution
matches the product of the stationary distributions of local Markov chains. Moreover, any categor-
ical variational approximation factorizable over the treesβÄô clades would not be correctly supported
on the space of complete binary trees and would lead to frequently sampled invalid graphs.

C.3   C OMPARISON OF DIFFERENT TRAINING CRITERIA

Experimental setup. We considered the same environments and used the same neural network
architectures described in subsection C.1 to parametrize the transition policies of the GFlowNets.
Importantly, the implementation of the DB constraint and of the FL-GFlowNet requires the choice
of a parametrization for the state flows (Bengio et al., 2023; Pan et al., 2023a). We model them as an
neural network with an architecture that essentially mirrors that of the transition policies βÄî with the
only difference being the output dimension, which we set to one. Moreover, we followed suggestions
in (Pan et al., 2023a; Malkin et al., 2022) and utilized a learning rate of 3 ¬Ζ 10βà£3 for all parameters of
the policy networks except for the partition functionβÄôs logarithm log Z composing the TB constraint,
for which we used a learning rate of 1 ¬Ζ 10βà£1 . Noticeably, we found that this heterogeneous learning
rate scheme is crucial to enable the training convergence under the TB constraint.

Further remarks regarding Figure 6. In Figure 6, we observed that LCB and LT B per-
form similarly in the grid world and in design of sequences domains. A reasonable explanation
for this is that such criteria are identically parameterized in such domains, as LDB reduces to
R(sβÄ≤ )pB (s|sβÄ≤ )pF (sf |s) = R(s)pF (sβÄ≤ |s)pF (sf |sβÄ≤ ) in environments where every state is terminal
Deleu et al. (2022). Thus, F vanishes and hence the difficult estimation of this function is avoided.

C.4   A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS

Comparison between TB and CB with different learning rates.                               TB (lr=0.001)

Figure 8 shows that increasing the learning rate for log ZœïZ signifi-  0.8                TB (lr=0.01)
                                                                                          TB (lr=0.1)
cantly accelerates the training convergence for the TB objective. In   0.6
                                                                                          TB (lr=0.5)
                                                                           L1


                                                                                          TB (lr=1.0)
this experiment, the learning rate for the other parameters was fixed  0.4
                                                                                          TB (lr=5.0)
      βà£3
at 10 βÄî following the setup of Malkin et al. (2022, Appendix                              TB (lr=10.0)
                                                                                          CB
B). However, CB leads to faster convergence relatively to TB for all       0 200
                                                                              Epoch
                                                                                    400

lrβÄôs. In practice, though, note that finding an adequate learning rate
for log ZœïZ may be a very difficult and computationally exhaustive Figure 8: CB outperforms TB
endeavor that is completely avoided by implementing the CB loss. for different lrβÄôs for log Z.

Implementing different training objectives for the clients. Table 2 suggests that the accuracy
of FC-GFlowNetβÄôs distributional approximation is mostly independent of whether the clients im-
plemented CB or TB as training objectives. Notably, the combination phase of our algorithm is
designedly agnostic to how the local models were trained βÄî as long as they provide us with well-
trained backward and forward policies. This is not constraining, however, since any practically use-
ful training scheme for GFlowNets is explicitly based upon the estimation of such policies Malkin
et al. (2022); Pan et al. (2023a); Bengio et al. (2023); Zhang et al. (2023a).                               Reviewer: Xj4h



                                                    20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D    R ELATED WORK
GFlowNets were originally proposed as a reinforcement learning algorithm tailored to the search
of diverse and highly valuable states within a given discrete environment (Bengio et al., 2021). Re-
cently, these algorithms were successfully applied to the discovery of biological sequences (Jain
et al., 2022), robust scheduling of operations in computation graphs (Zhang et al., 2023a), Bayesian
structure learning and causal discovery (Deleu et al., 2022; 2023; da Silva et al., 2023; Atanackovic
et al., 2023), combinatorial optimization (Zhang et al., 2023b), active learning (Hernandez-Garcia
et al., 2023), multi-objective optimization (Jain et al., 2023), and discrete probabilistic modeling
(Zhang et al., 2022a; Hu et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2022b). Bengio et al. (2023) formulated the
theoretical foundations of GFlowNets. Correlatively, (Lahlou et al., 2023) laid out the theory of
GFlowNets defined on environments with a non-countable state space. Pan et al. (2023c) and Zhang
et al. (2023c) extended GFlowNets to environments with stochastic transitions and rewards. Con-
comitantly to these advances, there is a growing literature that aims to better understand and improve
this class of algorithms (Deleu and Bengio, 2023; Shen et al., 2023; Malkin et al., 2023), with an
emphasis on the development of effective objectives and parametrizations to accelerate training con-
vergence (Pan et al., 2023b;a; Malkin et al., 2022; Deleu et al., 2022). Notably, both Malkin et al.
(2023) and (Zhang et al., 2023a) proposed using the variance of the a TB-based estimate of the log
partition function as a training objective based on the variance reduction method of Richter et al.
(2020). It is important to note one may use stochastic rewards (see Bengio et al., 2023; Zhang et al.,
2023c) carry out federated inference, in the same fashion of, e.g., distributed stochastic-gradient
MCMC (El Mekkaoui et al., 2021; Vono et al., 2022). Notably, stochastic rewards have also been
used in the context of causal structure learning by (Deleu et al., 2022) and (Deleu et al., 2023). How-
ever, it would require many communication steps between clients and server to achieve convergence
βÄî which is precisely the bottleneck FC-GFlowNets aim to avoid.                                             Reviewer: Xj4h

Distributed Bayesian inference mainly concerns the task of approximating or sampling from a
posterior distribution given that data shards are spread across different machines. This comprises
both federated scenarios (El Mekkaoui et al., 2021; Vono et al., 2022) or the ones in which we
arbitrarily split data to speed up inference (Scott et al., 2016). Within this realm, there is a notable
family of algorithms under the label of embarrassingly parallel MCMC (Neiswanger et al., 2014),
which employ a divide-and-conquer strategy to assess the posterior. These methods sample from
subposteriors (defined on each userβÄôs data) in parallel, subsequently sending results to the server
for aggregation. The usual approach is to use local samples to approximate the subposteriors with
some tractable form and then aggregate the approximations in a product. In this line, works vary
mostly in the approximations employed. For instance, Mesquita et al. (2019) apply normalizing
flows, (Nemeth and Sherlock, 2018) model the subposteriors using Gaussian processes, and (Wang
et al., 2015) use hyper-histograms. It is important to note, however, that these works are mostly
geared towards posteriors over continuous random variables.
Federated learning was originally motivated by the need to train machine learning models on
privacy-sensitive data scattered across multiple mobile devices βÄî linked by an unreliable commu-
nication network (McMahan et al., 2017). While we are the first tackling FL of GFlowNets, there
are works on learning other generative models in federated/distributed settings, such as for gener-
ative adversarial networks (Hong et al., 2021; Chang et al., 2020; Qu et al., 2020) and variational
autoencoders (Polato, 2021).


                                                  21
