Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


SDM-RL: S TEADY-S TATE D IVERGENCE M AXIMIZA -
TION FOR ROBUST R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         While reinforcement learning algorithms have achieved human-level performance
         in complex scenarios, they often falter when subjected to perturbations in test en-
         vironments. Previous attempts to mitigate this issue have explored the training
         of multiple policies with varied behaviors, yet these efforts are compromised due
         to suboptimal choices in diversity measures. Such measures often lead to training
         instability or fail to capture the intended diversity among policies. In this research,
         we offer a unified perspective that ties together previous work through the com-
         mon framework of maximizing divergence between steady-state probability distri-
         butions induced by different behavioral policies. Most importantly, we introduce
         an innovative diversity measure, simply used as an intrinsic reward, that addresses
         the limitations of prior work. Our theoretical advancements are complemented by
         experimental evidence across a diverse set of benchmarks.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018) in the recent past has shown to perform better
at complex tasks (Lillicrap et al., 2015) and to even exceed human level performance (Mnih et al.,
2013b; 2015; Silver et al., 2016) leveraging the use of deep neural networks as function approxi-
mators. However, these RL approaches have exhibited susceptibility to even minor perturbations
within test environments. One potential solution for this problem is to train the RL algorithms to be
robust under those perturbations in the training phase itself (Zhang et al., 2021a; Sun et al., 2023).
However, the lack of knowledge about the permissible perturbations in the test environment renders
such training approaches restrictive and effective only when prior information about the test envi-
ronment is available. This leads us to the question on can we formulate a general form of robustness
without any knowledge about the test environment?
One potential solution to this question is to induce a set of policies that are different from each other.
Recent works have attempted to accomplish this by characterizing the diversity within the policy set
as an intrinsic reward function, optimizing it concurrently with the environmental reward so that they
can induce policies that are both close to the optimal policy and different from each other. These di-
versity measures in existing literature can be broadly categorized into two groups: information-based
diversity measures (Kumar et al., 2020; Eysenbach et al., 2018; Osa et al., 2022) that maximized the
mutual information between the policies and the states encountered while executing those policies
and successor feature (Barreto et al., 2018a) based diversity measures (Zahavy et al., 2022; 2023)
that estimates the distance between the steady-state probability distributions (SSD) induced by dif-
ferent polices using successor features. As we show in this work all of these diversity measures can
be seen as a relaxation or an approximation for the different approaches to measuring the divergence
between the SSDs induced by polices in this set.
However, these measures have their limitations. They directly depend on the current policy, which
can lead to training instability or as in the case of successor feature-based measures, struggle to
converge to the true distance between steady-state distributions (SSDs) induced by different policies
when environmental knowledge is lacking, resulting in weak estimation of the distance between the
SSDs.
In this work, we propose what could be considered an ideal diversity measure, but demonstrate that
it is not immune to limitations identified in previous work. To address this, we introduce a novel
alternative measure, which we theoretically show to approximate the ideal measure more closely


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


than existing ones. Crucially, our alternative mitigates the stability issues seen in prior research,
often attributable to the direct relationship between the diversity measure and the current policy.
Our contribution can be summarized as follows
  We propose an ideal diversity measure and a surrogate diversity measure for the ideal measure
  which addresses the limitations of both the ideal measure and the measures from the past works
  present.

  In the discrete state space setting, we theoretically show that our proposed measure is closer to
  the ideal diversity than the past works.

  On an experimentation level in both continuous and discrete control settings we show that our
  method performs better compared to the past works.


                                              Policy 1


                                              Policy 2


                                            Policy 3
Figure 1: Examples of different near optimal polices that were learned on the hopper environment
using our proposed measure. Here the learned polices 1, 2 and 3 correspond to hopping forward
while lowering the body, hopping only using the tip of the front foot and balancing in place respec-
tively.


2   R ELATED W ORKS
Robustness in Reinforcement Learning The pursuit of robustness within reinforcement learning
has undergone extensive investigation, with applications spanning safety and generalization, among
others. A prevalent approach to addressing robustness in reinforcement learning involves framing it
as a two-player zero-sum game, wherein the adversary’s action space encompasses the uncertainties
present in the test environment, such as the transition function and reward function (Bagnell et al.,
2001; Nilim & Ghaoui, 2004; Iyengar, 2005). An alternative avenue to induce robustness is by
perturbing either the state observations (Zhang et al., 2021b; Pattanaik et al., 2018) or the agent’s
actions (Sun et al., 2023; Klima et al., 2019), or by accounting for uncertainties in environmental
parameters like mass, friction, and gravity (Pinto et al., 2017; 2016). However, it’s important to
note that these methods require knowledge about the permissible range of perturbations that can be
applied to the environment in test time.
Diversity in Reinforcement Learning In the absence of the knowledge about the uncertainty in
the test environment a set of works tries to generate different close to optimal behaviours in the
training in order to have robustness in test time. These line of works are closely related to our work.
(Kumar et al., 2020; Eysenbach et al., 2018; Osa et al., 2022; Zahavy et al., 2022; 2023) uses a
diversity measure as an auxiliary intrinsic reward to the main environmental reward. Variation of
these concepts have also been used into multi agent reinforcement learning (Wang et al., 2020; Liu
et al., 2017) to induce different roles in different agents.


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Steady State Probability Ratio Estimation Estimating the steady state probability ratio between
an expert policy and a learners policy has been a complex task due to their dependency on both the
policy and the policy’s interaction with the environment. There have been methods that estimate
this ratio (Gelada & Bellemare, 2019; Hallak & Mannor, 2017) using the steady-state property of
stationary distributions of Markov processes. But these methods come with the limitation of needing
a explicit knowledge of the policy making it impossible to learn in the face of data from a mixture
of polices or non markovian behaviour polices. To this end recent works (Nachum et al., 2019;
Kostrikov et al., 2019) have proposed a policy agnostic estimation of steady state probability ratios.
Our diversity estimation objective in Equation 3 falls on to a similar type of ratio estimation.


3     P RELIMINARIES

3.1   R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

We consider a Markov decision process (MDP), defined by the tuple < S, A, p, r >, where the
state space S and the action space A which is either continuous or discrete, and the unknown state
transition probability p(st+1 |st , at ) represents the probability of the next state st+1 ∈ S given the
current state st ∈ S and action a ∈ A. The environment gives a bounded reward r(st , at ) which is
bounded by [Rmin , Rmax ] on each transition. We will use π(at |st ) to denote the policy that dictates
the action taken by an agent given a state. As a general notation given a probability space X, we
will use x ∈ X to indicate the random variable from the space and xi ∈ X as the realization of the
random variable. We will also use xt to indicate a time-indexed random variable. We will P     define the
                                                                                                  t=H
total accumulated reward during an episode of length H given a start state s0 by Jπ (s0 ) = t=0 rt .
The maximum possible reward an agent can get in the environment is given by Rmax . The steady-
state distribution that is induced by a certain policy πi is defined as dπi . This can either be a steady
state distribution dπi (s) or a steady state-action probability distribution dπi (s, a).

3.2   D IVERSE R EINFORCEMENT LEARNING

When it comes to diverse reinforcement learning the policy is defined by a set of policies π ∈ Π
where each realization of the policy πi is a separate policy and the goal of the learner is to learn a
set of policies such that each of those policies is close to optimal and diverse enough from the other
policies. In general, the cardinality of the set of policies is set as a non-infinite number. Given a
set of latent variable Z and a certain zi ∈ Z we use πi−1 to define the collection of all policies in
the set other than the policy πi corresponding to the latent variable zi . In situations where we don’t
have information about all the policies in the set, we will slightly abuse this notation and use πi−1 to
define the collection of all the available policies other than πi . Once the training is done in general
a random zi is drawn from a probability p(z) and the corresponding policy πi is used as the current
policy. In practice, zi s are drawn from a uniform distribution.
In general, the diversity is either implicitly or explicitly defined by a measure of how separate the
agent’s policy is on the steady state probability distribution space. The diverse policies are obtained
by explicitly maximizing the diversity measure along with the reward. Generally, these methods can
be classified into two major categories as follows.
  Information based methods (Kumar et al., 2020; Eysenbach et al., 2018; Osa et al., 2022): Here
  the information between the latent variable z and either the states visited by a policies or the
  trajectories generated by the policies is used as a diversity measure. To be exact, either I(s; z)
  or I(τ ; z) is used as the diversity measure where τ denotes the trajectory and I(.) refers to the
  mutual information. As we see later this type of setting can also eventually be derived as an
  implicate measure of the distance between the steady state probability distribution induced by
  these policies.
  Successor Feature (SF) Based (Zahavy et al., 2022; 2023): Here the direct objective is to charac-
  terize distance between the SSDs induced by the polices in the set of polices as the diversity. But
  instead of directly approximating the SSDs the expected return of successor features (Barreto
  et al., 2018b) ψ = Es,a∼dπ (s,a) [ϕ(s, a)] are used as an estimate for the actual steady state proba-
  bility distribution. Here ϕi+1 denotes the successor feature and ψ denotes the expected successor
  feature. As seen later this surrogate function can be a weak estimate in most scenarios.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We discuss about these methods in detail in Section 5.
In most instances, the diversity measure serves as an auxiliary reward in conjunction with the en-
vironmental reward. When the diversity measure or function is dependent on the current policy πi ,
it has the potential to escalate to significantly higher values, since the learning algorithm strives to
discover policies that yield greater diversity values and it can now choose a policy such that the
diversity function yields higher values in general for all states as it now has the ability to change the
auxiliary reward function itself. In case of the information based methods this dependency is convex
in the steady state probability induced by the policy πi as shown in A.1. Consequently, in such sce-
narios, the pursuit of diversity may lead to policies with extremely low rewards as the diversity value
surpasses a certain threshold. To mitigate this, an indicator constraints as below is normally used
confine the influence of diversity beyond a certain threshold. The general objective for a diverse
policy optimization of the past works (both the successor feature and information based methods)
can be summarized as follows.

               Jπi = E(s,a)∼dπi [rt (s, a) + αdiv .1(κ.Rmax <Rπi ) Diversityπi ,π−1 (s, a)]           (1)
                                                                                    i


Here Diversityπz ,π −1 (s, a) refers to the diversity between a policy πi and the rest of the policies
                 i   z
                      i
in the set. Here Rmax is the maximum reward on the training environment. Rπi refers to the
return of the current policy where 0 < κ < 1 and 1 is an indicator random variable. However,
employing such an indicator random variable can potentially cause all policies to converge towards
the optimal one, unless the parameter κ is chosen judiciously. Intuitively, selecting a higher value for
κ implies that most state transition tuples (s, a, r, s′ ) will lack the diversity term in reward, thereby
driving the algorithm to optimize all policies towards a singular, optimal policy, devoid of diversity.
Conversely, opting for a lower κ value may result in an overall performance decline. Furthermore,
in offline setting due to the presence of such an indicator random variable the replay buffer will
contains samples following two different objectives (when the indicator random variable is zero vs
non zero) this would make the learning for the agent difficult as it can lead to insufficient support for
a specific diverse policy within the replay buffer. Moreover, tuning of this κ also require some level
of intuition about the ideal reward in the environment. Thus the removal of the diversity function’s
dependence on the policy πi can help us alleviate these optimization related problems.

4    P ROPOSED D IVERSITY M EASURE

We propose our diversity measure to evaluate the overall diversity in the set of polices Π as follows

                                                                         Uniform(s)
                          Diversityours
                                   π −1
                                        (.) = Ezi ∼p(z) [E(s)∼dπi (log              )]                (2)
                                    i                                     dπ−1 (s)
                                                                             i


The essence of this diversity measure lies in its reliance on the steady state probability distribution
of other policies πi−1 as an indicator to identify states that are frequently visited. Consequently, it
can be used as a diversity measure to encourage the optimization of different policies while having
optimality in mind. In fact, within a constant factor, this measure is equivalent to maximizing the
entropy of the steady-state probability dπi−1 . But the direct computation of the entropy involves
estimating the dπi−1 probability itself. But the formulation of Equation 2 as KL divergence allows
us to use the Donsker-Varadhan representation (Donsker & Varadhan, 1983) of KL divergence to
estimate the KL divergence using samples by minimizing the following objective.
                                               h       i
           −DKL dπi ∥dπi−1 = min log E(s)∼dπ −1 eνi (s) − E(s)∼Uniform(s) [νi (s)]

                                                                                                      (3)
                                        νi :S→R              i



If we use a function approximator νi : S → R the optimal solution to the above objective will give
us the estimate of the term needed to evaluate the KL divergece as follows.

                                                        Uniform(s)
                                        νi∗ (s) = log              +C                                 (4)
                                                         dπi−1 (s)

                                                         4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A key observation about this diversity measure Diversityoursπi−1
                                                                 (.) is its independence from the current
policy πi , distinguishing it from previous approaches. This unique characteristic renders the diver-
sity function a constant with regard to the current policy, effectively mitigating the issue of diversity
escalation. Consequently, we can express the policy optimization objective as follows, eliminating
the need for the indicator random variable 1(α.Rmax < Rπi ). The pseudo code for the algorithm
can be found on Appendix A.5.


                          Jπi = E(s,a)∼dπi [rt (s, a) + α ∗ Diversityours
                                                                     πi−1 (s, a)]                             (5)

We can use any standard reinforcement learning algorithm to optimize this objective. Now, we only
need to adjust 0 < αdiv < 1 instead of having to fine-tune both κ and α as was required in prior
works. This effectively addresses the limitations that were encountered in previous optimization ap-
proaches. Furthermore, the objective in Equation 3 is also suited to measuring the diversity between
non Markov behaviours and Markov polices. Thus this method can also be generalized for setting
where the diversity in polices is induced with an expert behaviour in mind where the trained agents
maybe working with an expert in the test settings. Even though this is beyond the scope of this paper
the ability to do this also gives our work more validity in terms of generalizability.


5     J USTIFICATION OF O UR P ROPOSED D IVERSITY M EASURE

5.1    I DEAL D IVERSITY M EASURE


      (a) Diversity = Ezi ∼p(z) [KL(dπi−1 (.)||dπi (.))] (b) Diversity = Ezi ∼p(z) [KL(dπall (.)||dπi (.))]

Figure 2: The figure gives a geometrical example on why the ideal diversity measure is better than
the information diversity measure. In this example of reaching the goal from the start state the green
paths denote the a set of polices denoted by πi−1 while the blue path denotes the policy πi . The red
line denote the average polices. In case of (a) is it the average of only the πi−1 polices and in case of
(b) it is the average of all three polices πall . If we are to compute the diversity between the current
policy and the average policy given by the red line we can see that the ideal diversity measure (a)
calculate an accurate diversity measure than the non ideal measure (b)

In this section, we propose a diversity measure as follows, which we argue as an ideal diversity
measure against the existing works in the following sections.


                        Diversity ideal (.) = Ezi ∼p(z) [KL(dπi−1 (.)||dπi (.))]                              (6)
                                                                             dπi (s)
                                              = Ezi ∼p(z) [E(s)∼dπi (log              )]                      (7)
                                                                            dπi−1 (s)

However, it is evident that this measure or function still depends on the current policy πi under-
scoring the necessity for an optimization objective akin to Equation 1. This is what motivated us to
alternatively propose a diversity measure in Equation 2 independent of the current policy π. In the
following sections we show that the proposed measure in Equation 2 is still theoretically better than
the past works.


                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5.2   I NFORMATION BASED METHOD

Information-based methods typically define diversity as the mutual information between the latent
variable z and either the trajectory or the state. This intuitively couples different trajectories or
state visitations with distinct realizations of z. When the information between z and the trajectory
equals zero, it signifies that the choice of zi has no impact on the trajectory. Conversely, if this
information is higher, it implies that different policies are dependent on the specific values of z.
With generally used assumption that zs are sampled
                                                 P from a uniform distribution, we can equivalently
express the diversity measure as KL(dπz (.)|| k dπk (.)), up to a constant factor. Here, we slightly
abuse notationP to denote the mixture of steady distribution probability induced by all the policies in
the set Π as k dπk (.).

                                                           X
                     Diversity inf o (.) = KL(dπz (.)||         dπk (.))                           (8)
                                                            k
                                                                     dπ (s)
                                         = Ezi ∼p(z) [E(s)∼dπi (log P i        )]                  (9)
                                                                     k dπk (s)

Information-based methods differ from the ideal diversity measure in that the ideal measure maxi-
mizes the divergence between the steady-state probability distribution induced by the current policy
and the steady-state distribution induced by all the other policies. In contrast, the information-based
method maximizes the divergence between the steady-state probability induced by the current policy
and all policies, including itself. This difference is one of the reasons why we contend that the ideal
measure offers a better separation between the current policy and the other policies in the set.
Theorem 1. In discrete state-space settings, the difference between the ideal diversity measure and
the information-based diversity measure, δinf o , is always smaller than the deviation between the
proposed diversity measure and the ideal diversity measure, δours .

Proof. Proof Sketch: Since these measures involve divergences, we can lowerbound the informa-
tion based measure’s closeness to the ideal diversity measure , as follows, where C is a constant and
H(.) denotes entropy.

                      δ info ≥ Ezi ∼p(z) [H(dπi (.), dπi−1 (.)) − H(dπi (.))] − C                 (10)

Similarly we can measure proposed measure’s Equation 2 deviation from the ideal measure as fol-
lows with a constant K
                             δ ours = Ezi ∼p(z) [−H(dπi (.))] + K                         (11)

The differences between δinf o and δours while ignoring the constants can be written as
                            δ info − δ ours = Ezi ∼p(z) [H(dπi (.), dπi−1 (.))]                   (12)

In the case of discrete state space the cross entropy is always non negative. Thus δ info ≥ δ ours
concluding the proof.

Theorem 1 makes our proposed measure closer to the ideal measure than the information based
measure. This on top of the independence from the current policy gives a superiority for our measure
against the information based measure.
For a detailed derivation, please refer to the Appendix A.1, A.2, A.3, A.4.

5.3   S UCCESSOR F EATURE BASED METHOD

Successor feature based methods also work on the idea of maximising the steady state probabilities
between the polices but instead of working directly on the probabilities they use the expected succes-
sor features as a surrogate measure. The idea of successor features is to decompose the rewards as
a linear combination of some feature vector of choice. Here the feature ϕ is known as the successor
feature.


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                               ⊤
                                       r (s, a) = ϕ (s, a) w                                    (13)


The expectation of the consecutive successor features give an state and action s, a is treated as an
estimate of the steady state probability distribution.



                                  ψ(s, a) = Es,a∼dπ (s,a) [ϕ(s, a)]                             (14)


Then using the vector representation of the steady state probability distribution we can define the
diversity as some distance measure for instance the Hausdorff distance.


                                                         n
                                                         X                   2
                         Diversityπi ,π−1 (s, a) = 0.5         min ψ i − ψ j 2                  (15)
                                      i                        j̸=i
                                                         i=1



When successor features are selected as the one-hot vector representation in the state-action space,
ψ(s, a) converges towards the steady-state probability distribution, as w effectively becomes equiv-
alent to r (s, a). However, as we deviate from the one-hot vector representation, some information
from the reward itself becomes encapsulated by the successor feature, weakening the assumption of
convergence to the real steady-state probability. In practice, state observation can be chosen as the
feature vector. But in high-dimensional setting, raw state observations may prove insufficient for
estimating diversity, necessitating the learner to have a certain degree of environmental knowledge
for designing these feature vectors. This makes this measure less generalizable compared to both
the ideal measure in Equation 8 and our proposed measure in Equation 2.


6     E XPERIMENTS

We design our experiments to answer question which we believe as central to proving our hypothesis.
Does the proposed measure induce diverse polices without collapsing to a single policy? To this
end, we evaluate our proposed metric using a 2D grid world environment and continuous control
tasks (Todorov et al., 2012). In our experiments, we optimize our the diversity-based objective in
Equation 5 in conjunction with Soft Actor Critic (SAC) (Haarnoja et al., 2018) as the base algorithm
for continuous control and Q-learning (Mnih et al., 2013a) as the base algorithm for discrete control
scenario. We benchmark our diversity measure based method (Ours) against the SAC base algorithm
in the continuous domain and Q-learning in the discrete domain, along with the Information-based
method (Kumar et al., 2020) and the Successor Feature-based method (SF) (Zahavy et al., 2022).
We maintain the same base algorithm across all these methods for consistency.


6.1   G RIDWORLD :ROBUSTNESS UNDER PERTURBATION

Here as seen on Figure 3 (a) in the training environment task of the agent is to move from the grey
box to the black box in as few steps as possible. In the test environment the agent is faced with
obstacles of different sizes as show in Figure 3 (b,c,d) where the optimal policy possible from the
training environment will not be enough successfully navigate in the test environment thus requiring
the agent to generate polices that are diverse enough while sacrificing on the optimality at some
level. Here the agent receives a reward of 20 when it reaches the goal and is penalized in a dynamic
manner at every step based on the distance from the goal.


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(a) Original Environment           (b) Obstacle 1           (c) Obstacle 2              (d) Obstacle 3

Figure 3: Illustration of environment obstacles during test time. Here the grey box indicate the
starting point and the black box indicates the goal. Blue boxes indicate the obstacles that were
added in the new environment. Here the goal of the agent is to navigate to the black box from the
grey box.


As seen in Figure 4 a setting like this where only a single optimal policy is possible the presence of
the indicator random variable based filter 1(κ.Rmax <Rπi ) and the diversity measure’s dependence on
the current policy had lead to the collapsing of polices into a single optimal policy while the current
policy independent diversity measure of ours lead to a stable training thus inducing different polices
which makes it robust to the unseen test environment 1. The intuition behind this observation is that
when there is only one optimal policy that is possible in the environment the hyper parameter tuning
κ becomes paramount because the policies needed.


                        (a) Ours                        (b) Others (Q learning, Information based, SF)

Figure 4: Demonstration of the learned diverse yet near-optimal policies. Here the lines denote the
trajectories of the polices generated by each algorithm.

            Method           Original Environment         Obstacle 1     Obstacle 2     Obstacle 3
          Q Learning                  15.6                 -70.03         -70.03         -70.03
              SF                      15.6                 -70.03         -70.03         -70.03
       Information based              15.6                 -70.03         -70.03         -70.03
             Ours                    13.47                 -51.12          -6.17         -51.12

Table 1: Comparison of our proposed methods against Q Learning, Information based and the suc-
cessor feature based method in the grid world environment. Here the test environment was defined
with additional unseen obstacles in the training. Here both the successor feature based method and
the information based method suffered from all the polices collapsing into an optimal policy result-
ing in them under-performing compared to our method in the test scenarios.


6.2   C ONTINUOUS CONTROL TASKS :ROBUSTNESS UNDER PERTURBATION

In our study within the realm of continuous control, we conducted a benchmark comparison between
our approach and previous methods, using the established Mujoco control tasks in the Gymnasium
environment (Towers et al., 2023). Specifically, we evaluated our approach in the Hopper and Ant
environments. During the training phase, our agents were trained to generate multiple policies for
the standard control tasks. In the testing phase, we introduced perturbations by simulating joint
malfunctions, where specific joint torques were set to fixed values. The testing tasks were defined
based on these joint failures as follows.
Ant
  Test 1: Fix the torque of Ant’s right back leg hinge joint at -1.0


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Test 2: Fix the torque of Ant’s front right leg hinge joint at -1.0
  Test 3: Fix the torque of Ant’s back leg hinge joint at -1.0
Hopper
  Test 1: Fix the torque of Hopper’s thigh hinge joint at 0.5
As seen in the Table 2 and Table 3 on average our proposed method was able to experimentally
perform better as opposed to the past works while sacrificing some performance in the training
environment as expected.

                                                     Method                                Original Environment                                                                 Test 1                                                        Test 2                            Test 3
                                                       SAC                                     3593 ± 1115                                                                     55 ± 114                                                     42 ±172                           -13 ± 148
                                                        SF                                      1553 ± 772                                                                    351 ± 410                                                    -145 ± 193                         208 ± 220
                                                   Information                                   779 ± 385                                                                    659 ± 230                                                     266 ± 56                          302 ± 154
                                                       Ours                                     1335 ± 663                                                                    568 ± 327                                                    615 ± 448                          498 ± 512

Table 2: Comparison of our proposed methods against SAC, Information based and the successor
feature based method. Here the test experiments were conducted by selectively disabling certain
joints in the Ant. Across all tasks, our algorithm, on average, achieved a higher cumulative reward
at the cost of a lower cumulative reward in the training environment.


                                                                                             Method                                                           Original Environment                                                           Test 1
                                                                                               SAC                                                                3263 ± 507                                                                98 ± 47
                                                                                                SF                                                                 1419 ± 800                                                              313 ± 31
                                                                                           Information                                                             2930 ± 266                                                              147 ± 71
                                                                                               Ours                                                                1277 ± 567                                                              435 ± 83

Table 3: Comparison of our proposed methods against SAC, Information based and the successor
feature based method. Here the test experiment was designed by disabling thigh joint of the Hopper.
As observed in previous experiments, our algorithm achieved a higher cumulative reward on the test
task, albeit at the cost of a relatively lower cumulative reward in the training environment.


6.3                                   C OVERAGE : C ONTINUOUS CONTROL TASKS

We additionally perform a visual assessment of our proposed measure’s coverage in the state space
against the past works. Here we collect the states visited following all the polices generated by a
particular algorithm and we perform a dimesionality reduction via PCA (F.R.S., 1901) and create a
scatter plot of the points along the first two principal axes. Consistent with the findings presented in
the previous section, our diversity measure effectively demonstrates superior coverage of the state
space, as illustrated in Figure 5.

                                                          Ours                                                                                   SAC                                                              Infromation based measure                                   Successor feature based measure
 Second prominent Dimension


                                                                                            Second prominent Dimension


                                                                                                                                                                                  Second prominent Dimension


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Second prominent Dimension


                              0.04
                                                                                Policy 1                                                                           Policy 1                                                                        Policy 1                                                                                        Policy 1
                                                                                Policy 2                                 0.03
                                                                                                                                                                   Policy 2                               0.030                                    Policy 2                                0.04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Policy 2
                              0.03                                              Policy 3                                                                           Policy 3                                                                        Policy 3                                                                                        Policy 3
                                                                                Policy 4                                                                           Policy 4                               0.025                                    Policy 4                                                                                        Policy 4
                              0.02
                                                                                                                         0.02                                                                                                                                                              0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.020
                              0.01


                              0.00                                                                                                                                                                        0.015
                                                                                                                         0.01                                                                                                                                                              0.00


                              0.01                                                                                                                                                                        0.010

                                                                                                                         0.00                                                                                                                                                              0.02
                              0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.005

                              0.03

                                                                                                                         0.01                                                                             0.000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.04
                              0.04



                                       Prominent Dimension                                                                             Prominent Dimension                                                                Prominent Dimension                                                             Prominent Dimension
                                     0.03   0.02   0.01    0.00   0.01   0.02      0.03                                         0.02     0.01   0.00   0.01     0.02                                               0.02      0.01   0.00    0.01      0.02                                        0.000    0.005   0.010   0.015   0.020   0.025       0.030


                                             (a) Ours                                                                                      (b) SAC                                        (c) Information based                                                                                                    (d) SF

Figure 5: This figure illustrates the state space coverage by the policies generated by each agent in
the hopper environment. Dimensionality reduction was performed through PCA on the visited states.
Here the x and y axes represent the two primary dimensions resulting from PCA. Our proposed
method demonstrated better coverage compared to alternative methods.



                                                                                                                                                                              9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


6.4   H YPERPARAMETERS

In the case of SAC, the policy and value-based estimators used a network architecture with two
hidden layers, each of size 256, utilizing ReLU non-linearity (Agarap, 2018). Both the alpha and
the network used a learning rate of 3 × 10−4 . A discount rate γ of 0.99 was employed, along with a
soft update rate of 5 × 10−2 to update the target value function alongside the current value function.
The νi (s) estimator from our method, the discriminator from the information-based method, and the
expected successor feature estimator all shared the same architecture with two hidden layers, each of
size 256, and employed ReLU non-linearity. Their respective learning rates were 3×10−6 , 3×10−4 ,
and 3 × 10−4 . In both the information-based method and SF-based methods, κ was selected from
within the range of 0.2 to 0.75. For all the algorithms, αdiv was searched across a range of 0.1 to 10.

7     C ONCLUSION
In this work, we analyse the diversity measures employed to elicit distinct behaviors in reinforcement
learning agents in the existing works and identify the limitations posed by them. Additionally, we
introduce an alternative diversity metric that adeptly mitigates these limitations, offering a more
effective indicator of the diversity among these different behaviours. Our primary focus of this work
has been on the analysis of diversity metrics. We demonstrate that our proposed metric effectively
addresses these limitations, both theoretically and empirically.
One non explored avenue in this work is the proposed framework’s ability to induce different be-
haviours with regards to the non Markovian polices. This is an interesting avenue because it can
facilitate on training agents that work in complementary to an expert in tasks such as search and
rescue where it will be more beneficial to train the agents to exhibit behaviours not followed by
the human in order to increase the cooperative coverage of the area. This poses as an interesting
direction for the future works.
Our proposed measure also has its own limitations. Specifically, it necessitates the storage of eval-
uation samples of policies during training to estimate the diversity measure, potentially increasing
storage requirements. But this comes with an advantage that samples from some expert polices can
be used without any knowledge about the expert polices while inducing diversity. Consequently, a
potential avenue for future research lies in finding a balance where the diversity of current learn-
able policies can be efficiently evaluated without the requirement for evaluation samples, while still
enabling the estimation of diversity with respect to available expert data samples.


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Abien Fred Agarap.     Deep learning using rectified linear units (relu).         arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1803.08375, 2018.
J. Andrew Bagnell, A. Ng, and Jeff G. Schneider. Solving uncertain markov decision processes.
   2001. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:6406768.
André Barreto, Will Dabney, Rémi Munos, Jonathan J. Hunt, Tom Schaul, Hado van Hasselt, and
  David Silver. Successor features for transfer in reinforcement learning, 2018a.
André Barreto, Will Dabney, Rémi Munos, Jonathan J. Hunt, Tom Schaul, Hado van Hasselt, and
  David Silver. Successor features for transfer in reinforcement learning, 2018b.
M. D. Donsker and S. R.S. Varadhan. Asymptotic evaluation of certain markov process expectations
 for large time. iv. Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics, 36(2):183–212, March
 1983. ISSN 0010-3640. doi: 10.1002/cpa.3160360204.
Benjamin Eysenbach, Abhishek Gupta, Julian Ibarz, and Sergey Levine. Diversity is all you need:
  Learning skills without a reward function, 2018.
Karl Pearson F.R.S. Liii. on lines and planes of closest fit to systems of points in space. The
  London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science, 2(11):559–572,
  1901. doi: 10.1080/14786440109462720.
Carles Gelada and Marc G. Bellemare. Off-policy deep reinforcement learning by bootstrapping the
  covariate shift, 2019.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor, 2018.
Assaf Hallak and Shie Mannor. Consistent on-line off-policy evaluation, 2017.
Garud N. Iyengar. Robust dynamic programming. Mathematics of Operations Research, 30(2):
  257–280, 2005. ISSN 0364765X, 15265471. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/
  25151652.
Richard Klima, Daan Bloembergen, Michael Kaisers, and Karl Tuyls. Robust temporal difference
  learning for critical domains, 2019.
Ilya Kostrikov, Ofir Nachum, and Jonathan Tompson. Imitation learning via off-policy distribution
   matching, 2019.
Saurabh Kumar, Aviral Kumar, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. One solution is not all you need:
  Few-shot extrapolation via structured maxent rl, 2020.
Timothy P. Lillicrap, Jonathan J. Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Manfred Otto Heess, Tom Erez,
  Yuval Tassa, David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learn-
  ing. CoRR, abs/1509.02971, 2015.
Yang Liu, Prajit Ramachandran, Qiang Liu, and Jian Peng. Stein variational policy gradient, 2017.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan Wier-
  stra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning, 2013a.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan Wier-
  stra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning, 2013b. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/1312.5602.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A. Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G. Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin A. Riedmiller, Andreas Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, Stig Petersen,
  Charlie Beattie, Amir Sadik, Ioannis Antonoglou, Helen King, Dharshan Kumaran, Daan Wier-
  stra, Shane Legg, and Demis Hassabis. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning.
  Nature, 518:529–533, 2015.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ofir Nachum, Yinlam Chow, Bo Dai, and Lihong Li. Dualdice: Behavior-agnostic estimation of
  discounted stationary distribution corrections, 2019.
Arnab Nilim and Laurent El Ghaoui. Robust Markov Decision Processes with Uncertain Transition
  Matrices. PhD thesis, USA, 2004. AAI3165509.
Takayuki Osa, Voot Tangkaratt, and Masashi Sugiyama. Discovering diverse solutions in deep
  reinforcement learning by maximizing state-action-based mutual information, 2022.
Anay Pattanaik, Zhenyi Tang, Shuijing Liu, Gautham Bommannan, and Girish Chowdhary. Robust
  deep reinforcement learning with adversarial attacks. In Proceedings of the 17th International
  Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems, AAMAS ’18, pp. 2040–2042, Rich-
  land, SC, 2018. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems.
Lerrel Pinto, James Davidson, and Abhinav Gupta. Supervision via competition: Robot adversaries
  for learning tasks, 2016.
Lerrel Pinto, James Davidson, Rahul Sukthankar, and Abhinav Gupta. Robust adversarial reinforce-
  ment learning, 2017.
David Silver, Aja Huang, Christopher Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Driessche,
  Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, Sander Dieleman,
  Dominik Grewe, John Nham, Nal Kalchbrenner, Ilya Sutskever, Timothy Lillicrap, Madeleine
  Leach, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Thore Graepel, and Demis Hassabis. Mastering the game of go with
  deep neural networks and tree search. Nature, 529:484–489, 01 2016. doi: 10.1038/nature16961.
Yanchao Sun, Ruijie Zheng, Yongyuan Liang, and Furong Huang. Who is the strongest enemy?
  towards optimal and efficient evasion attacks in deep rl, 2023.
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. The MIT Press,
  second edition, 2018. URL http://incompleteideas.net/book/the-book-2nd.
  html.
Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based con-
  trol. 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 5026–5033,
  2012. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:5230692.
Mark Towers, Jordan K. Terry, Ariel Kwiatkowski, John U. Balis, Gianluca de Cola, Tristan Deleu,
 Manuel Goulão, Andreas Kallinteris, Arjun KG, Markus Krimmel, Rodrigo Perez-Vicente, An-
 drea Pierré, Sander Schulhoff, Jun Jet Tai, Andrew Tan Jin Shen, and Omar G. Younis. Gymna-
 sium, March 2023. URL https://zenodo.org/record/8127025.
Tonghan Wang, Heng Dong, Victor Lesser, and Chongjie Zhang. Roma: Multi-agent reinforcement
  learning with emergent roles, 2020.
Tom Zahavy, Brendan O’Donoghue, Andre Barreto, Volodymyr Mnih, Sebastian Flennerhag, and
  Satinder Singh. Discovering diverse nearly optimal policies with successor features, 2022.
Tom Zahavy, Yannick Schroecker, Feryal Behbahani, Kate Baumli, Sebastian Flennerhag, Shaobo
  Hou, and Satinder Singh. Discovering policies with domino: Diversity optimization maintaining
  near optimality, 2023.
Huan Zhang, Hongge Chen, Duane Boning, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. Robust reinforcement learning on
  state observations with learned optimal adversary, 2021a.
Huan Zhang, Hongge Chen, Chaowei Xiao, Bo Li, Mingyan Liu, Duane Boning, and Cho-Jui
  Hsieh. Robust deep reinforcement learning against adversarial perturbations on state observa-
  tions, 2021b.


                                              12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX

A.1     I NFORMATION BASED MEASURE DERIVATION

Given that the choice of pz for sampling zi s is p(z) ∼ U nif rom(1, nz ) a catergorical uniform
distribution where the cardiality of |Z| = nz we can write the mutual infromation based measure as
follows.
                       I(s; z) =                           I(z; s)
                                           P                            p(sj ,zi )
                           =                  sj ,zi p(sj , zi ) log p(zi )p(sj )
                                            P                           p(zj |si )
                           =                     s ,z p(sj , zi ) log p(zi )
                                         P j i                             p(zi |sj )
                           =                s ,z p(sj |zi ).p(zi ) log p(zi )
                                          Pj i                   −1        p(zi |sj )         (16)
                           =                 sj ,zi p(sj |zi ).nz log n−1      z
                                    P      −1
                                                 P                            dπi (s)
                           =           zi nz .      sj ,zi dπi (s) log
                                                                         P              −1
                                                                            k dπk (s) .nz
                                                  −1
                                          P
                           =                zi zn    .KL(d    π zi (.)||d πzall  (.))
                           =             Ezi ∼p(z) [KL(dπzi (.)||dπzall (.))]

Here we can write p(sj |zi ) = dπi (sj ) as it is the steady state probability induced by the policy
corresponding to a certain zi ∈ Z. Furthermore we replace If we replace p(zi |sj ) in 16 with the
following.

                                                            p(sj |zi ).p(zi )
                                           p(zi |sj ) =    P
                                                             k p(sj |k).p(k)
                                                               d .p(zi )
                                                =          P πi
                                                             k dπk (sj ).p(k)
                                                             dπ (sj ).n−1z
                                                                                                              (17)
                                                =          P i             −1
                                                             k dπk (sj ) .nz
                                                                dπi (sj )
                                                =            P
                                                                k dπk (sj )



Since KL divergence is a convex function we can see that the information measure for the ith policy
is convex on dπi induced by that policy πi .

A.2     I NFORMATION BASED MEASURE ’ S DEVIATION FROM IDEAL MEASURE

        δ info =       Ezi ∼p(z) [KL(dπi (.)||dπi−1 (.))] − Ezi ∼p(z) [KL(dπi (.)||dπiall (.))]
                                                   d (s)                                        d (s)
                     Ezi ∼p(z) [ sj dπi (s) log dπ πi (s) )] − Ezi ∼p(z) [ sj dπi (s) log dπ πi (s) )]
                                P                                           P
            =
                                                    i−1                                           iall
                                                            d i (sj )                     dπi (sj )           (18)
                      Ezi ∼p(z) [ sj dπi (sj ) (log P dπ π(s).(n−1)
                                 P
            =                                                           −1 ) −   log P               −1 )]
                                                       k̸=i  k                         k dπk (sj ).n
                                                                      P            −1
                                                                         d    (s).n
                                 Ezi ∼p(z) [ sj dπi (sj ) log( P dkπ π(s).(n−1)
                                            P
            =                                                               k
                                                                                      −1 ) )]
                                                                    k̸=i   k



A.3     P ROPOSED METHOD ’ S DEVIATION FROM IDEAL MEASURE

      δ ours =      Ezi ∼p(z) [KL(dπi (.)||dπi−1 (.))] − Ezi ∼p(z) [KL(Uniform(.)||dπi−1 (.))]
                                                   d (s)                                       n− 1
                    Ezi ∼p(z) [ sj dπi (s) log dπ πi (s) )] − Ezi ∼p(z) [ sj dπi (s) log dπ s (s) )]
                               P                                          P
        =
                                                    i−1                                        i−1
                                                         d i (sj )                       n−s 1
                   Ezi ∼p(z) [ sj dπi (sj ) (log P dπ π(s).(n−1)
                              P
        =                                                          −1 ) −  log P                    −1 ) )]   (19)
                                               P k̸=i k                          k̸=i dπk (s).(n−1)
        =                         Ezi ∼p(z) [ sj dπi (sj ) (log(dπi (sj )) + log(ns ))]
                                                  P
        =                            Ezi ∼p(z) [ sj dπi (sj ) log(dπi (sj ))] + K
        =                                      Ezi ∼p(z) [−H(dπi (.))] + K

A.4     C OMPARISON OF OUR DEVIATION VS INFORMATION BASED MEASURE ’ S DEVIATION

Since log is a monotonic function we can lower bound the information based measure’s deviation as
follows


                                                          13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                      dπ (s).(n−1)−1 )
                                                              P
               δ info =
                                          P
                               Ezi ∼p(z) [ sj (dπi (sj ) log( k̸=Pi dk (s).n−1 z ))]
                                                                      k πk       z
                                                              P                     −1
                                                                 k̸=i dπk (s).(n−1)z )
                                          P
                  ≤            Ezi ∼p(z) [ sj (dπi (sj ) log(         dπi (s).n−1
                                                                                        ))[
                                                                               z
                                                        P                      −1
                                     P                         d π  (s).(n−1)                      (20)
                  ≤       Ezi ∼p(z) [ sj (dπi (sj )(log( k̸=i dkπ (s)             ))] + log(nz )
                                                                    i
                  ≤               Ezi ∼p(z) [−KL(dπi (.)||dπi−1 (.))] + log(nz )]
                  ≥                    Ezi ∼p(z) [KL(dπi (.)||dπi−1 (.))] − C
                  ≥              Ezi ∼p(z) [H(dπi (.), dπi−1 (.)) − H(dπi (.))] − C

If we compared both δ info and δ ours
                δ info − δ ours = H(dπi (.), dπi−1 (.)) − H(dπzi (.)) + H(dπi (.)) + M
                                                                                                   (21)
                δ info − δ ours =               H(dπi (.), dπi−1 (.)) + M

For a discrete case the cross entropy is a non negative quantity. Thus always δours ≤ δinfo making
our measure close to the ideal measure than the information based measure.


A.5     P SEUDO C ODE

Algorithm 1 SDM-RL with SAC
 1: procedure I NITIALIZATION
 2: Initialize the ratio network νω
 3: Initialize the policy πθz
 4: Initialize Q functions Qϕ1 , Qϕ2 .
 5: Initialize Qϕtar1 , Qϕtar2 .
 6: Set ϕtar1 ← ϕ1 and ϕtar2 ← ϕ2
 7: Initialize the replay buffer Dz s for each policy
 8:
 9: procedure T RAINING
10:     for z = no polices do
11:          Train the ν network with the samples Dz− 1 from previous polices πi−1 using the loss
      function
12:          minνi :S→R log E(s)∼dπ −1 eνi (s) − E(s)∼Uniform(s) [νi (s)]
                                      z
                                          i
13:        for j = no episodes do
14:           Observe a state s
15:           while sj is not terminal do
16:               Get an action a = ϕ(|s)s
17:               Implement the action and observe a next state s′ , termination signal d and a
    reward r.
18:               Store the sample < s, a, s′ , r, d > in the replay buffer D.
19:               if Update then
20:                    Sample B =< s, a, s′ , r, d >
21:                    Compute the target Q function as
22:                    y (r, s′ , d)                =         r        +       αν(s, a)     +     γ(1 −
    d) mini=1,2 Qϕtarg ,i (s′ , a′ ) − α log πθz (ã′ | s′ ) , a′ ∼ πθz (· | s′ )
23:                    Update the Q function using the gradient
                               1
                                   P                                       ′      2
24:                    ∇ϕi |B|        (s,a,r,s′ ,d)∈B (Qϕi (s, a) − y (r, s , d))    for i = 1, 2
25:                    UpdateP    the policy using the gradient
                             1
26:                    ∇θ |B|        s= (mini=1,2 Qϕi (s, ãθ (s)) − α log πθz (ãθ (s) | s))
27:                    Update the target networks
28:                    ϕtarg,i ← ρϕtarg,i + (1 − ρ)ϕi for i = 1, 2



                                                      14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.6    V ISUALIZATION OF THE DIVERSITY MEASURE LANDSCAPE FOR THE GRID WORLD
       PROBLEM


                                   (1) πi−1          (1) Reward Landscape


                                   (2) πi−1          (2) Reward Landscape


                                   (3) πi−1          (3) Reward Landscape

Figure 6: This figure illustrates learned diversity measure’s landscape corresponding policy of others
in different occasion in the gridworld setting. For the figures in the right the x, y axis denote the grid
and the z axis denotes the value of the reward function. This figure illustrates on how visted states
are penalized by a function independent of the policy πi under the proposed diversity measure.


                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.7                                          C OVERAGE : C ONTINUAL C ONTROL TASK

                                                              Ours                                                                                           SAC                                                                 Infromation based measure                                                                Successor feature based measure
 Second prominent Dimension


                                                                                                 Second prominent Dimension


                                                                                                                                                                                             Second prominent Dimension


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Second prominent Dimension
                                                                                   Policy 1                                                                                  Policy 1                                                                                                    Policy 1                                                                              Policy 1
                              0.03
                                                                                   Policy 2                                   0.03
                                                                                                                                                                             Policy 2                                     0.04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Policy 2                                 0.030                                        Policy 2
                                                                                   Policy 3                                                                                  Policy 3                                                                                                    Policy 3                                                                              Policy 3
                                                                                   Policy 4                                                                                  Policy 4                                                                                                    Policy 4                                 0.025
                              0.02
                                                                                                                              0.02                                                                                        0.02

                              0.01                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.020



                              0.00                                                                                                                                                                                        0.00                                                                                                    0.015
                                                                                                                              0.01


                              0.01                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.02
                              0.02                                                                                            0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.005


                              0.03                                                                                                                                                                                        0.04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.000

                                                                                                                              0.01
                              0.04

                                             Prominent Dimension                                                                            Prominent Dimension                                                                           Prominent Dimension                                                                                    Prominent Dimension
                                     0.030   0.025    0.020    0.015   0.010   0.005     0.000                                       0.03     0.02    0.01     0.00   0.01      0.02                                             0.0175    0.0150   0.0125   0.0100   0.0075   0.0050   0.0025   0.0000                                   0.03    0.02   0.01   0.00   0.01   0.02


                                                     (a) Ours                                                                                        (b) SAC                                          (c) Information based                                                                                                                              (d) SF

Figure 7: This figure illustrates the state space coverage by the policies generated by each agent in
the ant environment. Dimensionality reduction was performed through PCA on the visited states.
Here the x and y axes represents the two primary dimensions resulting from PCA. Our proposed
method demonstrated better coverage in the areas on the right hand side of the space a compared to
the lack of coverage in case of SAC. All three of the polices showing better performance than the
standard SAC on test task while having certain level of coverage in this area leads us to hypothesize
that the diverse polices are generated by the visitation of these states. Our proposed measure with
a higher coverage was able perform better in average the than other methods both enhancing our
hypothesis and the ability of our measure to induce better diversity.


                                                                                                                                                                                        16
