Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACCELERATING R ETRIEVAL - AUGMENTED L ANGUAGE
M ODEL S ERVING WITH S PECULATION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         Retrieval-augmented language models (RaLM) have demonstrated the potential to
         solve knowledge-intensive natural language processing (NLP) tasks by combining
         a non-parametric knowledge base with a parametric language model. Instead of
         fine-tuning a fully parametric model, RaLM excels at its low-cost adaptation to
         the latest data and better source attribution mechanisms. Among various RaLM
         approaches, iterative RaLM delivers a better generation quality due to a more fre-
         quent interaction between the retriever and the language model. Despite the bene-
         fits, iterative RaLM usually encounters high overheads due to the frequent retrieval
         step. To this end, we propose RaLMSpec, a speculation-inspired framework that
         provides generic speed-up over iterative RaLM while preserving the same model
         outputs through speculative retrieval and batched verification. By further incor-
         porating prefetching, optimal speculation stride scheduler, and asynchronous ver-
         ification, RaLMSpec can automatically exploit the acceleration potential to the
         fullest. Extensive evaluations over three language models on four downstream
         QA datasets demonstrate that RaLMSpec can achieve a speed-up ratio of 1.75-
         2.39×, 1.04-1.39×, and 1.31-1.77× when the retriever is an exact dense retriever,
         approximate dense retriever, and sparse retriever respectively compared with the
         baseline.

1   I NTRODUCTION
Recent advancements in large language models such as LLaMA-2, GPT-3, and PaLM have shown
promising results in diverse NLP tasks (Touvron et al., 2023; Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al.,
2022). However, encoding a massive amount of knowledge into a fully parametric model requires
excessive effort in both training and deployment. The situation can be further exacerbated when the
foundation model is required to adapt to new data or various downstream tasks (Asai et al., 2023). To
address this challenge, recent work introduces retrieval-augmented language models (RaLM), which
integrate the parametric language model with a non-parametric knowledge base through retrieval
augmentation (Guu et al., 2020; Shi et al., 2023; Ram et al., 2023; Khattab et al., 2022).
Existing RaLM methods can be categorized into two classes based on the interaction between the
knowledge base and language model. First, one-shot RaLM performs retrieval once for each request
and combines the retrieved documents with the original request to assist generation. On the other
hand, iterative RaLM enables iterative interactions between the language model and knowledge
base for a request so that the language model can opportunistically query the knowledge base to
retrieve more relevant documents during generation. Compared to iterative RaLM, one-shot RaLM
introduces less retrieval overhead but is inherently limited when the required information varies
from time to time during the generation process. On the other hand, iterative RaLM achieves better
generative performance while suffering from frequent retrievals and thus high retrieval overhead.
This paper answers the following research question: can we reduce the overhead of iterative RaLM
without affecting generative quality?
We propose RaLMSpec, a framework that employs speculative retrieval with batched verification to
reduce the serving overhead for iterative RaLM while provably preserving the model output. A key
bottleneck of existing iterative RaLM methods is the inefficiency of retrieval. In particular, due to
the auto-regressive nature of generative language models, the retrieval step is usually performed with
a single query summarizing the current context. As shown in Figure 1(a), existing iterative RaLM
approaches interleave the retrieval step and the generation step by constantly retrieving from the


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


knowledge base with the latest context-dependent queries (i.e., q0 , q1 , and q2 ). The corresponding
retrieved contents (A, B, C) can then assist the generation process by contributing relevant informa-
tion to the language model through a prompt or attention-level combination. However, issuing these
queries for knowledge base retrieval sequentially is intrinsically inefficient.
The idea of speculative retrieval is conceptually similar to speculative execution originated from
the computer architecture literature (Burton, 1985). More specifically, RaLMSpec replaces the ex-
pensive, iterative retrieval steps of existing RaLM methods with more efficient but less accurate
speculative retrieval steps. Consequently, RaLMSpec uses a batched verification step to correct any
incorrect speculation resul and preserve the model’s generative quality. More precisely, after a num-
ber of speculative retrieval steps, RaLMSpec initiates a verification step by performing a batched
retrieval (i.e., ➅ in Figure 1(b)), where the queries in the batch are the corresponding queries in the
speculative retrieval steps. If there is a mismatch between the speculated documents and the ground
truth documents retrieved in the verification step, RaLMSpec automatically corrects the mismatch
by rolling back to the first mis-speculated position and rerunning language model decoding using
the ground truth documents. As a result, a subpar speculation method with an early mismatch can
result in additional overhead. In observing that the same entry can be repetitively retrieved from the
knowledge base when generating the response (i.e., temporal locality), RaLMSpec maintains a local
cache to store past documents for each request, and performs speculative retrieval by retrieving from
the local cache instead of the knowledge base. RaLMSpec updates the local cache by directly adding
documents retrieved from the knowledge base in each verification step. Figure 1(c) shows a timeline
comparison between RaLMSpec and existing iterative RaLM methods. RaLMSpec’s latency saving
is essentially obtained through efficient batched retrieval, i.e. retrieving from the knowledge base
with n queries is more efficient than executing n retrievals sequentially. We show evidence of the
above claim in Appendix A.1.
Besides maintaining a local cache for speculative retrieval, we further propose three additional tech-
niques to further reduce RaLM serving latency. First, RaLMSpec can support cache prefetching
by updating the local cache with the top-k retrieved documents from the knowledge base to boost
RaLMSpec’s speculative performance. Second, RaLMSpec enables an optimal speculation stride
scheduler that dynamically adjusts the speculation stride (i.e., the number of consecutive speculation
steps between two verification steps) to minimize the speculation overhead. Third, RaLMSpec can
exploit concurrency by allowing asynchronous verification, which enables an extra speculation step
to be performed asynchronously with a verification step.
Extensive evaluation of RaLMSpec over the Wiki-QA (Yang et al., 2015), Web Questions (Be-
rant et al., 2013), Natural Questions (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019), and Trivia QA (Joshi et al., 2017)
datasets on the GPT-2, OPT, and LLaMA-2 models shows that RaLMSpec can automatically adapt
the speculation configuration and reduce the serving latency of the baseline implementation by up
to 2.4×, 1.4×, 1.8× with an exact dense, approximate dense, and sparse retriever, respectively.

Contributions. This paper makes the following contributions:

       • We propose RaLMSpec, a framework that reduces the serving latency of generic iterative
         RaLM approaches while preserving the same model outputs.
       • Technically, by leveraging the temporal locality of the retrieved documents, RaLMSpec
         uses a caching-based speculative retrieval mechanism with batched verification to reduce
         the retrieval overhead. We further propose three additional techniques to reduce RaLM
         serving latency, namely cache prefetching, asynchronous verification, and optimal specu-
         lation stride scheduling.
       • Empirically, we validate that RaLMSpec achieves significant RaLM serving latency reduc-
         tion across different datasets, language models, and retriever types. These results indicate
         RaLMSpec can be a generic acceleration framework for serving iterative RaLMs.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Retrieval-augmented language models. Since Guu et al. (2020) first proposes to provide rele-
vant information to the language model with retrieved documents from an external knowledge base,
numerous works have started to leverage retrieval to improve the language model generation qual-
ity (Shi et al., 2023; Park et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a; Zhu et al., 2023; Rubin & Berant, 2023;


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                             : Language model decoding
                          : Knowledge base retrieval (slow)    : Local cache retrieval (fast)

                                                      Document                                     Document                                         Document
                                                 1                                             3                                            5
                                                       Retrieval                                    Retrieval                                        Retrieval
      Knowledge base
                                           q0                                      q1                                                q2
                                                                  A                                         B                                                C


                                Why do retrieval
                                                                               LM                                                  LM                                          LM
               LM             augmented language                       2                                                 4                                               6
                                 models work?                                Decoding                                            Decoding                                    Decoding
      Language Model

                                                                           (a) Iterative RaLM.

                                                                  6              Batched Veri cation


                          (                      )
                                            q2                                                                               Update Local Cache
                                            q1           Document
                                                                                       A       B   C
                                            q0            Retrieval
      Knowledge base                                                                                                                Correction

           A        B                                                                                                                                                         A   B   C
                                                                                 Speculative Retrieval
                                                 Document                                  Document                                Document
                                            1                                      3                                         5
                                                  Retrieval                                 Retrieval                               Retrieval
        Local Cache                                                                                                                                                          Local Cache
                                  q0                                        q1                                      q2
                                                          A                                         B                                           A                C


                                Why do retrieval
               LM                                                       LM                                    LM                                          LM
                              augmented language              2                                         4                                           7
                                 models work?
                                                                      Decoding                              Decoding                                    Decoding
      Language Model
                     fi


                                                                          (b) RaLMSpec (ours).

      Iterative RaLM                   1                      2                            3                    4                           5                        6

       RaLMSpec           1        2             3       4            5                6                    7


                                  Speculative Retrieval                    Batched Veri cation
                    fi


                                                                      (c) Timeline comparison.
Figure 1: {q0 , q1 , q2 } denotes context-dependent query embeddings and A, B, C are document en-
tries. Figure 1(a) shows the workflow of existing iterative RaLM, which suffers from high retrieval
overhead. Figure 1(b) shows an overview of RaLMSpec, which enables faster speculative retrieval
steps (➀, ➂, ➄) followed by a batched verification step (➅) to guarantee correctness. Consequently,
RaLMSpec achieves a lower latency while preserving model quality as shown in Figure 1(c).

Wang et al., 2023b; Zhou et al., 2023). As these works only perform retrieval once before the
language model generation starts, we refer to them as one-shot RaLM. Besides one-shot RaLM ap-
proaches, another line of work performs retrieval regularly when serving a single request. Ram et al.
(2023); Lewis et al. (2020); Jiang et al. (2023); Borgeaud et al. (2022); Khattab et al. (2022) retrieve
constantly from the external database with the latest context and leverage the retrieved information
to improve the generation quality either through direct concatenation or intermediate layer cross-
attention. K-Nearest Neighbour Language Models (KNN-LM), on the other hand, produces the next
token distribution by interpolating between a weighted distribution over k retrieved documents and
the language model output (Khandelwal et al., 2019; Drozdov et al., 2022). Compared with one-shot
RaLM, iterative RaLM methods have been shown to provide higher quality responses at the cost of
excessive latency overhead (Khandelwal et al., 2019; Drozdov et al., 2022; Ram et al., 2023). For
instance, Khandelwal et al. (2019) retrieves up to 1024 documents for each token generated, which
results in unaffordable serving overhead in practice. Reducing the serving overhead of iterative
RaLM methods while preserving its high-quality output is thus the core of our work.

Retrievers for RaLM. Different retrievers have different tradeoffs between retrieval overheads
and retrieval accuracy when serving RaLMs. Instead of using conventional sparse retrievers such
as TF-IDF or BM25 (Ramos et al., 2003; Robertson et al., 2009), Karpukhin et al. (2020) trains
a dense retriever particularly for RaLM. Similarly, Izacard et al. (2021) proposes to train a dense
retriever by unsupervised contrastive learning. Later work further explores the possibility of end-to-
end pretraining, where the retriever and language model are trained collaboratively (Izacard et al.,
2022; Zhong et al., 2022; Khattab & Zaharia, 2020; Santhanam et al., 2021). Exact dense retrievers
are inefficient but accurate, while approximate retrievers are fast to query but less accurate (He et al.,


                                                                                               3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2021; Xiong et al., 2020). To demonstrate the generality of our design, we experiment RaLMSpec
with different retrievers (sparse, exact dense, and approximate dense retrievers).

Iterative RaLM serving. As for efficient iterative RaLM serving approaches, the work most rel-
evant to ours is Alon et al. (2022). By using a pre-computed automaton state when a complete
retrieval for the KNN-LM is unnecessary, Alon et al. (2022) can reduce the number of calls to the
external knowledge base and thus save latency. However, Alon et al. (2022) is not guaranteed to pre-
serve the same model output and hence might compromise model generation quality. To this end,
our goal is to achieve generic and efficient serving for existing iterative RaLM approaches while
guaranteeing to preserve model quality. To the best of our knowledge, RaLMSpec is the first work
that achieves inference time speed-up for generic iterative RaLM approaches without compromising
model output. The key intuition behind RaLMSpec is speculative retrieval and batched verification.
Speculation has a long history in the computer architecture field (Burton, 1985). Recent works fur-
ther bring the concept of speculative decoding into Large Language Models (LLM) serving, which
essentially reduces serving latency (Leviathan et al., 2022; Stern et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2023;
Miao et al., 2023; Xia et al.; Joao Gante, 2023; Yang et al., 2023). However, as far as we know,
RaLMSpec is the first work that incorporates the concept of speculative retrieval in RaLM serving
and is orthogonal to the speculative inference technique for large language models (LLMs).

3    R A LMS PEC
A key observation that motivates the design of RaLMSpec is that the same document in a knowledge
base can be retrieved multiple times during the iterative retrievals of a generative task (e.g., the
sequence of the retrieved documents can be A, B, A, B, C), also known as the temporal locality in
the system domain. Leveraging this observation, RaLMSpec enables a caching-based mechanism for
speculative retrieval. Combined with batched verification, RaLMSpec can thus reduce the serving
latency of iterative RaLM while provably preserving its generative quality. We describe the pipeline
of RaLMSpec in Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1 RaLMSpec Pipeline.
 1: Input: Input tokens X = {x0 , x1 , · · · , xt−1 }, external corpus C, language model f (·)
 2: Output: RaLM generated outputs
 3: Initialize local cache Q = {}, speculation stride s, model generation stride k
 4: q = encode(X), Q.insert(C.retrieve(q))                                             ▷ cache prefetching
 5: while EOS not in X do
 6:     for i = 1 to s do
 7:          qi = encode(X), dˆi = Q.retrieve(qi )                                   ▷ speculative retrieval
 8:          X̂i = f (X, dˆi , k)                      ▷ model generation step that generates k new tokens
 9:          X = [X, X̂i ]
10:     end for
11:     d1 , · · · , ds = C.retrieve(q1 , · · · , qs )                               ▷ batched verification
12:     m = arg mini dˆi ̸= di
13:     if m ≤ s then                                                             ▷ do correction if needed
14:          Roll X back to the m-th speculation step
15:          X̂ = f (X, di , k)
16:          X = [X, X̂]
17:     end if
18: end while



Speculative retrieval. For speculative retrieval, we maintain a local cache for each new request
to store retrieved documents. As shown in Figure 2, RaLMSpec utilizes the local cache as a “re-
trieval” cache instead of a typical exact match cache in the system literature, where a local cache
retrieval is performed similarly to a knowledge base retrieval except for the number of documents
in the local cache is far less. As there is no entry in the local cache at the start of the process, we
perform a retrieval from the knowledge base using the initial query and populate the local cache
with the retrieved key and value pairs. The key is usually a vectorized representation of the retrieved
documents for dense retrievers or a set of local information (e.g., word level frequency) for sparse


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


retrievers, while the value is the retrieved documents. For a retrieval step, instead of retrieving from
the knowledge base, RaLMSpec retrieves from the local cache speculatively. However, the spec-
ulative retrieval results might deviate from the actual retrieval results. To guarantee correctness, a
verification step is required for every s consecutive number of speculative retrieval steps performed.
We refer to s as the speculation stride. For instance, s = 3 in Figure 1(b) for our approach.
A fundamental property that ensures the effectiveness of leveraging a local cache for speculative
retrieval is that for most dense and sparse retrievers, relative ranking between documents is preserved
between the local cache and the knowledge base. More importantly, if the top-ranked entry in the
knowledge base is present in our local cache for a given query, the same entry is guaranteed to be
ranked at the top when retrieving from our local cache using the same retrieval metric for this query.
For most dense retrievers, this property can be naturally satisfied as the distance metric used by the
dense retrievers can be locally computed. For sparse retrievers like BM25 Robertson et al. (2009),
we store the corpus-related information throughout the generation process so that the score can be
locally computed on the fly. Thus, combined with the temporal locality of the retrieved documents,
leveraging a local cache for speculative retrieval can significantly boost the speculation success rate.

Batched verification. During a verification step, we verify the speculated results with a batched
retrieval from the knowledge base. For instance, as Figure 1(b) shows, with a speculation stride
s = 3, the corresponding queries and cache-retrieved documents for the three consecutive specula-
tive retrieval steps (➀, ➂, ➄) are q0 →q1 →q2 and A→B→A, respectively. During the verification
process, we will retrieve from the external knowledge base with the batched query {q0 , q1 , q2 }. Sup-
pose the documents retrieved from the knowledge base are {A, B, C} for the verification step1 . We
can then validate that the third speculative retrieval step mismatches with the ground truth results.
In case of a mismatch, the generation process will roll back to the first mismatch position in the se-
quence and redo the generation with the correct value (i.e., replacing the third speculated document
A with the ground truth document C and continuing generation for the request). In the meantime,
we can populate the local cache with the documents retrieved during the verification step. Aside
from the top-1 cache update approach, RaLMSpec also supports top-k cache update as demon-
strated in Figure 2. Similar to the concept of prefetching, the top-k cache update aims to fetch more
relevant entries to the local cache per verification step to further boost the speculation success rate.

                                 q0                                                 q1
                                       A     B       C                                      A           B       C

                                       0.6   0.2     0.1                                    0.3         0.5    0.2
                                                                 A                                                           B
                                                                              LM
                         LM


                                        Local Cache                                          Local Cache


                                                           Speculative Retrieval
                 q0 q1   Veri cation                 Update           q0 q1   Veri cation                              Update
                                                   Local Cache                                                       Local Cache
                                        A    D                                                      A          AD
                                                                                                  AA          D
                                        Top-1
                                                                                                    Top-k
                              Top-1 Cache Update                              Top-k Cache Update (Prefetching)
                  fi


Figure 2: For speculative retrieval, we maintain a local cache for each request and use the same
scoring metric as the original retriever to rank the entries within the local cache for a given query. In
the verification step, we populate the local cache with either the top-1 or top-k retrieved documents
from the knowledge base, where the latter one is referred to as prefetching.


Observing that batched retrieval is more efficient by exploiting parallelism, and the speculative re-
trieval latency is negligible compared to retrieving from the knowledge base. Consequently, in the
former toy example, we complete three retrieval steps with only one batched knowledge base re-
trieval, while a naive implementation requires three knowledge base retrievals. Note that if there is
an early mismatch for the speculative retrieval steps, we will incur additional speculation overhead
for generating extra tokens. As a result, the speculation stride is a crucial parameter exploiting the
trade-off between speculation overhead and retrieval saving. We will elaborate more on choosing an
optimal speculation stride s in Section 4.
   1
     Note that we actually don’t need to perform the last speculative retrieval step. We show it in our toy
example only to demonstrate the verification process.


                                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In addition to a single-thread implementation, RaLMSpec also considers asynchronous verification.
Instead of stalling the speculation step during verification, we can launch an extra speculation step
asynchronously while the verification of the previous step occurs. This asynchronous verification
technique is especially beneficial when the verification latency is smaller than the language model’s
decoding latency as shown in Figure 3. In fact, in this case, asynchronous verification with a specu-
lation stride s = 1 is the optimal strategy for speculative retrieval. Intuitively, since the verification
results can be returned before a speculative retrieval and language model decoding step is completed,
we can always hide the latency of a verification step behind a speculation step if the speculation suc-
ceeds. More specifically, if the verification succeeds, the model can continue the generation process,
saving the verification latency. On the other hand, as soon as the verification fails, the model can re-
generate the output based on the corrected information, which falls back to the naive implementation
with no speculation overhead.


          Veri cation Thread
          Speculation Thread                                                Latency Saving
                                           Regenerate due
                               A       A                    B   C
                                           to mismatch

                                   A                    B           B               C

            Single Thread
            fi



Figure 3: Asynchronous verification obtains latency saving by hiding the verification latency behind
a valid speculation step. In case a mismatch is detected between the speculated document and ground
truth document, the language model will regenerate outputs using the ground truth document.



4    O PTIMAL S PECULATION S TRIDE S CHEDULER
RaLMSpec uses speculation stride s (defined in Section 3) as a hyperparameter to control the num-
ber of speculation steps performed before a verification step. It plays a crucial role in our system
due to its effect on the trade-off between speculation overhead and latency saving. Too large a spec-
ulation stride would incur high speculation overhead if verification fails early in the stage, while too
small a speculation stride does not exploit the benefits of speculation to the fullest. Additionally,
depending on different language models, retrieval methods, and speculation accuracy, the optimal
choice of the speculation stride varies across diverse setups.
Instead of hand-tuning the speculation stride, we propose the Optimal Speculation Stride Scheduler
(OS3 ), which formalizes this trade-off into an objective function and solves an optimal speculation
stride across different configurations adaptively. Given that the goal is to correctly verify a fixed
number of documents with minimal latency, we formulate our objective function as the expected
number of documents verified successfully per unit time. The goal is therefore to maximize the
objective function by optimizing speculation stride s.
More precisely, let a denote the latency of a speculation step (speculative retrieval + language model
decoding), b denote the latency of a verification step, di be the ground truth documents retrieved
from the corpus, and dˆi be the speculated documents retrieved from the local cache. If we define
γ(X) = P (di = dˆi | X), ∀i ∈ [s] as the speculation accuracy given the current context X, then
                                                                   s
the expected number of verified documents is given by 1−γ(X) 1−γ(X) with a speculation stride s. We
include the derivation in Appendix A.2. For synchronous verification, the latency is calculated
as sa + b. For asynchronous verification, if all speculated documents match with the ground truth
documents in the verification step with a probability of γ(X)s , we can benefit from the asynchronous
verification with a latency of (s − 1)a + max(a, b). Otherwise, with probability 1 − γ(X)s we incur
a mismatch so asynchronous verification brings no gain at all with a latency of sa + b. Therefore,
the expected latency is [γ(X)s ((s − 1)a + max(a, b)) + (1 − γ(X)s )(sa + b)] for asynchronous
                                                          1−γ(X)s
verification. By defining the objective function as (1−γ(X))(sa+b)    for synchronous verification, or
                     1−γ(X)s
(1−γ(X))[γ(X)s ((s−1)a+max(a,b))+(1−γ(X)s )(sa+b)] for asynchronous verification, we can adaptively
solve for the optimal s with an estimation of a, b, γ(X). Appendix A.2 describes how we estimate
a, b, γ(X).


                                                            6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5     E VALUATION
5.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUPS
We describe our experimental setups in this section, including language models, downstream
datasets, retrievers, and the implementation details of the baseline, as well as our approach.
Language Models. To demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework with different language
models, we select models from three standard natural language generation (NLG) model classes,
namely GPT2, OPT, and LLaMA-2 (Radford et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023).
More specifically, we choose GPT2-medium, OPT-1.3B, and LLaMA-2-7B, which are commonly
used as base language models in RaLM and, at the same time, span across different model sizes.
Datasets. For the downstream workload, we mainly focus on the knowledge-intensive open-domain
question-answering tasks. We thus include four QA datasets in our experiments: Wiki-QA, Web
Questions, Natural Question, and Trivia-QA (Yang et al., 2015; Berant et al., 2013; Kwiatkowski
et al., 2019; Joshi et al., 2017). For all tasks, we use the Wikipedia corpus as our external knowledge
base (Chen et al., 2017).
Retrievers. To demonstrate the consistency of our approach, we test our method against both dense
retrievers (vector-based) and sparse retrievers (bag-of-words-based). For dense retrievers, we fur-
ther experiment with the exact and approximate methods, where the approximate method is much
faster but less accurate. We use the Dense Passage Retriever (DPR) (Karpukhin et al., 2020) as the
exact dense retriever (EDR), and its approximate version DPR-HNSW as the approximate dense
retriever (ADR) (Malkov & Yashunin, 2018). For the sparse retriever (SR), we use the BM25 re-
triever (Robertson et al., 2009). We use the implementation from Pyserini (Lin et al., 2021) for
all dense and sparse retrievers, where the dense retrievers are built on top of the standard FAISS
library (Johnson et al., 2019).
Baseline. For baseline implementation, we follow directly from the iterative RaLM implementation
as in Ram et al. (2023), where retrieval is triggered every four tokens generated by the language
model. The latest retrieved document chunk is directly prepended to the prompt and replaces previ-
ous documents. We use RaLMSeq to denote the baseline implementation in the rest of the paper.
Implementation Details. For both RaLMSpec and RaLMSeq, we set the maximum input prompt
length to be 512 tokens and the maximum generation length to be 128 tokens. The maximum length
of the retrieved document chunk is set to 256 as in Ram et al. (2023). For naive RaLMSpec, we use a
constant speculation stride s = 3. Whenever OS3 is enabled, we initialize the speculation stride with
s = 1 and let the scheduler adapt onwards. In all our experiments, we set the window size w = 5
and γmax = 0.6 for estimating γ. For prefetching, we use a prefetch size of 20. We also test with a
prefetch size of 256 for the ablation study. Due to the existence of Global Interpreter Lock (GIL) in
Python, the potential of asynchronous verification cannot be fully realized. Thus, for asynchronous
verification only, we use a simulated latency by calculating the ideal running time without additional
overhead2 . Except for asynchronous verification, all latencies are measured in wall-clock time. We
want to note that asynchronous verification is not a significant factor contributing to the speed-up;
details are provided in the ablation study in Section 5.2. Both RaLMSeq and RaLMSpec are written
in Python and tested on the VM.GPU.A10 instance on the Oracle cloud, which contains one A10
GPU and 15 CPUs.
5.2   R ESULTS
In this section, we empirically verify our approach against diverse language models, retrievers,
and downstream datasets. We demonstrate our main results in Figure 4. RaLMSpec+P denotes
RaLMSpec with prefetching enabled, RaLMSpec+S denotes RaLMSpec with the optimal specu-
lation stride scheduler (OS3 ) enabled, and RaLMSpec+A denotes RaLMSpec with asynchronous
verification enabled. RaLMSpec+PSA indicates RaLMSpec with all three components enabled.
For each dataset, we randomly select 100 questions to test the latency results with RaLMSeq and
RaLMSpec. To show the confidence interval, we further plot the mean and standard deviation over
five independent runs for each setup. With the exact dense retriever (EDR), RaLMSpec+PSA can
reduce the latency by 2.39× for GPT2, 2.33× for OPT, and 1.75× for LLaMA-2 compared with
   2
     Enabling an asynchronous verification only requires two parallel threads (one thread for model generation
and one thread for retrieval), thus the overhead should be minimal.


                                                      7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: Latency comparison between RaLMSeq, RaLMSpec, and RaLMSpec+PSA on GPT2-
medium, OPT-1.3B, and LLaMA-2-7B over four QA datasets with three different types of retriev-
ers, where EDR, ADR, SR stand for exact dense retriever, approximate dense retriever, and sparse
retriever respectively. We decompose the overall latency into the language model generation latency
(G) and retrieval latency (R) to demonstrate the trade-off.

RaLMSeq. With the approximate dense retriever (ADR), RaLMSpec+PSA can reduce the latency
by 1.05× for GPT2, 1.39× for OPT, and 1.04× for LLaMA-2 compared with RaLMSeq. With the
sparse retriever (SR), RaLMSpec+PSA can reduce the latency by 1.53× for GPT2, 1.77× for OPT,
and 1.31× for LLaMA-2 compared with RaLMSeq. We include the full results in Appendix A.7.

Analysis. As shown in Figure 4, RaLMSpec+PSA achieves the best performance consistently
across all scenarios. However, the most significant speed-up ratio is achieved when the retriever is
the exact dense retriever. This is because our approach can only optimize for the retrieval latency
(R), not the language model generation latency (G). Thus, our speed-up is intrinsically bottlenecked
by the ratio of the retrieval latency over the end-to-end latency. When we use the approximate
dense or sparse retriever, the naive implementation of RaLMSpec performs worse than the base-
line for some cases. This relates to a constant speculation stride being used, and consequently, the
trade-off between the speculation overhead and gain might not be optimal. More specifically, as the
language model decoding step latency outweighs the retrieval latency, being too optimistic in the
speculation stride can result in excessive speculation overhead due to an early mismatch in the veri-
fication step. On the other hand, if we enable the optimal speculation stride scheduler (OS3 ), we can
resolve this issue as the speculation stride can then be optimally adapted. Combined with prefetch-
ing and asynchronous verification, RaLMSpec+PSA achieves the best speed-up ratio performance
consistently and automatically across all scenarios.

Ablation study. We further present the contribution of each component (prefetching, OS3 , and
asynchronous verification) in Table 1 on GPT2, OPT, and LLaMA-2 with the exact dense retriever
(EDR), approximate dense retriever (ADR), and sparse retriever (SR). The speed-up ratio is com-
pared against the baseline (RaLMSeq) and averaged over the four datasets. In most cases, enabling
OS3 brings the most significant gain among the three components, while combining all three ele-
ments achieves the best performance consistently. This reflects that controlling the trade-off between


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Ablation results of speed-up ratio compared with baseline of each component. P stands
for prefetching, S stands for optimal speculation stride scheduler and A stands for asynchronous
verification. (∗) and (∗∗) denote the most speed-up and the second most speed-up respectively.
              Retriever         Method            GPT2           OPT         LLaMA-2
                             RaLMSpec             2.04×         1.76×           1.70×
                            RaLMSpec+P            2.10×       2.16×(∗∗)      1.75×(∗∗)
                EDR         RaLMSpec+S          2.26×(∗∗)       2.15×           1.69×
                            RaLMSpec+A            2.03×         1.74×           1.74×
                           RaLMSpec+PSA          2.39×(∗)     2.32×(∗)        1.75×(∗)
                             RaLMSpec             0.62×         0.61×           0.58×
                            RaLMSpec+P            0.59×         0.76×           0.58×
                ADR         RaLMSpec+S          0.92×(∗∗)     1.17×(∗∗)      1.01×(∗∗)
                            RaLMSpec+A            0.66×         0.46×           0.55×
                           RaLMSpec+PSA          1.05×(∗)     1.39×(∗)        1.04×(∗)
                             RaLMSpec             1.34×         1.18×           0.97×
                            RaLMSpec+P            1.39×         1.42×           0.98×
                 SR         RaLMSpec+S            1.32×       1.52×(∗∗)      1.05×(∗∗)
                            RaLMSpec+A          1.41×(∗∗)       1.27×           1.01×
                           RaLMSpec+PSA         1.53×(∗)      1.77×(∗)        1.31×(∗)


speculation overhead and latency reduction with the speculation stride is critical for achieving the
optimal speed-up under various scenarios. The results demonstrate that OS3 can find a better stride
scheduling solution than the naive hand-tuned constant speculation stride in most cases. Prefetching
can also improve performance by caching more entries in the local cache to obtain a higher spec-
ulation accuracy. However, increasing a prefetching size can introduce higher retrieval overhead.
As shown in Table 2, when we increase the prefetching size from 20 to 256, the performance de-
creases in most cases due to the diminished prefetching gain and increased retrieval overhead. Asyn-
chronous verification improves the performance by introducing an extra speculation step when doing
verification. However, if the verification fails at an earlier stage, the benefit of doing asynchronous
verification cannot be realized. As prefetching, OS3 , and asynchronous verification compensate one
another, combining all of them fully realizes our approach’s potential.

Table 2: Ablation results of speed-up ratio of different prefetching size compared with the baseline.
                 Retriever          Method            GPT2       OPT      LLaMA-2
                              RaLMSpec+P(20)          2.10×     2.16×       1.75×
                    EDR
                              RaLMSpec+P(256)         2.15×     1.72×       1.63×
                              RaLMSpec+P(20)          0.59×     0.76×       0.58×
                   ADR
                              RaLMSpec+P(256)         0.67×     0.25×       0.34×
                              RaLMSpec+P(20)          1.39×     1.42×       0.98×
                     SR
                              RaLMSpec+P(256)         1.02×     0.93×       0.84×



6   C ONCLUSION
In this work, we introduce RaLMSpec, a speculation-inspired framework that accelerates the serving
of generic retrieval augmented generation approaches that suffer from frequent retrieval-generation
interactions. By leveraging the temporal locality of retrieved documents, we enable a request-level
local cache for speculative retrieval and a batched verification step to guarantee correctness. In ad-
dition, we introduce cache prefetching, an optimal speculation stride scheduler, and asynchronous
verification to boost the speculation performance further. The effectiveness of RaLMSpec has been
verified empirically against different language models, retrievers, and downstream datasets. The re-
sults demonstrate that RaLMSpec can indeed have substantial speed-ups consistently in all scenarios
compared with the baseline.



                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Uri Alon, Frank Xu, Junxian He, Sudipta Sengupta, Dan Roth, and Graham Neubig. Neuro-symbolic
  language modeling with automaton-augmented retrieval. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 468–485. PMLR, 2022.
Akari Asai, Sewon Min, Zexuan Zhong, and Danqi Chen. Acl 2023 tutorial: Retrieval-based lan-
  guage models and applications. ACL 2023, 2023.
Jonathan Berant, Andrew Chou, Roy Frostig, and Percy Liang. Semantic parsing on Freebase from
  question-answer pairs. In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing, pp. 1533–1544, Seattle, Washington, USA, October 2013. Association for
  Computational Linguistics. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/D13-1160.
Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Jordan Hoffmann, Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford, Katie Milli-
  can, George Bm Van Den Driessche, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Bogdan Damoc, Aidan Clark, et al.
  Improving language models by retrieving from trillions of tokens. In International conference on
  machine learning, pp. 2206–2240. PMLR, 2022.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
F Warren Burton. Speculative computation, parallelism, and functional programming. IEEE Trans-
  actions on Computers, 100(12):1190–1193, 1985.
Charlie Chen, Sebastian Borgeaud, Geoffrey Irving, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Laurent Sifre, and John
  Jumper. Accelerating large language model decoding with speculative sampling. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.01318, 2023.
Danqi Chen, Adam Fisch, Jason Weston, and Antoine Bordes. Reading wikipedia to answer open-
  domain questions. In 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL
  2017, pp. 1870–1879. Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2017.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.
Andrew Drozdov, Shufan Wang, Razieh Rahimi, Andrew McCallum, Hamed Zamani, and Mohit
  Iyyer. You can’t pick your neighbors, or can you? when and how to rely on retrieval in the k
  nn-lm. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.15859, 2022.
Kelvin Guu, Kenton Lee, Zora Tung, Panupong Pasupat, and Mingwei Chang. Retrieval augmented
  language model pre-training. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 3929–3938.
  PMLR, 2020.
Junxian He, Graham Neubig, and Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick. Efficient nearest neighbor language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.04212, 2021.
Gautier Izacard, Mathilde Caron, Lucas Hosseini, Sebastian Riedel, Piotr Bojanowski, Armand
  Joulin, and Edouard Grave. Unsupervised dense information retrieval with contrastive learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09118, 2021.
Gautier Izacard, Patrick Lewis, Maria Lomeli, Lucas Hosseini, Fabio Petroni, Timo Schick, Jane
  Dwivedi-Yu, Armand Joulin, Sebastian Riedel, and Edouard Grave. Few-shot learning with re-
  trieval augmented language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.03299, 2022.
Zhengbao Jiang, Frank F Xu, Luyu Gao, Zhiqing Sun, Qian Liu, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Yiming Yang,
  Jamie Callan, and Graham Neubig. Active retrieval augmented generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.06983, 2023.
Joao Gante. Assisted generation: a new direction toward low-latency text generation, 2023. URL
  https://huggingface.co/blog/assisted-generation.

                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jeff Johnson, Matthijs Douze, and Hervé Jégou. Billion-scale similarity search with GPUs. IEEE
   Transactions on Big Data, 7(3):535–547, 2019.
Mandar Joshi, Eunsol Choi, Daniel Weld, and Luke Zettlemoyer. triviaqa: A Large Scale
 Distantly Supervised Challenge Dataset for Reading Comprehension. arXiv e-prints, art.
 arXiv:1705.03551, 2017.
Vladimir Karpukhin, Barlas Oğuz, Sewon Min, Patrick Lewis, Ledell Wu, Sergey Edunov, Danqi
  Chen, and Wen-tau Yih. Dense passage retrieval for open-domain question answering. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2004.04906, 2020.
Urvashi Khandelwal, Omer Levy, Dan Jurafsky, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Mike Lewis. Generalization
  through memorization: Nearest neighbor language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.00172,
  2019.
Omar Khattab and Matei Zaharia. Colbert: Efficient and effective passage search via contextualized
 late interaction over bert. In Proceedings of the 43rd International ACM SIGIR conference on
 research and development in Information Retrieval, pp. 39–48, 2020.
Omar Khattab, Keshav Santhanam, Xiang Lisa Li, David Hall, Percy Liang, Christopher Potts,
 and Matei Zaharia. Demonstrate-search-predict: Composing retrieval and language models for
 knowledge-intensive nlp. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.14024, 2022.
Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Redfield, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh, Chris
  Alberti, Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Jacob Devlin, Kenton Lee, et al. Natural questions: a
  benchmark for question answering research. Transactions of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 7:453–466, 2019.
Yaniv Leviathan, Matan Kalman, and Yossi Matias. Fast inference from transformers via speculative
  decoding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.17192, 2022.
Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal,
  Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, et al. Retrieval-augmented genera-
  tion for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
  9459–9474, 2020.
Jimmy Lin, Xueguang Ma, Sheng-Chieh Lin, Jheng-Hong Yang, Ronak Pradeep, and Rodrigo
  Nogueira. Pyserini: A Python toolkit for reproducible information retrieval research with sparse
  and dense representations. In Proceedings of the 44th Annual International ACM SIGIR Con-
  ference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR 2021), pp. 2356–2362,
  2021.
Yu A Malkov and Dmitry A Yashunin. Efficient and robust approximate nearest neighbor search
  using hierarchical navigable small world graphs. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and
  machine intelligence, 42(4):824–836, 2018.
Xupeng Miao, Gabriele Oliaro, Zhihao Zhang, Xinhao Cheng, Zeyu Wang, Rae Ying Yee Wong,
  Zhuoming Chen, Daiyaan Arfeen, Reyna Abhyankar, and Zhihao Jia. Specinfer: Accelerating
  generative llm serving with speculative inference and token tree verification. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.09781, 2023.
Joon Sung Park, Joseph C O’Brien, Carrie J Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and
  Michael S Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.03442, 2023.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Ori Ram, Yoav Levine, Itay Dalmedigos, Dor Muhlgay, Amnon Shashua, Kevin Leyton-
  Brown, and Yoav Shoham. In-context retrieval-augmented language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.00083, 2023.
Juan Ramos et al. Using tf-idf to determine word relevance in document queries. In Proceedings of
  the first instructional conference on machine learning, volume 242, pp. 29–48. Citeseer, 2003.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Stephen Robertson, Hugo Zaragoza, et al. The probabilistic relevance framework: Bm25 and be-
  yond. Foundations and Trends® in Information Retrieval, 3(4):333–389, 2009.
Ohad Rubin and Jonathan Berant. Long-range language modeling with self-retrieval. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.13421, 2023.
Keshav Santhanam, Omar Khattab, Jon Saad-Falcon, Christopher Potts, and Matei Zaharia.
  Colbertv2: Effective and efficient retrieval via lightweight late interaction. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2112.01488, 2021.
Weijia Shi, Sewon Min, Michihiro Yasunaga, Minjoon Seo, Rich James, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettle-
 moyer, and Wen-tau Yih. Replug: Retrieval-augmented black-box language models. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2301.12652, 2023.
Mitchell Stern, Noam Shazeer, and Jakob Uszkoreit. Blockwise parallel decoding for deep autore-
 gressive models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
  tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan,
  and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291, 2023a.
Weizhi Wang, Li Dong, Hao Cheng, Xiaodong Liu, Xifeng Yan, Jianfeng Gao, and Furu Wei. Aug-
 menting language models with long-term memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.07174, 2023b.
Heming Xia, Tao Ge, Si-Qing Chen, Furu Wei, and Zhifang Sui. Speculative decoding: Lossless
  speedup of autoregressive translation.
Lee Xiong, Chenyan Xiong, Ye Li, Kwok-Fung Tang, Jialin Liu, Paul Bennett, Junaid Ahmed,
  and Arnold Overwijk. Approximate nearest neighbor negative contrastive learning for dense text
  retrieval. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.00808, 2020.
Nan Yang, Tao Ge, Liang Wang, Binxing Jiao, Daxin Jiang, Linjun Yang, Rangan Majumder, and
  Furu Wei. Inference with reference: Lossless acceleration of large language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2304.04487, 2023.
Yi Yang, Wen-tau Yih, and Christopher Meek. WikiQA: A challenge dataset for open-domain
  question answering. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing, pp. 2013–2018, Lisbon, Portugal, September 2015. Association for Com-
  putational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D15-1237. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  D15-1237.
Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christo-
  pher Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, Todor Mihaylov, Myle Ott, Sam Shleifer, Kurt
  Shuster, Daniel Simig, Punit Singh Koura, Anjali Sridhar, Tianlu Wang, and Luke Zettlemoyer.
  Opt: Open pre-trained transformer language models, 2022.
Zexuan Zhong, Tao Lei, and Danqi Chen. Training language models with memory augmentation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.12674, 2022.
Wangchunshu Zhou, Yuchen Eleanor Jiang, Peng Cui, Tiannan Wang, Zhenxin Xiao, Yifan Hou,
 Ryan Cotterell, and Mrinmaya Sachan. Recurrentgpt: Interactive generation of (arbitrarily) long
 text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13304, 2023.
Xizhou Zhu, Yuntao Chen, Hao Tian, Chenxin Tao, Weijie Su, Chenyu Yang, Gao Huang, Bin Li,
  Lewei Lu, Xiaogang Wang, et al. Ghost in the minecraft: Generally capable agents for open-world
  enviroments via large language models with text-based knowledge and memory. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.17144, 2023.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A                             A PPENDIX
A.1                           BATCHED R ETRIEVAL


                          4
  Latency per Query (s)


                                                            Latency per Query (s)


                                                                                                                            Latency per Query (s)
                                                                                    0.055
                                                                                                                                                    0.15
                          3                                                         0.050
                                                                                    0.045                                                           0.10
                          2
                                                                                    0.040
                          1                                                         0.035                                                           0.05
                                                                                    0.030
                                2   4     6      8     10                                     2     4     6      8   10                                       2    4    6       8   10
                                    Batch Size                                                      Batch Size                                                     Batch Size

                          (a) Exact dense retriever.        (b) Approximate dense retriever                                                                (c) Sparse retriever
Figure 5: Effect of batch size on latency per query for three different types of retrievers. 95%
confidence bands for the true mean latency are included.

We demonstrate the benefit of batched retrievals by examining the latency per query for increasing
batch sizes. For all three retrieval methods, latency per query decreases with increasing batch size.
This is most noticeable with the exact dense retriever and sparse retriever, where total retrieval time
was essentially constant across all batch sizes. The approximate dense retriever exhibited latency
that scaled linearly with batch size; however, there was a significant intercept term in the linear
relationship. With batch retrievals, repeated incurrences of this latency under individual retrievals
are saved. The result is less latency per query for approximate dense retrievers as well, though not
to the extent of exact dense retrievers or sparse retrievers.
A.2                           D ETAILED D ERIVATIONS
Expected matching length. Given a speculation accuracy of γ(X) ∈ [0, 1] for single-step spec-
ulation, the expected number of matched documents with a speculation stride s can be calculated
as:
                                           s−2
                                           X
 E [# of verified documents | X, s] = 1 +      iγ(X)i (1 − γ(X)) + (s − 1)γ(X)(s−1)
                                                                                                  i=1
                                                                                                  s−2
                                                                                                  X                  s−1
                                                                                                                     X
                                                                            =               1+          iγ(X)i −         (i − 1)γ(X)i + (s − 1)γ(X)(s−1)
                                                                                                  i=1                i=1
                                                                                            s−1
                                                                                            X
                                                                            =                     γ(X)i
                                                                                            i=0
                                                                                            1 − γ(X)s
                                                                            =
                                                                                            1 − γ(X)

Parameter estimation for OS3 To get an optimal stride s, we need to adaptively estimate
a, b, γ(X). For a, b, we directly estimate their value with the profiling results from the most recent
steps. For the exact dense retriever and sparse retriever, we observe that the latency of batched re-
trieval with a batch size smaller than 10 is nearly constant, while for the approximate dense retriever,
the latency is surprisingly linear to the batch size but with a large intercept (batch retrieval is still
more efficient due to the intercept is non-zero). We include the batched retrieval latency analysis for
three different retrievers in Appendix A.1. For γ(X), we use the maximum log-likelihood estima-
tion within a specific window size w so that the estimated γ̂ can have both locality and less variance.
More specifically, denoting s(t), t ∈ [w] as the speculation stride (also the batch size) in the t-th
most recent verification step, M (s(t), X) as the corresponding number of matched documents, we
estimate γ(X) with
                                                 P
                                                    tM  (s(t), X)
                        γ̂(X) = P
                                                        t 1(M (s(t), X) < s(t))
                                                     P
                                    t M (s(t), X) +
where 1(·) is the indicator function. To prevent the over-optimistic estimation and division-by-zero
error when γ̂ approaches probability 1 in some cases, we further set a constant upper bound γmax
and truncate γ̂ accordingly.


                                                                                                    13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.3   KNN-LM S ERVING E VALUATION


                                       (a) Exact dense retriever.


                                   (b) Approximate dense retriever
Figure 6: Speedup Ratio Results for RaLMSpec on kNN-LMs using Wikipedia-QA. k stands for
number of nearest neighbors in kNN-LMs, s stands for stride size, OS3 stands for optimal scheduler
stride.
We further evaluate our approach against a retrieval-intensive workload KNN-LM (Khandelwal
et al., 2019). For KNN-LM, the knowledge base is constructed for each training token, with the
key being the embedding of its leftward context and the value being the token itself. Instead of
relying on a single language model to generate the next token sampling distribution, KNN-LM re-
trieves k closest entries in a knowledge base along with their target tokens using an embedding of
the current context. A distribution over these k target tokens is then computed based on their dis-
tance with respect to the current context embedding. The distribution is then interpolated with the
original language model distribution to get the next token sampling distribution. Khandelwal et al.
(2019) indicates KNN-LM can improve the perplexity of the base language model to state-of-the-art
without extra training. While effective, the inference overhead of KNN-LM models is prohibitive as
retrieval will be performed for every token generation step. To this end, we are interested in testing
our system against the KNN-LM models. Different from the original speculation cache design, we
cannot populate the cache by adding the same documents, as it will likely not be retrieved again in


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


future decoding steps. However, for speculation, we can populate the cache with the next n entries
directly after the currently retrieved item. In addition, instead of enforcing all retrieved items to
be the same for the verification step, we identify that equivalency can be preserved as long as the
speculated next token matches with the ground truth next token. This relaxation is critical when k
is large, e.g., k = 1024. Matching all 1024 entries with the ground truth one is exponentially hard,
but matching the ground truth decoded token can be easier. By modifying the cache update rule and
verification protocol as above, we can achieve significant speed-up ratios compared with the naive
implementation as shown in Figure 6. We have verified our approach against different k values
ranging from 1 to 1024. When the retriever is an exact dense retriever, RaLMSpec can achieve up to
7.59× acceleration rate with the optimal speculation stride scheduler (OS3 ) and even 3.88× accel-
eration rate when k = 1024. When the retriever is an approximate dense retriever, RaLMSpec can
achieve up to 2.45× acceleration rate with the optimal speculation stride scheduler (OS3 ) and even
2.37× acceleration rate when k = 1024. We have further experimented with different speculation
stride sizes to have some ablation studies on the importance of the stride. The results show that a
larger stride is better for the exact dense retriever, while a smaller stride is more suitable for the
approximate dense retriever when k = 8, 1024. Enabling the optimal speculation stride scheduler
can achieve the best performance consistently across all scenarios.

A.4    LL A MA-2-13B S ERVING E VALUATION



Table 3: RaLMSpec+PSA speed-up ratio compared against the baseline on LLaMA-2-13B over four
downstream datasets (Wiki QA, Web Questions, Natural Questions, and Trivia-QA).
              Retriever     Wiki QA     Web Questions      Natural Questions      Trivia-QA
                EDR           1.70×          1.85×               1.73×              1.78×
                ADR           1.03×          1.04×               1.02×              1.03×
                 SR           1.18×          1.21×               1.22×              1.26×


To demonstrate the effectiveness of RaLMSpec, we evaluate RaLMSpec+PSA with the LLaMA-2-
13B model over the Wiki QA, Web Questions, Natural Questions, and Trivia-QA and present the
results in Table 3. We can still observe RaLMSpec+PSA can achieve up to 1.85× speed-up ratio
compared against RaLMSeq when the retriever is the exact dense retriever. We observe marginal
improvement for the approximate dense retriever because language model generation latency has far
outweighed the retrieval latency. Thus, the retrieval latency saving is amortized within the end-to-
end latency saving.

A.5    A BLATION S TUDY ON D IFFERENT S YSTEM C OMPONENTS



                                   : RaLMSpec             : RaLMSpec+P
                                   : RaLMSpec+PS          : RaLMSpec+PSA


      (a) Exact dense retriever.      (b) Approximate dense retriever          (c) Sparse retriever
Figure 7: Ablation study on the contribution of the prefetching (P), optimal speculation stride sched-
uler (S), and asynchronous verification (A) components.


                                                     15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 4: Speed-up contribution of different combinations of prefetching (P), optimal speculation
stride scheduler (S), and asynchronous verification (A). We report the average serving latency over
100 requests evaluated over LLaMA-2-7B and the Wiki QA dataset.
      Retriever       B         P         S         A         PS       SA        PA       PSA
        EDR       144.39s     82.23s    85.19s    90.49s    81.64s   85.13s    81.60s    79.06s
        ADR         8.06s     14.25s     8.14s    13.90s     8.17s    7.83s    12.84s    7.89s
         SR        10.75s     11.27s    10.38s    10.88s    10.21s    8.26s    10.61s    8.28s


To demonstrate the contribution of different components, we have evaluated all combinations among
prefetching (P), optimal speculation stride scheduler (S), and asynchronous verification (A) with the
LLaMA-2-7B model on the Wiki QA dataset and presented the results in Table 4 and Figure 7. When
the retriever is the exact dense retriever, prefetching can improve more effectively than the optimal
speculation stride scheduler and asynchronous verification. In addition, prefetching+asynchronous
verification can even outperform RaLMSpec+PSA. This is due to the prefixed stride (s=3) for the
exact dense retriever is already near-optimal, and the optimal speculation stride scheduler needs a
warm-up phase at the start to adapt to the optimal stride, thus incurring some additional overheads.
We can observe that the optimal speculation stride scheduler is the most crucial component for
the approximate dense and sparse retriever and achieves the best performance when combined with
asynchronous verification. Prefetching can even affect performance negatively because the overhead
of prefetching outweighs its gain. To sum up, enabling the optimal speculation stride scheduler
for all workloads can help achieve a near-optimal stride adaptively. For workloads where retrieval
dominates most of the latency, enabling prefetching can further improve the serving latency while the
contribution of asynchronous verification is marginal. For workloads where retrieval is not the most
time-consuming step, asynchronous verification can benefit the serving latency while prefetching’s
overhead can outweigh its benefit if the prefetching size has not been chosen properly.
A.6   A BLATION S TUDY ON S PECULATION S TRIDE

Table 5: Ablation results on different speculation strides (S=2,4,8) and the optimal speculation stride
scheduler (OS3 ). We report the average serving latency over 100 requests evaluated over LLaMA-
2-7B and the Wiki QA dataset.
                          Retriever     S=2       S=4       S=8       OS3
                            EDR        92.17s    81.06s    81.90s    85.19s
                            ADR         9.86s    14.93s    25.88s    8.14s
                             SR        10.65s    12.48s    16.66s    10.38s


To demonstrate the effect of the optimal speculation stride scheduler, we have conducted ablation
studies on different fixed speculation strides (s=2, 4, 8) with LLaMA-2-7B over the Wiki QA dataset.
The results are presented in Table 5. We can observe from the results that a larger speculation stride
is better when the exact dense retriever is used. This is because the retrieval latency is much larger
for the exact dense retriever and way exceeds the language model generation latency. Thus, an ag-
gressive speculation stride will incur little overhead while having the opportunity for a longer match.
On the other hand, the approximately dense and sparse retrievers prefer a smaller speculation stride
because the retrieval is more efficient, and the cost-performance ratio for doing more speculations
is low. Thus, the optimal speculation stride scheduler is designed to tackle this dynamism and can
achieve near-optimal stride scheduling in all scenarios. OS3 performs slightly worse than s = 4, 8
in the case of EDR because a warm-up phase is required for OS3 to start its adaptation, i.e., we
initialize s=1 when we enable OS3 . Thus, the warm-up phase can introduce non-optimal strides and,
thus, slightly worse performance.
A.7   A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
This section presents the full evaluation results with GPT2, OPT, and LLaMA-2 over Wiki QA,
Web Questions, Natural Questions, and Trivia-QA against the exact dense, approximate dense, and
sparse retriever.


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 6: Averaged latency measured in seconds over GPT-2. OPT and LLaMA-2 with the exact
dense retriever.

  Model           Method              Wiki QA           WQ              NQ           Trivia QA
                Baseline            142.14 ± 0.96   141.38 ± 1.50   144.22 ± 1.17   144.82 ± 0.96
               RaLMSpec              69.82 ± 0.22    69.88 ± 0.52    70.79 ± 1.27    69.83 ± 0.28
             RaLMSpec+P(20)          68.22 ± 0.18    68.09 ± 0.18    68.06 ± 0.37    68.14 ± 0.06
            RaLMSpec+P(256)          66.14 ± 0.39    65.22 ± 0.79    67.10 ± 0.59    66.64 ± 0.23
  GPT2
              RaLMSpec+S             62.72 ± 0.48    62.43 ± 0.19    63.48 ± 0.69    64.63 ± 0.44
              RaLMSpec+A             69.92 ± 1.06    69.36 ± 0.60    71.00 ± 0.74    70.40 ± 0.78
           RaLMSpec+P(20)SA          58.35 ± 0.31    59.24 ± 0.46    60.21 ± 0.78    61.39 ± 0.99
           RaLMSpec+P(256)SA        53.95 ± 0.72    53.36 ± 1.08    56.26 ± 0.95    56.95 ± 1.34
                Baseline            126.86 ± 1.39   55.60 ± 0.08    62.02 ± 0.11    91.50 ± 0.01
               RaLMSpec              77.81 ± 0.84   29.99 ± 0.54    34.75 ± 0.19    48.20 ± 0.09
            RaLMSpec+P(20)           40.37 ± 0.07   29.09 ± 0.07    33.79 ± 0.60    52.09 ± 0.11
            RaLMSpec+P(256)          72.68 ± 0.75   31.94 ± 1.16    39.90 ± 3.18    50.24 ± 0.02
   OPT
              RaLMSpec+S             40.77 ± 0.52   29.49 ± 0.53    35.13 ± 0.10    50.82 ± 0.49
              RaLMSpec+A             77.76 ± 4.99   30.28 ± 0.59    36.16 ± 1.18    47.83 ± 0.03
           RaLMSpec+P(20)SA         39.00 ± 0.58    28.31 ± 0.62    31.88 ± 1.67    45.51 ± 2.93
           RaLMSpec+P(256)SA         59.21 ± 0.04   27.79 ± 0.11    30.02 ± 0.01    45.13 ± 0.04
                Baseline            144.39 ± 1.71   146.52 ± 1.92   149.76 ± 0.95   147.76 ± 2.80
               RaLMSpec              81.05 ± 0.78    87.20 ± 1.83    86.92 ± 1.30    90.44 ± 2.01
            RaLMSpec+P(20)           83.94 ± 1.11   84.23 ± 0.37     84.74 ± 0.47    81.86 ± 0.76
            RaLMSpec+P(256)          82.23 ± 1.95    94.15 ± 1.60    97.14 ± 1.89    85.65 ± 1.46
 LLaMA
              RaLMSpec+S             85.19 ± 2.26    88.95 ± 0.99    89.45 ± 1.28    84.28 ± 2.93
              RaLMSpec+A             90.49 ± 6.12    85.74 ± 1.94   84.37 ± 0.62     77.39 ± 1.11
           RaLMSpec+P(20)SA          81.94 ± 0.91    85.81 ± 1.82    85.47 ± 1.70    82.03 ± 2.73
           RaLMSpec+P(256)SA        79.06 ± 3.61     87.34 ± 4.63    95.54 ± 3.36   73.64 ± 0.80


                                             17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 7: Averaged latency measured in seconds over GPT-2. OPT and LLaMA-2 with the approxi-
mate dense retriever.

  Model           Method             Wiki QA           WQ             NQ          Trivia QA
                Baseline            4.48 ± 0.11    4.50 ± 0.41    4.38 ± 0.60    3.78 ± 0.10
               RaLMSpec             7.26 ± 0.07    6.44 ± 0.44    6.41 ± 0.71    7.47 ± 0.16
             RaLMSpec+P(20)         6.92 ± 0.10    7.38 ± 0.56    7.37 ± 0.58    7.28 ± 0.28
            RaLMSpec+P(256)         6.65 ± 0.07    5.97 ± 0.46    5.64 ± 0.74    6.96 ± 0.63
  GPT2
              RaLMSpec+S            4.59 ± 0.28    4.77 ± 0.32    4.65 ± 0.61    4.51 ± 0.45
              RaLMSpec+A            6.50 ± 0.54    6.49 ± 0.38    5.70 ± 0.70    6.94 ± 0.84
           RaLMSpec+P(20)SA         4.24 ± 0.14    4.34 ± 0.35    4.03 ± 0.68    3.64 ± 0.54
           RaLMSpec+P(256)SA        4.01 ± 0.21    3.81 ± 0.02    3.40 ± 0.01    3.86 ± 0.31
                Baseline             4.43 ± 0.05   1.31 ± 0.01    1.83 ± 0.01     2.42 ± 0.03
               RaLMSpec              7.15 ± 0.06   2.34 ± 0.01    3.04 ± 0.03     3.79 ± 0.04
             RaLMSpec+P(20)          3.44 ± 0.02   2.34 ± 0.01    2.70 ± 0.06     4.66 ± 0.03
            RaLMSpec+P(256)         16.03 ± 0.03   6.06 ± 0.01    7.06 ± 0.04    10.17 ± 0.01
   OPT
              RaLMSpec+S             2.21 ± 0.01   1.47 ± 0.01    1.88 ± 0.05     2.97 ± 0.05
              RaLMSpec+A             7.55 ± 0.05   2.25 ± 0.01    5.41 ± 1.32     6.20 ± 0.02
           RaLMSpec+P(20)SA         1.98 ± 0.03    1.30 ± 0.01    1.50 ± 0.01    2.37 ± 0.01
           RaLMSpec+P(256)SA         9.41 ± 0.66   4.14 ± 0.02    4.31 ± 0.02     6.19 ± 0.02
                Baseline             8.06 ± 0.07   7.97 ± 0.06    8.11 ± 0.11    8.68 ± 0.10
               RaLMSpec             14.10 ± 0.31   13.44 ± 0.37   14.35 ± 0.15   14.23 ± 0.35
             RaLMSpec+P(20)         14.25 ± 0.39   13.45 ± 0.28   14.08 ± 0.32   14.21 ± 0.30
            RaLMSpec+P(256)         20.63 ± 0.48   26.44 ± 3.11   27.38 ± 3.39   21.04 ± 0.43
 LLaMA
              RaLMSpec+S             8.14 ± 0.19   8.08 ± 0.07    8.08 ± 0.07    8.16 ± 0.09
              RaLMSpec+A            13.90 ± 0.36   13.28 ± 0.17   13.72 ± 0.14   18.35 ± 1.11
           RaLMSpec+P(20)SA         7.89 ± 0.22    7.84 ± 0.15    7.90 ± 0.12    7.91 ± 0.03
           RaLMSpec+P(256)SA        14.06 ± 0.08   14.96 ± 1.34   14.59 ± 2.04   12.94 ± 0.03


                                             18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 8: Averaged latency measured in seconds over GPT-2. OPT and LLaMA-2 with the sparse
retriever.

  Model           Method             Wiki QA           WQ             NQ          Trivia QA
                Baseline            7.41 ± 1.34    7.03 ± 1.15    7.23 ± 0.11    6.80 ± 0.09
               RaLMSpec             5.18 ± 0.13    5.30 ± 0.95    5.34 ± 0.11    5.40 ± 0.03
             RaLMSpec+P(20)         5.23 ± 0.23    4.58 ± 0.01    5.17 ± 0.05    5.50 ± 0.04
            RaLMSpec+P(256)         6.88 ± 0.66    7.16 ± 1.34    6.76 ± 0.27    6.91 ± 0.13
  GPT2
              RaLMSpec+S            5.62 ± 0.96    5.03 ± 0.68    5.24 ± 0.13    5.61 ± 0.11
              RaLMSpec+A            5.34 ± 0.89    4.99 ± 0.86    4.76 ± 0.14    5.04 ± 0.12
           RaLMSpec+P(20)SA         4.49 ± 0.09    4.57 ± 0.81    4.54 ± 0.02    4.99 ± 0.01
           RaLMSpec+P(256)SA        6.66 ± 1.25    6.50 ± 1.39    5.54 ± 0.02    5.91 ± 0.03
                Baseline            7.68 ± 0.01    1.83 ± 0.01    2.62 ± 0.01    4.71 ± 0.02
               RaLMSpec             5.63 ± 0.01    1.93 ± 0.01    2.60 ± 0.01    4.07 ± 0.02
             RaLMSpec+P(20)         3.00 ± 0.01    2.06 ± 0.01    2.50 ± 0.02    4.27 ± 0.01
            RaLMSpec+P(256)         7.13 ± 0.01    2.45 ± 0.01    3.22 ± 0.01    5.24 ± 0.02
   OPT
              RaLMSpec+S            2.79 ± 0.01    1.69 ± 0.01    2.32 ± 0.01    4.27 ± 0.01
              RaLMSpec+A            5.27 ± 0.02    1.86 ± 0.01    2.28 ± 0.01    3.82 ± 0.02
           RaLMSpec+P(20)SA         2.46 ± 0.01    1.57 ± 0.01    1.88 ± 0.01    3.59 ± 0.01
           RaLMSpec+P(256)SA        6.37 ± 0.01    1.92 ± 0.04    2.44 ± 0.02    4.53 ± 0.01
                Baseline            10.75 ± 0.32   10.55 ± 0.07   10.72 ± 0.10   11.06 ± 0.25
               RaLMSpec             11.47 ± 0.17   11.02 ± 0.31   11.10 ± 0.27   10.79 ± 0.20
             RaLMSpec+P(20)         11.27 ± 0.14   11.04 ± 0.22   10.69 ± 0.15   10.66 ± 0.23
            RaLMSpec+P(256)         12.83 ± 0.21   13.35 ± 0.81   12.48 ± 0.22   12.60 ± 0.36
 LLaMA
              RaLMSpec+S            10.38 ± 0.28   10.19 ± 0.19   9.95 ± 0.04    10.18 ± 0.08
              RaLMSpec+A            10.88 ± 0.26   10.66 ± 0.12   10.56 ± 0.20   10.16 ± 0.18
           RaLMSpec+P(20)SA         8.28 ± 0.18    8.18 ± 0.10    8.26 ± 0.14    8.09 ± 0.18
           RaLMSpec+P(256)SA         9.46 ± 0.17   10.42 ± 0.74   9.64 ± 0.08     9.36 ± 0.16


                                             19
