Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S YMBOL : G ENERATING F LEXIBLE B LACK -B OX O PTI -
MIZERS THROUGH S YMBOLIC E QUATION L EARNING

Jiacheng Chen1,∗ , Zeyuan Ma1,∗ , Hongshu Guo1 , Yining Ma2 , Jie Zhang2 , Yue-Jiao Gong1,†
       1                                         2
         South China University of Technology      Nanyang Technological University
     {jackchan9345, scut.crazynicolas, guohongshu369}@gmail.com,
          {yining.ma, zhangj}@ntu.edu.sg , gongyuejiao@gmail.com



                                               A BSTRACT

            Recent Meta-learning for Black-Box Optimization (MetaBBO) methods harness
            neural networks to meta-learn configurations of traditional black-box optimizers.
            Despite their success, they are inevitably restricted by the limitations of predefined
            hand-crafted optimizers. In this paper, we present S YMBOL, a novel framework
            that promotes the automated discovery of black-box optimizers through symbolic
            equation learning. Specifically, we propose a Symbolic Equation Generator (SEG)
            that allows closed-form optimization rules to be dynamically generated for spe-
            cific tasks and optimization steps. Within S YMBOL, we then develop three distinct
            strategies based on reinforcement learning, so as to meta-learn the SEG efficiently.
            Extensive experiments reveal that the optimizers generated by S YMBOL not only
            surpass the state-of-the-art BBO and MetaBBO baselines, but also exhibit excep-
            tional zero-shot generalization abilities across entirely unseen tasks with different
            problem dimensions, population sizes, and optimization horizons. Furthermore,
            we conduct in-depth analyses of our S YMBOL framework and the optimization
            rules that it generates, underscoring its desirable flexibility and interpretability.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Black-Box Optimization (BBO) pertains to optimizing an objective function without knowing its
mathematical formulation, essential in numerous domains ranging from automated machine learn-
ing (Akiba et al., 2019) to bioinformatics (Tsaban et al., 2022). Due to the black-box nature, op-
timizing BBO tasks requires a search process that iteratively probes and evaluates candidate solu-
tions. While several well-known BBO optimizers, such as Differential Evolution (Storn & Price,
1997), Evolutionary Strategy (Hansen & Ostermeier, 2001), and Bayesian Optimization (Snoek
et al., 2012b) have been proposed to steer the search process based on hand-crafted rules, they often
necessitate intricate manual tuning with deep expertise to secure the desirable performance for a
particular class of BBO tasks.
To mitigate the labour-intensive tuning required for BBO optimizers, recent Meta-Black-Box Op-
timization (MetaBBO) methods have turned to meta-learning (Finn et al., 2017) to automate such
process. In the left portion of Figure 1, we depict existing prevailing BBO (in the first block)
and MetaBBO (in the remaining blocks) paradigms. Essentially, MetaBBO follows the bi-level
optimization and can be categorized into two branches. The first branch is the MetaBBO for auto-
configuration. As shown in the second block, at the meta level, a neural policy dictates configura-
tions for the lower-level BBO optimizer, and this lower-level optimizer typically employs an expert-
derived formulation; Together, they strive to optimize a meta-objective to excel across a broader
range of BBO tasks. While they offer a pathway to data-centric optimization, the fine-tuned opti-
mizer closely follows the designs of the backbone BBO optimizer, thereby inheriting the potential
limitations of human-crafted rules. More recently, some MetaBBO methods employ neural net-
works to directly propose subsequent candidate solutions shown in the third block, however, these
models may easily get overfitted and their efficiency may be limited to low-dimensional BBOs only.
    ∗
        Equal Contribution
    †
        Corresponding Author


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Comparison of traditional BBO, MetaBBO, and our S YMBOL frameworks. Left: Depic-
tion of various BBO methods. Right: A view of the bi-level structure of S YMBOL. The lower level
optimizes individual BBO tasks, with the SEG generating step-by-step update rules. The meta level
compiles performances from the lower level into a meta objective so as to learn the SEG through
either the S YMBOL-E (without a teacher BBO optimizer), S YMBOL-G, or S YMBOL-S strategy.


Meanwhile, while they attempt to bypass hand-crafted rules, they shift towards becoming “black
box” optimization systems, raising concerns about interpretability and generalization.
In this paper, we address the above challenges by presenting S YMBOL, a novel MetaBBO frame-
work designed to autonomously generate symbolic equations for black-box optimizer learning. As
shown in the final block on the left side of Figure 1, our proposed S YMBOL considers generating
update rules expressed as closed-form equations, which not only allows S YMBOL to minimize its
dependence on hand-crafted optimizers, enhancing flexibility for discovering novel BBO optimiz-
ers, but also to exhibit much better interpretability. Specifically, our S YMBOL framework, illustrated
in the right portion of Figure 1, follows the bi-level structure of MetaBBO. It features a Symbolic-
Equation-Generator (SEG) at the lower level to dynamically generate symbolic update equations
for optimizing a given BBO task and a given optimization step. The generated rules then determine
the next generations of candidate solutions (or the next population in BBO parlance). At the meta
level, the SEG is trained to maximize the meta-objective across various BBO tasks.
Nevertheless, achieving the above flexible and interpretable framework certainly comes with its
challenges. To this end, we introduce the following novel designs: 1) At the lower level, our SEG
autoregressively generates closed-form equations with each symbol drawn from a basis symbol set
rooted in first principles; concurrently, we also design a constant inference mechanism for incorpo-
rating constants in the equations; 2) At the meta level, we put forth three unique S YMBOL training
strategies to meta-learn SEG, namely the Exploration strategy (S YMBOL-E), which initiates the
learning from scratch; the Guided strategy (S YMBOL-G), which harnesses a state-of-the-art BBO
optimizer as a teacher for behavior cloning; and the Synergized strategy (S YMBOL-S), which amal-
gamates the previous two for effective training; 3) Lastly, to bolster zero-shot generalization, our
SEG further combines fitness landscape analysis with a robust contextual representation, while our
S YMBOL leverages a diverse training set that encompasses various landscape properties.
Through benchmark experiments, we validate the effectiveness of our S YMBOL framework, demon-
strating its efficacy in discovering optimizers that surpass the existing hand-crafted ones. Moreover,
S YMBOL stands out with its zero-shot generalization ability, matching the performance of well-
known SMAC optimizer (Lindauer et al., 2022) but with faster speed on the entirely unseen BBO
tasks such as hyper-parameter optimization and protein docking. We also discuss the optimization
rules that our S YMBOL generates. Lastly, we conduct extensive analyses of S YMBOL regarding its
teacher options, hyper-parameter sensitivities, and ablation studies. Our main contributions are four
folds: 1) The introduction of S YMBOL, a pioneering generative MetaBBO framework for automated
optimizer discovery; 2) The SEG network, designed to effectively generate closed-form BBO equa-
tions; 3) Three training strategies based on reinforcement learning for different application needs;
and 4) New state-of-the-art MetaBBO performance complemented by in-depth discussions.


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2   R ELATED W ORKS

Traditional black-box optimizer. Traditional black-box optimizers seek global optima without
relying on gradient information, with population-based algorithms being particularly dominant.
Algorithms like Genetic Algorithm (GA) (Holland, 1992), Differential Evolution (DE) (Storn &
Price, 1997), Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) (Kennedy & Eberhart, 1995) focus on the inner-
population evolution, ensuring convergence of individual solutions within the population towards the
global optima. Others, like Evolution Strategy (ES) (Hansen et al., 2003), focus on refining the popu-
lation distribution based on statistics. To further enhance performance, adaptive strategies have been
developed, including dynamic population size strategy (Biswas et al., 2021; Auger & Hansen, 2005),
multi-operator selection strategy (Brest et al., 2021), adaptive control parameter strategy (Sarker
et al., 2013), etc. Besides population-based methods, Bayesian Optimization (BO) (Snoek et al.,
2012a; 2015) leverages Gaussian Processes and posterior acquisition to discern optimal solutions.
Among these, SMAC (Lindauer et al., 2022) makes advances with a racing mechanism, setting the
state-of-the-art performance in autoML hyper-parameter optimization (Arango et al., 2021).
Meta-learned black-box optimizer. Initial MetaBBO research utilizes traditional black-box op-
timizers at the meta level to determine proper configurations for lower-level optimizers, where a
single configuration is usually generated for the entire optimization process (Zhao et al., 2023). Re-
cent MetaBBO meta-learns the configurations or update rules of black-box optimizers using a neural
network, aiming to generate more flexible update rules dynamically. Typically, they consider fine-
tuning the configurations of a backbone BBO optimizer, e.g., auto-selecting evolution operators and
hyper-parameters for the evolutionary optimizers (Sharma et al., 2019; Sun et al., 2021; Lange et al.,
2023; Chaybouti et al., 2022; Lange et al., 2022; G.Shala et al., 2020; Li et al., 2023; Wu et al.,
2023). Though boosting the performance, they remain constrained by the inherent limitations of the
backbone optimizer. Another way is to directly suggest the next candidate solution(s) through neural
networks (Chen et al., 2017; TV et al., 2019). These end-to-end models can match the performance
of state-of-the-art black-box optimizers in low-dimensional tasks (≤ 6). Yet, for larger scales, their
efficiency can diminish. Furthermore, their shift towards becoming “black box” systems raises in-
terpretability concerns. Meanwhile, we note that many of the above MetaBBO works may still fail
to generalize across different task distributions (Sharma et al., 2019), dimensions (Chen et al., 2017;
TV et al., 2019; Chaybouti et al., 2022; Cao et al., 2019), population sizes (Sun et al., 2021), or
optimization horizons (Chen et al., 2017; TV et al., 2019). Symbolic-L2O (Zheng et al., 2022) and
Lion (Chen et al., 2023), using symbolic learning, show a certain similarity with our S YMBOL in
concept. But it focuses on discovering gradient descent optimizers, whereas S YMBOL is designed
to devise novel update rules for a range of BBO tasks.
Symbolic equation learning. Symbolic equation learning aims to discover a mathematical expres-
sion that best fits the given data, which is a core concept in the realm of Symbolic Regression
(SR). Traditional SR algorithms utilize genetic programming (GP) to evolve and optimize sym-
bolic expressions (Schmidt & Lipson, 2009), whereas recent studies embrace the assistance of
neural-guided search methodologies, such as utilizing a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) com-
bined with reinforcement learning, as in (Petersen et al., 2021). In this approach, RNN is used to
autoregressively infer a function fˆ, and the reward could be calculated as the error between the
ground truth f (x) and the predicted values fˆ(x). The constants in fˆ are local-searched by the Broy-
den–Fletcher–Goldfarb–Shanno (BFGS) (R.Fletcher, 1970), performing iterative evaluations and
adjustments. In our proposed S YMBOL, we favor using RNN to formulate symbolic update rules
over resorting to GP-driven search, primarily due to two reasons: 1) the intensive computational
demands of GPs, and 2) its pronounced sensitivity to hyper-parameter choices (Biggio et al., 2021).

3   M ETHODOLOGY
Our S YMBOL framework, akin to MetaBBO, follows bi-level optimization. Starting with an initial
population (a set of solutions), the Symbolic Equation Generator (SEG) at the lower level dynam-
ically formulates the update rules, τ (t) , for advancing the populations (current solutions) from x(t)
to x(t+1) using the formula x(t+1) = x(t) + τ (t) . Here, we use t to represent the optimization step
(generation) and we depict the whole process in the bottom right of Figure 2. In the rest of Figure 2,
we provide an example of how SEG autoregressively generates such update rules τ (t) based on a
basis symbol set S (at the top) and the on-the-fly constant value inference mechanism (highlighted


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: The illustration of our symbolic equation generator (SEG) at the lower level. Left: An
example of generating the update rule τ via SEG with on-the-fly inference of constant c (highlighted
in red dashed block). Top right: The symbolic expression tree from the pre-order traversal and the
interpreted update rule τ . Bottom right: an illustration of the overall iterations of SEG.


in the middle). At the meta level, the SEG is trained via three different strategies of S YMBOL to
maximize the meta-objective over a task distribution.

3.1   S YMBOLIC E QUATION G ENERATOR

Our SEG leverages the structure of symbolic expression trees to represent analytical equations (Pe-
tersen et al., 2021), with internal nodes denoting operators (e.g., +) and terminal nodes signifying
operands (e.g., constants). Starting with an empty expression tree, it involves autoregressively se-
lecting a token from a basis symbol set S, so as to construct the pre-order traversal of this symbolic
expression tree. The traversal can then be uniquely interpreted into the corresponding update rule
with a closed form. In this paper, we adopt τ to denote the generated update rule, its symbolic
expression tree, and the corresponding pre-order traversal, interchangeably. We denote τi as the ith
token of τ and the depth of the expression tree as H.
We parameterize the SEG with an LSTM, denoted as θ, to autoregressively construct update rules
token by token. In each construction step, we input the LSTM with a Vectorized Tree Embedding
(VTE) of the partially constructed expression tree, complemented by features originating from Fit-
ness Landscape Analysis (FLA) as the initial cell state of the LSTM so as to capture the current
optimization status. The output would be a categorical distribution over all the available tokens
from the basis symbol set S, where each token τi is sampled from the distribution, during both
training and inference. This process terminates either when all terminal nodes are assigned as
operands or when the depth of the tree, H, exceeds a predetermined limit. The likelihood of the
pre-order traversal, τ , is the cumulative product of the probabilities of selecting each token, i.e.,
          Q|τ |
p(τ |θ) = i=1 p(τi |τ1:(i−1) , θ). More details are provided as follows.
Basis symbol set S. Following the first principle, we identify an essential symbol set S, i.e.,
{+, −, ×, x, x∗ , x− , x∗i , ∆x, xr , c}, where we divide them into operators and operands. 1) Oper-
ators: + − and ×. 2) Operands: x - ‘candidate solutions’, x∗ and x− - ‘the best and worst solutions
found so far in the whole population’, x∗i - ‘the best-so-far solution for the ith candidate’, ∆x - ‘the
differential vector (velocity) between consecutive steps of candidates’, xr - ‘a randomly selected
candidate from the present population of candidates’, and c - ‘constant values’. Such basis sym-
bol set covers update rules for known optimizers such as DE (Storn & Price, 1997) with mutation
strategy τ = (xr1 − x) + c × (xr2 − xr3 ), PSO (Kennedy & Eberhart, 1995) with update formula
τ = c1 × ∆x + c2 × (x∗ − x) + c3 × (x∗i − x), etc. More importantly, S could also span beyond the
existing hand-crafted space, offering flexibility to explore novel and effective rules. Note that the de-
sign of S needs to balance representability and learning effectiveness, simply removing/augmenting
symbols from/to S may impact the final performance, which is discussed in Appendix C.2.
Constant inference. Upon the selection of the constant token c for τi , we infer its value immediately
by processing the subsequent LSTM hidden states hi+1 through two distinct feed-forward layers.


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Specifically, any constant c is defined as a combination of its mantissa ϖ and exponent ϵ, represented
as c = ϖ×10ϵ , where we stipulated that ϵ ∈ {0, −1} and ϖ ∈ {−1.0, −0.9, −0.8, ..., 0.8, 0.9, 1.0}.
The process is shown in Figure 2, highlighted in the red dashed block. Note that such an inference
mechanism for constants grants S YMBOL the versatility to fine-tune the relative emphasis of differ-
ent segments within an update rule via sampling from various exponent levels.
Masks for streamlined equation generation. Following past works (Biggio et al., 2021; Valipour
et al., 2021; Vastl et al., 2022), we introduce several restrictions to simplify symbolic equation
generation: 1) The children of binary operators must not both be constants as the result is simply
another constant; 2) The generated expressions must not include consecutive inverse operation, e.g.,
+x − x; 3) The children of the operator + must not be the same since it is equivalent to the operator
×; 4) The operator × must have one constant child because two-variable multiplication merely
appears in any black-box optimizer; 5) The height H of the symbolic expression tree is empirically
set to be between 2 and 5, which aligns with most of traditional black-box optimizers. Given the
above restrictions, we mask out the probability of selecting any invalid token as 0.
Contextual state representation. To inform SEG of sufficient contextual information for gen-
erating update rules, our state representation includes two aspects: 1) Vectorized Tree Embed-
ding (VTE), which embeds the partially constructed symbolic expression tree created thus far into
a vector; and 2) Features derived from Fitness Landscape Analysis (FLA), which profiles the opti-
mization status for the current optimization step. Our designed FLA features consist of three parts:
1) Distributional features of the current population, e.g, average distance between any pair of indi-
viduals, aiding in assessing the distribution and diversity of candidates; 2) Statistic features of the
current objective values, e.g, average objective value gap between an individual and the best-so-far
solution, providing insights into the quality of optimization progress; 3) Time stamp embedding,
e.g, the number of consumed generations, offering a temporal perspective on the tasks’ evolution.
Collectively, FLA features convey the optimization status of current population on the given task,
constantly informing the SEG an inductive bias on generating update rule for next generation. Both
the leveraged VTE and FLA features are task-agnostic and dimension-agnostic, which allows our
S YMBOL to generalize across diverse tasks. More details on the state representation and the SEG
network architecture can be found in Appendix A.1, and Appendix A.2, respectively.

3.2   T HREE S TRATEGIES FOR T RAINING THE SEG

S YMBOL aims to meta-learn the SEG (parameterized by θ) by op-               0.96
                                                                          Norm. Performance


timizing the accumulated meta-objective over a task distribution             0.95
D, as shown in Eq. (1). Given a BBO problem f sampled from D,                0.94
in the form of the Markov Decision Process, the SEG receives an              0.93
                                                                             0.92
optimization status as state and generates a symbolic update rule            0.91
                                                                                                 Symbol-G
  (t)                                                                                            Symbol-E
τ as action to update the candidate population at each gener-                0.90                Symbol-S
ation t. For each generation t, we measure how well the gener-               0.89                Teacher
                                                                             0.88
ated τ (t) performs on the sampled f by a meta-performance met-                   0   20 40   60   80    100
ric R(τ (t) , f ) as reward. We denote the update rules trajectory                        Epoch

generated for f as Ψf = {τ (1) , · · · , τ (T ) }, where T denotes the Figure 3: Performance of three
maximum number of generations for the lower-level optimization different training strategies.
task, and G(Ψf ) denote the accumulated meta-performance.
                                                                 T
                                                               X
                                                                    R(τ (t) , f )|θ

                         J(θ) = Ef ∼D G(Ψf )|θ = Ef ∼D                                                   (1)
                                                                t=1
We introduce three S YMBOL training strategies, catering to diverse application needs. Their effec-
tiveness is illustrated in Figure 3. Each features a distinct reward function R(τ (t) , f ).
Exploration learning (S YMBOL-E). Our first proposed strategy S YMBOL-E seeks to directly let the
SEG learn to build optimizers from scratch. It utilizes a reward function to measure the effectiveness
of the generated optimizer (update rules) based on the progress they facilitate:
                                                            y ∗,(t) − y opt
                              Rexplore (τ (t) , f ) = (−1) · ∗,(0)                                 (2)
                                                            y       − y opt
where y ∗,(t) denotes the minimal objective value during the generations 0 ∼ t and y opt denotes the
known optimal for the given task (considering minimization). However, BBO tasks often present


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


intricate optimization landscapes, leading to significant exploration hurdles (Reddy et al., 2019).
Consequently, when training the SEG using S YMBOL-E, it might demonstrate competitive outcomes
but with a relatively slower convergence. This stems from the SEG undergoing numerous trial-and-
error attempts before pinpointing proper update rules, as shown by the orange trajectory in Figure 3.
Guided learning (S YMBOL-G). Our subsequent strategy, S YMBOL-G, endeavours to train the SEG
by mimicking the performance of a leading black-box optimizer κ (teacher optimizer). To this end,
we let the SEG and the teacher κ run in parallel (with identical initial population1 ). For each gen-
eration in the lower-level optimization process, we compute the meta-performance Rguided (τ (t) , f )
of SEG by measuring a negation of the Earth Mover’s Distance (Rubner et al., 1998) between its
                                                            (t)
current population x(t) and the population of the teacher xκ :
                                           −1           n
                                                                (t)    (t)    |xκ |
                                                                                    o|x|
                Rguided (τ (t) , f ) =             · max min{||xi − xκ,j ||2 }j=1                 (3)
                                       xmax − xmin                                   i=1

where xmax and xmin denote the upper bound and the lower bound of the search space, |·| denotes the
size of the population and || · ||2 denotes the Euclidean distance between two individual solutions.
Utilizing the demonstration from the teacher optimizer as a guiding policy, S YMBOL-G efficiently
addresses the exploration challenges faced in S YMBOL-E, leading to the fastest convergence as
shown in Figure 3. Meanwhile, we note that the final performance of S YMBOL-G is on par with or
even surpassing the performance of the teacher, underscoring the desirable effectiveness.
Synergized learning (S YMBOL-S). Our third strategy S YMBOL-S, integrates both the above designs
as shown in Eq. (4) where λ is a real-valued weight. Meanwhile, to reduce reliance on known
optima (in S YMBOL-E), we introduce a surrogate global optimum, ŷ opt , as a dynamic alternative to
substitute the static ground truth y opt in Eq. (2). We refer more details of ŷ opt to Appendix A.4.

                                  Rsynergized (·) = R̂explore (·) + λRguided (·)                              (4)
The results, as captured in Figure 3, reveal that S YMBOL-S excels in synergizing exploration and
guided learning, resulting in steadfast convergence and the best final performance.
Teacher optimizer selection. Choosing a proper teacher optimizer is generally straightforward, in-
volving selections from proven performers in BBO benchmarks or state-of-the-art domain literature.
For training S YMBOL in this paper, we utilize the MadDE (Biswas et al., 2021) as the teacher for
S YMBOL-G and S YMBOL-S , since MadDE is one of the winners of the CEC benchmark. Note
that our S YMBOL is a teacher-agnostic framework, which is validated in Section 4.3. For scenarios
where teacher selection is challenging, S YMBOL-E offers a fallback, allowing for meta-learning an
effective policy from scratch, without relying on any teacher optimizer.
Training algorithm. Upon selecting one of the aforementioned strategies, S YMBOL can be effi-
ciently trained using reinforcement learning. In our work, we employ the Proximal Policy Opti-
mization with a critic network (Schulman et al., 2017). See pseudocode in Appendix A.5.

4    E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

In this section, we delve into the following research questions: RQ1: Does S YMBOL (in any of the
three strategies) attain state-of-the-art performance during both meta test and meta generalization?
RQ2: What insights has S YMBOL gained and how could they be interpreted? RQ3: Does the choice
of teacher optimizer in S YMBOL-G and S YMBOL-S has significant impact on performance? RQ4:
How do the hyper-parameters and each component of S YMBOL designs affect the effectiveness?
Below, we first introduce the experimental setups and then discuss RQ1 ∼ RQ4, respectively.
Training distribution D. Our training dataset is synthesized based on the well-known IEEE CEC
Numerical Optimization Competition (Mohamed et al., 2021) benchmark, which contains ten chal-
lenging synthetic BBO problems (f1 ∼ f10 ). These problems, having a longstanding history in
the literature for evaluating the performance of BBO optimizers, show different global optimization
    1
      In S YMBOL, the student population size is fixed as 100. However, since different teachers may employ
different initial population sizes, it may be impossible for the student to share an identical initial population
with the teacher. In such situations, we use stratified sampling to form the student’s initial population from the
teacher’s. Details are given in Appendix A.3.


                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Table 1: Comparisons of S YMBOL and other baselines during meta test and meta generalization.
                                    Meta Test (D)             Meta Generalization (HPO-B)      Meta Generalization (Protein-docking)
                           #Ps=100, #Dim=10, #FEs=50000      #Ps=5, #Dim=2∼16, #FEs=500            #Ps=10, #Dim=12, #FEs=1000
            Baselines     Mean↑±(Std)       Time   Rank      Mean↑±(Std)     Time    Rank       Mean↑±(Std)      Time        Rank
                  RS      0.932±(0.007)    -/0.03s   11      0.908±(0.004) -/0.02s     8       0.996±(0.000) -/0.003s          4
                MadDE     0.940±(0.009)     -/0.8s    6      0.932±(0.004) -/0.2s      6       0.991±(0.001)     -/0.4s        8
  BBO


             sep-CMA-ES   0.935±(0.017)     -/1.3s    9      0.870±(0.017) -/0.1s      9       0.971±(0.000)     -/0.3s       10
            ipop-CMA-ES   0.970±(0.012)     -/1.4s    3      0.938±(0.013) -/0.1s      5       0.996±(0.003)     -/0.3s        5
                SMAC      0.937±(0.019)    -/1.1m     7      0.979±(0.005) -/0.7m      1       0.998 ±(0.000)   -/3.8m         2
                LDE       0.970±(0.006)     9h/0.9s    2                  fail                                   fail
             DEDDQN       0.959±(0.007)   38m/1.1m    5      0.862±(0.026)    -/0.6s     10     0.993±(0.000)     -/1.3s        7
  MetaBBO


               Meta-ES    0.936±(0.012)    12h/0.4s    8     0.949±(0.002)    -/0.1s      3     0.984±(0.000)     -/0.3s        9
               MELBA      0.846±(0.012)    4h/2.6m    13                  fail                                   fail
              RNN-Opt     0.923±(0.010)   11h/0.4m    12                  fail                                   fail
             S YMBOL-E    0.934±(0.008)     6h/0.9s   10     0.920±(0.007) -/0.5s        7      0.996±(0.000)     -/0.5s        3
             S YMBOL-G    0.964±(0.012)    10h/1.0s    4     0.940±(0.011) -/0.5s        4      0.995±(0.000)     -/0.5s        6
             S YMBOL-S    0.972±(0.011)    10h/1.3s    1     0.963±(0.006) -/0.7s        2      0.999±(0.000)     -/0.7s        1
 Note:
       For meta generalization, we test on HPO-B and protein-docking tasks featuring different task dimensions (#Dim), population sizes
 (#Ps), and optimization horizons (#FEs). Note that several MetaBBO methods fail to generalize to these two realistic tasks: RNN-Opt
 and MELBA are not generalizable across different task dimensions; LDE is not generalizable across different population sizes.

properties such as uni-modal, multi-modal, (non-)separable, and (a)symmetrical features. Addi-
tionally, they reveal varied local landscape properties, such as different properties around different
local optima, continuous everywhere yet differentiable nowhere landscapes, and optima situated in
flattened areas. To augment those 10 functions to form a boundless training data distribution for
reinforcement learning, we adopt a sampling procedure: 1) setting a random seed; 2) randomly se-
lect a batch of N problems from f1 ∼ f10 (with allowance for repetition), where we set problem
dimension to 10 and the searching space to [−100, 100]10 ; 3) for each selected problem f , randomly
introduce a offset z ∼ U [−80, 80]10 to the optimal and then randomly generate a rotational matrix
M ∈ R10×10 to rotate the searching space; and 4) yield the transformed problems f (M T (x + z)).
Baselines. We compare S YMBOL with a wide range of traditional BBO and MetaBBO optimizers.
Regarding the BBO methods, we include Random Search (RS), MadDE (Biswas et al., 2021),
strong ES optimizers sep-CMA-ES (Ros & Hansen, 2008) and ipop-CMA-ES (Auger & Hansen,
2005), and a strong BO optimizer SMAC (Lindauer et al., 2022). Regarding the MetaBBO methods,
we include DEDDQN (Sharma et al., 2019), LDE (Sun et al., 2021), and Meta-ES (Lange et al.,
2022) as baselines for auto-configuration; RNN-Opt (TV et al., 2019) and MELBA (Chaybouti
et al., 2022) as baselines for directly generating the next candidate solutions. All hyper-parameters
were tuned using the grid search and we list their best settings in Appendix B.1.
Training & code release. We dispatch training details and hyper-parameter setups of our S YMBOL
in Appendix B.2. For MetaBBO baselines, they are all trained on the same problem distribution D as
our framework while following their recommended settings. We release the implementation python
codes at https://github.com/GMC-DRL/Symbol, where we show how to train S YMBOL
with different strategies, and how to generalize it to unseen problems.

4.1         P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION (RQ1)

To ensure a thorough assessment, we conduct two sets of experiments: meta test and meta general-
ization. The former evaluates the performance of the trained optimizer on unseen, yet in-distribution
(w.r.t. D) BBO problems. The latter evaluates the adaptability of the optimizer on completely novel
realistic BBO tasks, characterized by varying task dimensions (#Dim), population sizes (#Ps), and
optimization horizons (#FEs). For each method, we report in Table 1: 1) the average of min-max
normalized performance with the corresponding standard deviation over 5 independent runs (see
Appendix B.3 for normalization details); 2) overall training time and the average solving time per
instance, in the format of “training/testing time”; and 3) performance rank among all methods.
Meta test. We meta-test S YMBOL (trained with the three strategies) on a group of 320 unseen
problem instances sampled from D, and compare them with all baselines. For each instance, all
participants are allowed to optimize it for no more than 5 × 104 function evaluations (FEs). We note
that SMAC is an exception which is given 500 FEs, otherwise it takes several days for evaluating
under the same FEs. The results in Table 1 show that: 1) S YMBOL-S stands out by delivering a per-
formance that not only surpasses all the baselines but also significantly outpaces its teacher, MadDE;
2) Compared with S YMBOL-G which concentrates itself on the teacher demonstration and S YMBOL-
E which probes optimal update rules from scratch, S YMBOL-S attain a significant improvement by


                                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                Table 2: Generated update rules and corresponding frequencies.
                                                                                                                                      80

                                                                                                                                      70

                                                                                                                                      60

                    Update rule (x + τ )                            Frequency                                                      50

                                                                                                                                  40



         x + 0.18 × (x∗ − xr ) + 0.42 × (x∗i − xr )                  42.207%                                                      30

                                                                                                                                  20

                                                                                                                                  10



          x + 0.18 × (x∗ − x) + 0.42 × (x∗i − x)                     39.448%                                                  4
                                                                                                                                  0


                   x + 0.18 × (x∗ − x∗i )
                                                                                                                          2


                                                                      7.448%            4
                                                                                            2
                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                      0


 x + 0.6 × (x − xr ) + 0.6 × (x∗i − x) + 0.18 × (x∗ − x∗i )
             ∗
                                                                      2.601%                        2
                                                                                                        4
                                                                                                              4


         x + 0.78 × (x∗ − xr ) + 0.42 × (x∗i − xr )                   1.586%     Table 3: 2D Rastrigin.
  Symbol-S


                    t=0          t=5          t=10         t=15         t=20     t=25                       t=30
  Original DE


                    t=0          t=5          t=10         t=15         t=20     t=25                       t=30
  CMA-ES


                    t=0          t=5          t=10         t=15         t=20     t=25                       t=30

Figure 4: Evolution visulization of the optimizers, showing the position of population (red dots) and
the global optimal (yellow star). Top: S YMBOL-S; Middle: original DE; Bottom: CMA-ES.

integrating their meta-objectives coordinately; 3) Methods like RNN-Opt and MELBA, which em-
ploy coordinate-based features, may be prone to overfitting, thereby resulting in suboptimal general-
ization to unseen instances, even if they are from the same distribution, D. In contrast, our S YMBOL
leverages generalizable VTE and VLA features and achieves the best performance.
Meta generalization. To test the zero-shot generalization performance on realistic tasks, we con-
sider the hyper-parameter optimization benchmark HPO-B (Arango et al., 2021) and the Protein-
docking benchmark (Hwang et al., 2010), details of which are elaborated in Appendix B.5. The
results in Table 1 show that: 1) S YMBOL-S not only achieves the state-of-the-art zero-shot gen-
eralization performance against all MetaBBO baselines, it also achieves similar performance with
the advanced BO tool-box SMAC; 2) While SMAC, developed over decades, takes 42s and 227s
for HPO and Protein-docking respectively, the optimizers discovered by our S YMBOL are able to
achieve comparable results with less than 1s, underscoring the significance of our S YMBOL frame-
work; 3) Recent MetaBBO methods DEDDQN and Meta-ES could be severely disturbed by the
intricate landscape properties (even worse than exhaustive random search). Instead, S YMBOL with
the proposed three strategies present a more robust zero-shot generalization performance.

4.2              I NTERPRETING S YMBOL (RQ2)

We now examine and interpret the generated closed-form update rules by our S YMBOL-S. Using a
2D Rastrigin function (Figure 3), known for its challenging multi-modal nature, we compare the per-
formance of the trained S YMBOL-S with original DE (Storn & Price, 1997) and CMA-ES (Hansen
et al., 2003). Each optimizer evolves a population of 10 solutions over 30 generations. S YMBOL-
S generates a variety of update rules and we detail the top-5 rules based on 50 runs in Table 2.
Notably, the two most frequent rules showcase distinct optimization strategies: the first empha-
sizes exploration in uncharted territories using xr , while the second prioritizes convergence towards
previously identified optimal solutions using the current x. In Figure 4, we illustrate the search be-
haviors of our learned S YMBOL-S compared to the baseline. The visualization clearly reveals that
S YMBOL-S is able to avoid falling into local optima and successfully locate the global optima by
dynamically deciding a proper update rule, while DE and CMA-ES show premature due to their
inflexible manual update rules. We validate this conclusion by further investigating the update rules


                                                           8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                                                                             0.98


                                                                                                                Norm. Performance ↑
                    −0.8                  DE                     PSO                    CMA-ES



    Log Norm. Obj. value ↓
                                                                                                                             0.96
                                                                                                Teacher
                    −1.0                                                                                                     0.94
                                                                                                Symbol-S
                                                                                                                             0.92
                    −1.2
                                                                                                                             0.90
                    −1.4                                                                                                     0.88

                              0   1   2        3   4   0   1    2     3     4   0   1   2   3      4       5                          0   0.25   0.5   0.75   1   1.25   1.5
                                                               FEs(10ˆ 4)                                                                               λ

 Figure 5: Performance of S YMBOL-S with different teachers.                                                   Figure 6: Effects of different λ.

generated in different periods of the optimization steps. In the later stage of the showcased evolu-
tion path (20 ≤ t ≤ 30), our S YMBOL-S (the top row) shows two searching patterns: 1) during
20 ≤ t ≤ 25, the population diverges to undiscovered area. We look back at the corresponding gen-
erated update rules in this period and find it is 0.18 × (x∗ − xr ) + 0.42 × (x∗i − xr ), which introduces
xr for exploring potential optimal area; 2) during 25 ≤ t ≤ 30, it prompts the population converging
to some local area. The dominant updated rule in this period is 0.18 × (x∗ − x) + 0.42 × (x∗i − x),
accelerating the population to converge to the most likely optima.

4.3                          T EACHER O PTIONS (RQ3)

We now investigate more teacher options where we substituted MadDE with the original DE, PSO,
and CMA-ES, respectively. Figure 5 presents the log-normalized, step-by-step objective values for
these variants in comparison to their teacher optimizers. Impressively, S YMBOL-S not only follows
the guidance of its teacher optimizer but consistently surpasses its performance during training. This
demonstrates the adaptability of our framework, capable of leveraging a wide array of existing and
future BBO optimizers as teachers. Comprehensive results, including those of S YMBOL-S on HPO-
B and Protein-docking and the outcomes for S YMBOL-G, are detailed in Figure 8, Appendix C.1.

4.4                          S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS AND A BLATION S TUDIES (RQ4)

Effects of λ. In Figure 6, we report the normalized performance (5 runs) of different λ values on
HPO-B tasks. When λ is set too low, behavior cloning may be ineffective, resulting in S YMBOL-
S performing similarly to S YMBOL-E. On the other hand, a high value of λ can potentially cause
overfitting. Together with the results on Protein-docking which we leave at Appendix C.2, Figure 10,
we suggest setting λ = 1 to strike a good balance between the imitation and the exploration.
Abalation on FLA features and basis symbol set. To verify that the FLA features help S YMBOL at-
tain good generalization performance, we conduct ablation studies on S YMBOL-S in Appendix C.2.
We find that each element of the FLA features plays a crucial role in ensuring robust generalization
capabilities. Besides the FLA features, the choice of tokens in the basis symbol set S may also affect
the performance, as discussed in Appendix C.2. We find that the key to selecting the basis symbol
set is ensuring its alignment with the BBO domain, rather than simply increasing the token count.


5                            C ONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we introduce S YMBOL, a novel MetaBBO framework tailored to autonomously gen-
erate optimizers for BBO tasks. Adopting a bi-level structure, S YMBOL integrates an SEG network
at the lower level, adept at generating closed-form BBO update rules. The SEG is then meta-learned
via three distinct training strategies: S YMBOL-E, S YMBOL-G, and S YMBOL-S, which possesses the
versatility to learn update rules either from scratch and/or by leveraging insights from established
BBO optimizers. Experimental results underscore the effectiveness of S YMBOL: training on syn-
thetic tasks suffices for it to generate optimizers that surpass state-of-the-art BBO and MetaBBO
methods, even when applied to entirely unseen realistic BBO tasks. As a pioneer work on genera-
tive MetaBBO through symbolic equation learning, while our S YMBOL offers several advancements,
certain limitations exist. Selecting a teacher for new BBO tasks can be challenging: even though
S YMBOL-E provides a teacher-free approach, future work may further enhance its training sample
efficiency (as faced by other RL tasks). Additionally, exploration of more powerful symbol sets is
another important future work. Furthermore, researching more advanced generators, such as those
based on large-language models (LLMs) (OpenAI, 2023), is also a promising future direction.


                                                                                        9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant
62276100, in part by the Guangdong Natural Science Funds for Distinguished Young Scholars under
Grant 2022B1515020049, in part by the Guangdong Regional Joint Funds for Basic and Applied
Research under Grant 2021B1515120078, in part by the TCL Young Scholars Program, and in part
by the Singapore MOE AcRF Tier 1 funding (RG13/23).

R EFERENCES
Takuya Akiba, Shotaro Sano, Toshihiko Yanase, Takeru Ohta, and Masanori Koyama. Optuna:
  A next-generation hyperparameter optimization framework. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM
  SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data mining, 2019.
Sebastian Pineda Arango, Hadi Samer Jomaa, Martin Wistuba, and Josif Grabocka. HPO-b: A
  large-scale reproducible benchmark for black-box HPO based on openML. In Proceedings of the
  35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Anne Auger and Nikolaus Hansen. A restart cma evolution strategy with increasing population size.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE Congress of Evolutionary Computation, 2005.
Luca Biggio, Tommaso Bendinelli, Alexander Neitz, Aurelien Lucchi, and Giambattista Parascan-
  dolo. Neural symbolic regression that scales. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference
  on Machine Learning, 2021.
Subhodip Biswas, Debanjan Saha, Shuvodeep De, Adam D Cobb, Swagatam Das, and Brian A
  Jalaian. Improving differential evolution through bayesian hyperparameter optimization. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE Congress of Evolutionary Computation, 2021.
Janez Brest, Mirjam Sepesy Maučec, and Borko Bošković. Self-adaptive differential evolution al-
  gorithm with population size reduction for single objective bound-constrained optimization: Al-
  gorithm j21. In Proceedings of the IEEE Congress of Evolutionary Computation, 2021.
Yue Cao, Tianlong Chen, Zhangyang Wang, and Yang Shen. Learning to optimize in swarms, 2019.
Sofian Chaybouti, Ludovic Dos Santos, Cedric Malherbe, and Aladin Virmaux. Meta-learning of
  black-box solvers using deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 36th Conference on
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Xiangning Chen, Chen Liang, Da Huang, Esteban Real, Kaiyuan Wang, Yao Liu, Hieu Pham, Xu-
  anyi Dong, Thang Luong, Cho-Jui Hsieh, Yifeng Lu, and Quoc V. Le. Symbolic discovery of
  optimization algorithms, 2023.
Yutian Chen, Matthew W Hoffman, Sergio Gómez Colmenarejo, Misha Denil, Timothy P Lilli-
  crap, Matt Botvinick, and Nando Freitas. Learning to learn without gradient descent by gradient
  descent. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning, 2017.
Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation
  of deep networks. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2017.
G.Shala, A. Biedenkapp, N.Awad, S. Adriaensen, M.Lindauer, and F. Hutter. Learning step-size
  adaptation in cma-es. In Proceedings of the Sixteenth International Conference on Parallel Prob-
  lem Solving from Nature (PPSN’20), September 2020.
Nikolaus Hansen and Andreas Ostermeier. Completely derandomized self-adaptation in evolution
  strategies. Evolutionary Computation, 9:159–195, 2001.
Nikolaus Hansen, Sibylle D Müller, and Petros Koumoutsakos. Reducing the time complexity of
  the derandomized evolution strategy with covariance matrix adaptation (cma-es). Evolutionary
  computation, 11:1–18, 2003.
Jonathan Ho and Stefano Ermon. Generative adversarial imitation learning, 2016.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


John H Holland. Genetic algorithms. Scientific american, 267:66–73, 1992.

Howook Hwang, Thom Vreven, Joël Janin, and Zhiping Weng. Protein–protein docking benchmark
  version 4.0. Proteins: Structure, Function, and Bioinformatics, 78:3111–3114, 2010.

James Kennedy and Russell Eberhart. Particle swarm optimization. In Proceedings of the Interna-
  tional Conference on Neural Networks, 1995.

Robert Lange, Tom Schaul, Yutian Chen, Chris Lu, Tom Zahavy, Valentin Dalibard, and Sebastian
  Flennerhag. Discovering attention-based genetic algorithms via meta-black-box optimization. In
  Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, 2023.

Robert Tjarko Lange, Tom Schaul, Yutian Chen, Tom Zahavy, Valentin Dalibard, Chris Lu, Satinder
  Singh, and Sebastian Flennerhag. Discovering evolution strategies via meta-black-box optimiza-
  tion. In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.

Xiaobin Li, Kai Wu, Xiaoyu Zhang, Handing Wang, and Jing Liu. B2opt: Learning to optimize
  black-box optimization with little budget, 2023.

Marius Lindauer, Katharina Eggensperger, Matthias Feurer, André Biedenkapp, Difan Deng, Car-
 olin Benjamins, Tim Ruhkopf, René Sass, and Frank Hutter. Smac3: A versatile bayesian opti-
 mization package for hyperparameter optimization. The Journal of Machine Learning Research,
 23:2475–2483, 2022.

Ali Wagdy Mohamed, Anas A Hadi, Ali Khater Mohamed, Prachi Agrawal, Abhishek Kumar, and
  P. N. Suganthan. Problem definitions and evaluation criteria for the cec 2021 on single objective
  bound constrained numerical optimization. In Proceedings of the IEEE Congress of Evolutionary
  Computation, 2021.

OpenAI. ChatGPT, 2023. URL https://openai.com/chatgpt.

Brenden K Petersen, Mikel Landajuela Larma, Terrell N. Mundhenk, Claudio Prata Santiago,
  Soo Kyung Kim, and Joanne Taery Kim. Deep symbolic regression: Recovering mathematical
  expressions from data via risk-seeking policy gradients. In Proceedings of the 9th International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.

Siddharth Reddy, Anca D Dragan, and Sergey Levine. Sqil: Imitation learning via reinforcement
  learning with sparse rewards. In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2019.

R.Fletcher. A new approach to variable metric algorithms. The Computer Journal, 1970.

Raymond Ros and Nikolaus Hansen. A simple modification in cma-es achieving linear time and
  space complexity. In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Parallel Problem Solv-
  ing from Nature. Springer, 2008.

Yossi Rubner, Carlo Tomasi, and Leonidas J Guibas. A metric for distributions with applications to
  image databases. In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Computer Vision, 1998.

Ruhul A Sarker, Saber M Elsayed, and Tapabrata Ray. Differential evolution with dynamic param-
  eters selection for optimization problems. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 18:
  689–707, 2013.

Michael Schmidt and Hod Lipson. Distilling free-form natural laws from experimental data. Science,
 324(5923):81–85, 2009.

John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.

Mudita Sharma, Alexandros Komninos, Manuel López-Ibáñez, and Dimitar Kazakov. Deep re-
 inforcement learning based parameter control in differential evolution. In Proceedings of the
 Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, 2019.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jasper Snoek, Hugo Larochelle, and Ryan P Adams. Practical bayesian optimization of machine
  learning algorithms. In Proceedings of the 26th Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2012a.
Jasper Snoek, Hugo Larochelle, and Ryan P Adams. Practical bayesian optimization of machine
  learning algorithms. In Proceedings of the 26th Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2012b.
Jasper Snoek, Oren Rippel, Kevin Swersky, Ryan Kiros, Nadathur Satish, Narayanan Sundaram,
  Mostofa Patwary, Mr Prabhat, and Ryan Adams. Scalable bayesian optimization using deep
  neural networks. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2015.
Rainer Storn and Kenneth Price. Differential evolution-a simple and efficient heuristic for global
  optimization over continuous spaces. Journal of Global Optimization, 11:341, 1997.
Jianyong Sun, Xin Liu, Thomas Bäck, and Zongben Xu. Learning adaptive differential evolution
   algorithm from optimization experiences by policy gradient. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary
   Computation, 25:666–680, 2021.
Tomer Tsaban, Julia K Varga, Orly Avraham, Ziv Ben-Aharon, Alisa Khramushin, and Ora
  Schueler-Furman. Harnessing protein folding neural networks for peptide–protein docking. Na-
  ture Communications, 13:176, 2022.
Vishnu TV, Pankaj Malhotra, Jyoti Narwariya, Lovekesh Vig, and Gautam Shroff. Meta-learning for
  black-box optimization. In Proceedings of the Joint European Conference on Machine Learning
  and Knowledge Discovery in Databases, 2019.
Mojtaba Valipour, Bowen You, Maysum Panju, and Ali Ghodsi. Symbolicgpt: A generative trans-
 former model for symbolic regression. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.14131, 2021.
Martin Vastl, Jonáš Kulhánek, Jiřı́ Kubalı́k, Erik Derner, and Robert Babuška. Symformer: End-to-
 end symbolic regression using transformer-based architecture. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.15764,
 2022.
Kai Wu, Penghui Liu, and Jing Liu. Decn: Automated evolutionary algorithms via evolution inspired
  deep convolution network, 2023.
Qi Zhao, Qiqi Duan, Bai Yan, Shi Cheng, and Yuhui Shi. A survey on automated design of meta-
  heuristic algorithms, 2023.
Wenqing Zheng, Tianlong Chen, Ting-Kuei Hu, and Zhangyang Wang. Symbolic learning to opti-
 mize: Towards interpretability and scalability, 2022.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A      T ECHNICAL D ETAILS OF S YMBOL

A.1     C ONTEXTUAL S TATE R EPRESENTATION

VTE. We first represent each token in S with a 4-bit binary code, e.g., 0001 for +, 0010 for −,
etc., listed in in Table 4. During constructing the update rule τ , we embed the corresponding under-
constructed symbolic expression tree into a fixed-length vector which is called VTE as a contextual
state to inform the SEG prompting next token for τ . We showcase a symbolic expression tree with
maximum height H = 3 in Figure 7. In this case, the SEG has generated 4 tokens in the previous
steps (+, x∗ , ×, c), thus the VTE for the current half-constructed tree is shown in the bottom of
Figure 7. For those blank positions in this tree we use 0000 to represent them, while for those
positions holding by a token τi , we use the binary codes in Table 4 to represent them. As we have
set a maximum height of τ to 5 in this paper, the VTE embedding of the symbolic expression tree τ
can be represented by 31 4-bit binary codes, resulting in a vector of {0, 1}124 .
FLA. The formulation of the FLA features is described in Table 5. States s{1,2,3} collectively repre-
sent the distributional features of the current candidate population. Specifically, state s1 represents
the average distance between each pair of candidate solutions, indicating the overall dispersion level.
State s2 represents the average distance between the best candidate solution in the current population
and the remaining solutions, providing insights into the convergence situation. State s3 represents
the average distance between the best solution found so far and the remaining solutions, indicating
the exploration-exploitation stage. Then, States s{4,5,6} provide information about the statistics of
the objective values in the current population and contribute to our framework’s understanding of the
fitness landscape. Specifically, state s4 represents the average difference between the best objective
value found in the current population and the remaining solutions, and s5 represents the average
difference when compared with the best objective value found so far. State s6 represents the stan-
dard deviation of the objective values of the current candidates. Finally, states s{7,8,9} collectively
represent the time-stamp features of the current optimization process. Among them, state s7 denotes
the current process, which can inform the framework about when to adopt appropriate strategies.
States s8 and s9 are measures for the stagnation situation.


      Table 4: Binary encoding of tokens in S.

      Tokens   Binary code   Tokens      Binary code
        +         0001         ×            0010
        −         0011          c           0100
         x        0101         x∗           0110
        x−        0111        ∆x            1000
        xr        1001         x∗i          1010
                                                            Figure 7: Illustration of VTE transformation.

A.2     N ETWORK A RCHITECTURE D ETAILS

SEG (Actor Network). The network parameters of SEG θ includes three components: 1) FLA Em-
bedder with parameters {WFLA , bFLA }; 2) LSTM with parameters {Wh , bh , Win , bin }; 3) Constant
inference decoder with parameters {Wϖ , bϖ , Wϵ , bϵ }. To generate an update rule τ for the current
optimization step (generation t), we first embed the FLA features of the current optimization status
SFLA as the initial cell state:
                                     c0FLA = WFLA
                                               T
                                                   SFLA + bFLA                                   (5)
We then initialize the h(0) = 0 and VTE(τ ) (at the very beginning, τ is empty) as the other two con-
textual states. The LSTM then starts auto-regressively determining each τi by iteratively executing
the following three steps:
                                   (i)                              (i−1)
                             h(i) , cFLA , o(i) = LSTM(VTE(τ ), cFLA , h(i−1) )                         (6)

                                              τi ∼ Softmax(o(i) )                                       (7)

                                                 τ = τ ∪ {τi }                                          (8)


                                                       13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               Table 5: Formulations of FLA features.

                           States                                 Notes
                                           (t)  (t)               Average distance between any pair of
                     s1         meani,j ||xi − xj ||2             individuals in current population.
        Population
                                             (t)                  Average distance between each individual
                     s2         meani ||xi − x∗,(t) ||2           and the best individual in tth generation.

                                               (t)                Average distance between each individual
                     s3             meani ||xi − x∗ ||2           and the best-so-far solution.

                                              (t)                 Average objective value gap between each
                     s4        meani (f (xi ) − f (x∗ ))          individual and the best-so-far solution.

                                                                  Average objective value gap between each
        Objective


                                             (t)
                     s5       meani (f (xi ) − f (x∗,(t) ))       individual and the best individual in tth
                                                                  generation.

                                                                  Standard deviation of the objective values
                                                     (t)
                     s6                stdi (f (xi ))             of population in tth generation, a value
                                                                  equals 0 denotes converged.
                                                                  The potion of remaining generations, T
                     s7                  (T − t)/T
                                                                  denotes maximum generations for one run.
        Time Stamp


                                                                  st denotes how many generations the
                     s8                     st/T
                                                                  optimizer stagnates improving.

                                   1   if f (x∗,(t) ) < f (x∗ )   Whether the optimizer finds better
                     s9
                                                                  individual than the best-so-far solution.
                                   0   otherwise


If the constant token c is inferred at ith construction step (τi = c), we activate the constant inference
decoder to infer the concrete constant value:
                                                        T (i)
                                      ϖ ∼ Softmax(Wϖ      o + bϖ )                                    (9)
                                    ϵ ∼ Softmax(WϵT o(i) + bϵ )                                    (10)
                                           c = ϖ × 10ϵ                                             (11)
Critic Network. The Critic has parameters Wcritic , bcritic . It receives the FLA features as the input
and predicts the expected return value υ (baseline value) as follows:
                                              T
                                      υ = Wcritic SFLA + bcritic                                   (12)

A.3   P OPULATION S AMPLING

When S YMBOL-G or S YMBOL-S constructs its initial population during the training process, we
need to ensure S YMBOL have the same initial population with the teacher optimizer. However, con-
sidering that the population size of S YMBOL may be different from the teacher optimizer, and some
teacher optimizers even dynamically decay the population size through the optimization process, a
flexible method is needed to initialize S YMBOL’s population. This method should not only adapt
to the uncertain population size of teacher but also make the initial population of S YMBOL closely
resemble that of the teacher optimizer. Specifically, in the case where the teacher’s population size is
larger than that of S YMBOL, the population of S YMBOL is stratified sampled from the teacher opti-
mizer base on the objective value. In cases where teacher’s population size is smaller than S YMBOL,
S YMBOL firstly replicates the teacher’s population and then randomly samples candidates from the
search space until the required population size is reached. We illustrate the population sampling
method in Algorithm 1.

A.4   S URROGATE G LOBAL O PTIMUM

The teacher optimizer in S YMBOL-S provides a convenience to reduce the reliance on known optima
in S YMBOL-E. We propose a surrogate global optimum, ŷ opt , to substitute the ground true global


                                                           14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Sampling student’s initial population from teacher’s population.
input: Teacher’s population ptea ; Teacher’s population size P stea ; Student’s population size P sstu
                                                                                                   ∗
output: Student’s population pstu
 1: pstu ← ∅; P sstu ← 0
 2: if P sstu
           ∗ > Ps
                     tea
                          then
 3:    pstu ← pstu ∪ ptea ; P sstu ← P stea
 4:    while P sstu < P sstu  ∗ do
 5:        Randomly sample a solution xr from the searching space
 6:        pstu ← pstu ∪ {xr }
 7:        P sstu ← P sstu + 1
 8:    end while
 9: else
10:    Sort ptea upon the objective value
11:    Equally spaced sample #P sstu                               tea
                                       ∗ candidate solutions from p , store in p
                                                                                 sample
         stu      sample      stu    stu
12:    p ←p              ; P s ← P s∗
13: end if


optimum. In the very beginning of training process, ŷ opt is determined from the teacher optimizer
when it optimizes the corresponding training task. In the rest of training process, ŷ opt is dynamically
updated when either the teacher or the SEG finds a solution with lowest objective value thus far.

A.5    P SEUDO C ODE FOR THE T RAINING P ROCESS

Algorithm 2 illustrates the pseudo code for the training process of three strategies of S YMBOL. To
execute these strategies, one must have access to the training distribution D and set the learning
rate α. Additionally, for S YMBOL-G and S YMBOL-S, the teacher optimizer κ is required. First,
we initialize the SEG with LSTM parameters θ. In each meta-training step, a batch of problems
f are sampled from D. Then, we reset κ for S YMBOL-G and S YMBOL-S, initialize its population
and evaluate the solutions. The population for student is similarly initialized. For each step in
lower-level optimization, we employ κ to gain the teacher suggestion, which will be skipped when
the training strategy is S YMBOL-E. Next, for all training strategies, we generate the update rule for
the student population with our SEG and use the rule to advance the population. The reward will
be then calculated according to different training modes as formulated in Eq. (2) ∼ (4). After the
lower-level loop concludes, we update the meta-objective and token trajectory, which participant in
the gradient calculation in PPO manner. Upon the meta-training loop, the well-trained SEG with
LSTM parameters θ is returned.


B     T RAINING AND T EST S ETUP

B.1   S ETTINGS OF T RADITIONAL BASELINES

For the sake of comparison fairness, we conduct grid search on some of the hyper-parameters of
baselines on the training distribution D. In this section, we present the search results of two BBO
baselines, MadDE and sep-CMA-ES, as they are sensitive to hyper-parameter values. For MadDE,
we focus on the following hyper-parameters: the probability of qBX crossover (PqBX ), the per-
centage of population in p-best mutation (p), the initial values for scale factor memory (F0 ) and
crossover rate memory (CR0 ). For sep-CMA-ES, we consider the following hyper-parameters: the
initial center (µ0 ) and initial standard deviation (σ0 ). The search range and best settings after gird
search of the two baseline algorithms are listed in Table 6. In the experiments of this paper, for
MadDE, we choose PqBX of 0.01 , p of 0.18, F0 of 0.2, and CR0 of 0.2. For sep-CMA-ES, we use
µ0 with a vector of 3 and σ0 with a vector of 2.

B.2   S ETTINGS OF S YMBOL

The neural parameters of our framework consist of two parts: 1) The Actor (SEG) includes an
FLA embedder for embedding the FLA features into the cell state of LSTM, which has parameters


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 2 Meta-learning the SEG with policy gradient.
input: Training distribution D; Teacher optimizer κ; Learning rate α; Training strategy;
output: Best performing SEG
 1: Initialize the SEG with LSTM parameters θ
 2: #Meta-level Looping
 3: repeat
 4:    Sample problem f from D                             ▷ See Training distribution part in Section3.2
 5:    Reset teacher κ                                              ▷ Skipped if performing S YMBOL-E
 6:    Meta-objective G ← 0; Token trajectory Ψ ← ∅
 7:    Initialize teacher population Xt , Yt = f (Xt )              ▷ Skipped if performing S YMBOL-E

                                                  Xt , If S YMBOL-G / S ▷ Share the same distribution
 8:    Initialize student population Xs ←
                                                  Xs , If S YMBOL-E
 9:    Ys ← f (Xs )                                                   ▷ Evaluate the candidate solutions
10:    #Lower-level Looping
11:    repeat
12:       Xt , Yt ← κ(Xt , Yt )                    ▷ Teacher’s round, skipped if performing S YMBOL-E
13:       τ, p(τ |θ) ← SEGθ (Xs , Ys )                     ▷ Generate update rule for student population
14:       Xs ← Xs + τ, Ys ← f (Xs )                           ▷ Student’s round to suggest new solutions
                
                Rexplore (·, f ),      If Training strategy is S YMBOL-E
15:       R ← Rguided (·, f ),          If Training strategy is S YMBOL-G
                
                   Rsynergized (·, f ), If Training strategy is S YMBOL-S
16:       G←G+R                                                                   ▷ Accumulate rewards
17:       Ψ ← Ψ ∪ {τ }
18:    until Function evaluations run out
19:    ĝ ← G · ∇θ log p(Ψ|θ)                                                ▷ Compute policy gradients
20:    θ ← θ + αĝ                                                              ▷ Apply policy gradients
21: until Exceed the pre-defined learning steps


            Table 6: Grid search for the hyper-parameters of MadDE and sep-CMA-ES.

                        Baselines   Parameters        Search range          Chosen values
                                      PqBX        [0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.5]        0.01
                                        p        [0.09, 0.18, 0.27, 0.36]       0.18
                        MadDE
                                        F0          [0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4]        0.2
                                       CR0          [0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4]        0.2
                                       µ0              [0, 1, 2, 3]              3
                      sep-CMA-ES
                                       σ0              [0, 1, 2, 3]              2



{WFLA ∈ R9×16 , bFLA ∈ R16 }. The LSTM network for generating symbol distribution has parame-
ters {Wh ∈ R16×64 , bh ∈ R64 , Win ∈ R124×64 , bin ∈ R64 }, along with two feed-forward layers for
inferring the constants, which have parameters {Wϵ ∈ R16×2 , bϵ ∈ R2 } and {Wϖ ∈ R16×21 , bϖ ∈
R21 }. 2) The Critic is a feed-forward layer with parameters {Wcritic ∈ R9×1 , bcritic ∈ R1 }. Our
framework is trained by the PPO algorithm, which updates the parameters k = 3 times every n = 10
sampling step, with a decay parameter γ = 0.9. The learning rate α is 10−3 . The number of genera-
tions (T ) for lower-level optimization is 500. The tunable parameter λ for S YMBOL-S is set to 1. We
simultaneously sample a batch of N = 32 problems from problem distribution D for training. The
pre-defined maximum learning steps for PPO is 5 × 104 . Once the training is done, S YMBOL can
be directly applied to meta-test (unseen problems sampled from D) and meta-generalization (unseen
tasks out of D) without the need for teacher optimizer or further fine-tuning. All experiments are
run on a machine with Intel i9-10980XE CPU, RTX 3090 GPU and 32GB RAM.

B.3   N ORMALIZATION OF THE O BJECTIVE VALUES
                                                                            k
Considering minimization problem, we first record the worst objective fmax      and the best objective
  k                                   k
fmin in all runs for the k instance (fmin is the f if the optima is known). For the mth run on the k th
                          th                      opt
                                                                m,k
task instance, we then record the best-found objective value fmin    . Then, the min-max normalized


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             −0.75                         DE                                                                                                                              DE
                                                     Teacher                                                                                                                         Teacher
                                                                                                                                                   −1
             −1.00                                   Symbol-G                     0.9                                                                                                Symbol-G


                                                                    Log Norm. Obj. value ↑


                                                                                                                                    Log Norm. Obj. value ↓
   Log Norm. Obj. value ↓
                                                                                                                     Teacher
             −1.25                                                                0.8                                                              −2
                                                                                                                     Symbol-G
                                                                                                           DE
                                           PSO                                                                                                                             PSO
                                                                                  0.9                                                              −1
                  −1.0

                                                                                  0.8                                                              −2
                                                                                                           PSO
                  −1.5                    CMA-ES                                                                                                                       CMA-ES
                                                                                  0.9
                                                                                                                                                   −1
                  −1.0
                                                                                  0.8
                                                                                                                                                   −2
                                                                                                          CMA-ES
                  −1.5
                             0   1    2          3    4         5                            0   1    2          3    4         5                             0   2    4         6    8         10
                                     FEs(10ˆ 4)                                                      FEs(10ˆ 2)                                                       FEs(10ˆ 2)

                             (a) S YMBOL-G on D                                     (b) S YMBOL-G on HPO-B                           (c) S YMBOL-G Protein-docking

                                           DE                                                                                                                              DE
                                                     Teacher                                                                                                                         Teacher
                                                                                   0.9                                                             −1
                 −1.0                                Symbol-S                                                                                                                        Symbol-S
   Log Norm. Obj. value ↓


                                                                    Log Norm. Obj. value ↑


                                                                                                                                     Log Norm. Obj. value ↓
                                                                                                                     Teacher
                                                                                   0.8                                                             −2
                                                                                                                     Symbol-S
                                                                                                            DE
                 −1.5
                                           PSO                                                                                                                             PSO
                 −1.0                                                              0.9                                                             −1

                                                                                   0.8                                                             −2
                                                                                                           PSO
                 −1.5                     CMA-ES                                                                                                                        CMA-ES
                                                                                   0.9                                                             −1
                 −1.0
                                                                                   0.8                                                             −2
                 −1.5                                                                                     CMA-ES
                             0   1    2          3    4         5                            0   1    2          3    4         5                             0   2    4         6    8         10
                                     FEs(10ˆ 4)                                                      FEs(10ˆ 2)                                                       FEs(10ˆ 2)

                             (d) S YMBOL-S on D                                        (e) S YMBOL-S on HPO-B                       (f) S YMBOL-S on Protein-docking

Figure 8: The performance of S YMBOL-G, S YMBOL-S and their teachers on the three benchmark
sets: D, HPO-B and Protein-docking.

                                                          PK h 1 PM            m,k    k
                                                                                          i
                                                       1                      fmin −fmin
objective value Obj for a baseline is computed as K          k=1 M          (
                                                                        m=1 fmaxk −f k   )  , where K and
                                                                                    min
M is the size of test set and the total test runs respectively. The corresponding min-max normalized
performance and log-normalized objective value used in our experimental results are computed as
(1 − Obj) and log10 (Obj).

B.4                         M ORE D ETAILS OF T RAINING D ISTRIBUTION

Table 7 provides more detailed properties of the ten classes of functions in D. These problems in-
clude various optimization properties such as unimodal, multi-modal, non-separable, asymmetrical,
diverse local or global optimization properties and so on. Furthermore, we also visualize these func-
tions in 2D configuration in Figure 9 for more intuitive insight. By covering such a wide range of
landscape features and incorporating fitness landscape analysis based state representation, S YMBOL
is not learning how to solve a given task, instead, it learns how to generate different update patterns
facing with various landscape feature, which ensures its superior generalization performance. Ad-
ditionally, for each selected function, we further apply the random offset and rotating operation to
augment the function. This augmentation further enrich the training distribution and may enhance
the generalization ability of S YMBOL to unseen tasks.

B.5                         TASKS S ETS FOR M ETA G ENERALIZATION

We provide two challenging realistic task sets to evaluate the zero-shot generalization performance
of S YMBOL and other baselines:
HPO-B benchmark (Arango et al., 2021), which includes a wide range of hyperparameter optimiza-
tion tasks for 16 different model types (e.g., SVM, XGBoost, etc.). These models have various
search spaces ranging from [0, 1]2 to [0, 1]16 . Each model is evaluated on several datasets, resulting
in a total of 86 tasks. For each instance, all baselines are allowed to optimize within 500 function
evaluations and with a population size of 5 (for baselines that incorporate a population of candidate


                                                                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                        Table 7: Summary of the ten classes of functions in D.
                                               No.                  Functions                           Properties
                                                                                                        -Unimodal
          Unimodal
                                                    1               Bent Cigar Function                 -Non-separable
          Function
                                                                                                        -Smooth but narrow ridge
                                                                                                        -Multi-modal
                                                    2               Schwefel’s Function                 -Non-separable
                                                                                                        -Local optima’s number is huge
                                                                                                        -Multi-modal
            Basic
                                                                                                        -Non-separable
          Functions                                 3               bi-Rastrigin Function
                                                                                                        -Asymmetrical
                                                                                                        -Continuous everywhere yet differentiable onwhere
                                                                    Rosenbrock’s plus Griewangk’s       -Non-separable
                                                    4
                                                                    Function                            -Optimal point locates in flat area
                                                   5                Hybrid Function 1 (N = 3)           -Multi-modal or Unimodal, depending on the basic function
           Hybrid
                                                   6                Hybrid Function 2 (N = 4)           -Non separable subcomponents
          Functions
                                                   7                Hybrid Function 3 (N = 5)           -Different properties for different variables subcomponents
                                                   8                Composition Function 1 (N = 3) -Multi-modal
         Composition
                                                   9                Composition Function 2 (N = 4) -Non-separable -Asymmetrical
          Functions
                                                   10               Composition Function 3 (N = 5) -Different propeties arround different local optima
                                                                                       Search range: [-100, 100]D


                                                       1.0
                                                             1e10


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1e6
                                                                                                                                    1500                                                                           250                                                                            6
                                                       0.8                                                                          1250                                                                                                                                                         5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   200
                                                      0.6                                                                           1000                                                                                                                                                         4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   150                                                                           3
                                                      0.4                                                                           750
                                                                                                                                    500                                                                            100                                                                           2
                                                      0.2                                                                           250                                                                            50                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                    100                                                                            100                                                                           100                                                                         100
                                               50                                                                             50                                                                            50                                                                          50
   100                                     0                           100                                                0                          100                                                0                         100                                               0
          50                                                                      50                                                                            50                                                                           50
               0                      50                                                    0                        50                                                   0                        50                                                  0                       50
                   50           100                                                                50          100                                                               50          100                                                              50         100
                        100                                                                             100                                                                           100                                                                          100

          (a) Function 1                                                          (b) Function 2                                                                (c) Function 3                                                               (d) Function 4



                                                                                                1500                                                                           700
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           12000
                                                                                                1250                                                                           600                                                                         10000
                                                                                                1000                                                                          500                                                                          8000
                                                                                                750                                                                           400                                                                          6000
                                                                                                500                                                                           300                                                                          4000
                                                                                                250                                                                           200                                                                          2000

                                                                                            100                                                                           100                                                                          100
                                                                                       50                                                                            50                                                                           50
                              100                                                 0                           100                                               0                           100                                              0
                                      50                                                                             50                                                                            50
                                               0                             50                                               0                            50                                               0                           50
                                                        50             100                                                               50          100                                                               50         100
                                                                100                                                                            100                                                                          100

                                       (e) Function 8                                                                 (f) Function 9                                                               (g) Function 10

Figure 9: Fitness landscapes of functions in D when dimension is set to 2. Functions 5-7 can not be
visualized in the 2D configuration due to the inherent constraint from hybrid functions.


solutions). To save evaluation time, we adopt the continuous version of HPO-B, which provides
surrogate evaluation functions for time-consuming machine learning tasks.
Protein-docking benchmark (Hwang et al., 2010), where the objective is to minimize the Gibbs free
energy resulting from protein-protein interaction between a given complex and any other conforma-
tion. We select 28 protein complexes and randomly initialize 10 starting points for each complex.
All 280 task instances have a search space of [−100, 100]12 . For each instance, all baselines are
allowed to optimize within 1000 function evaluations and with a population size of 10.


                                                                                                                                              18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                 Table 8: Ablation studies on the feature selection in FLA features.
                                            S YMBOL-S          S YMBOL-S       S YMBOL-S                           S YMBOL-S
          Task            S YMBOL-S
                                              w/o pop            w/o obj          w/o ts                             with xy
    CEC-competition↑     0.972±(0.011)     0.926±(0.015)      0.964±(0.011)   0.910±(0.017)                       0.849±(0.012)
        HPO-B↑           0.963±(0.006)     0.937±(0.009)      0.875±(0.027)   0.779±(0.024)                            fail
    Protein-docking↑     0.999±(0.000)     0.989±(0.002)      0.996±(0.001)   0.991±(0.001)                            fail


      Table 9: Ablation study results for symbols set design.


                                                                                Norm. Performance ↑
                                                                                             0.998
                                                                                             0.996
                                                                                             0.994
                                                  Symbols set
                                                                                             0.992
                                          S YMBOL-S      S YMBOL-S
        Task            S YMBOL-S                                                            0.990
                                            with S+        with S−                           0.988
                                                                                                      0   0.25   0.5   0.75   1   1.25   1.5
 CEC-competition↑      0.972±(0.011)     0.952±(0.015)     0.930±(0.018)                                                λ
     HPO-B↑            0.963±(0.006)     0.937±(0.009)     0.910±(0.009)
 Protein-docking↑      0.999±(0.000)     0.995±(0.001)     0.990±(0.002)      Figure 10: Performance with dif-
                                                                              ferent λ on Protein-docking.

C     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENT R ESULTS

C.1    T EACHER O PTIONS

Additionally, we provide a comprehensive analysis of the potential teacher options for S YMBOL-G
and S YMBOL-S. By incorporating different teachers (as described in the main body of this paper), we
train the resulting variants on D. The meta-test results and meta-generalization results are illustrated
in Figure 8. The results are consistent with the observations made in Section 4.3. S YMBOL-S
achieves robust performance improvement, while S YMBOL-G fails to learn from PSO. This issue
may be attributed to the definitive update rules, which can lead to overfitting. Even for S YMBOL-
S, where we integrate exploration behavior and prior demonstrations, our framework encounters
difficulties in learning from this type of teacher. We acknowledge this as a potential area for future
work and aim to address this limitation.

C.2    S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS AND A BLATION S TUDIES

Tunable parameter λ. We report the normalized zero-shot performance (5 runs) of S YMBOL-S
trained with 7 different λ = {0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1, 1.25, 1.5} on the Protein-docking tasks in Fig-
ure 10. The results are basically consistent with the observation in Section 4.4. We found that λ = 1
is a relatively better choice.
Feature selection for state representation. To verify that the FLA features help S YMBOL attain
good generalization performance, we conduct ablation studies on S YMBOL-S by omitting various
components: the distributional features of the current population (denoted as w/o pop), the statistic
features of the current objective values (w/o obj), and the time stamp embedding (w/o ts). Addi-
tionally, we also assessed the performance when replacing FLA features with the simple coordinate-
based feature set {x, f (x)} (with xy), which follows the coordinate state representation design in
(Chen et al., 2017; TV et al., 2019; Chaybouti et al., 2022). The outcomes, presented in Table 8,
confirm that each element of the FLA features plays a crucial role in ensuring robust generalization
capabilities. On the contrary, coordinate-based feature (w/o xy) somehow shows deficiency.
Basis symbol set design. We investigate the effect of the designs of the basis symbol set S on the fi-
nal performance of S YMBOL. The investigation is conducted in two directions: subtracting existing
symbols from S and augmenting them with new ones. For the former, we subtract three variables
x∗ , ∆x, and xr from S and denote this subtracted set as S− . For the latter, we add three unary oper-
ators sin, cos, and sign (frequently used non-linear functions in recent symbolic equation learning
frameworks) to S and denote this augmented set as S+ . We continue to use S YMBOL-S as a show-
case and load it with S+ and S− . Under identical training and testing settings, we report the ablation
results of the two ablated variants in Table 8, which show that: 1) Symbols such as xr are very
important for population-based black-box optimizers, as they provide exploration behaviors for can-
didate populations. Removing such symbols from the symbol set significantly reduces the learning
effectiveness. 2) Augmenting the symbol set certainly enlarges the representation space. However,


                                                         19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


this addition may also affect the search for optimal update rules. This opens up a discussion for the
symbolic equation learning community and ourselves on how to construct domain-specific symbol
sets for extending application scenarios beyond symbolic equation learning itself.

C.3   D ISCUSSION OF P ERFORMANCE OF S YMBOL -G

From experiment results in Table 1 and Figure 8, we notice that S YMBOL-G can even outperform
teacher optimizers in some cases. Possible explanation are as follows. Firstly, while the reward
guides the agent to closely imitate the teacher’s searching behavior, our S YMBOL is not designed
to merely replicate their exact update rules but to discover potentially more efficient update rules
upon the basis symbol set for handling a broad spectrum of BBO task, especially with the help
of our robust fitness landscape analysis features for enhanced generalization capability. Secondly,
unlike traditional optimizers (e.g., MadDE), which might rely on consistent fixed searching rules,
S YMBOL-G is designed to generate flexible and dynamic update rules for specific optimization steps.
Lastly, we note that the inherent exploration capability of RL also plays a role in the enhanced
performance. In contrast to deterministic strategies, the sampling-based strategy in RL provides
more diverse actions. Such observations also show up in some imitation learning frameworks, such
as the GAIL framework (Ho & Ermon, 2016). These factors collectively contribute to S YMBOL-G’s
ability to, in some cases, outperform its teacher optimizer. We note that by further incorporating the
exploration reward (S YMBOL-E), our S YMBOL-S would consistently surpass the teacher optimizer.


                                                 20
