Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


U NDERSTANDING A ND C ONTROLLING A M AZE -
S OLVING P OLICY N ETWORK
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         To understand the goals and goal representations of AI systems, we carefully study
         a pretrained reinforcement learning policy that solves mazes by navigating to a
         range of target squares. We find this network pursues multiple context-dependent
         goals, and we further identify circuits within the network that correspond to one
         of these goals. In particular, we identified eleven channels that track the location
         of the goal. By modifying these channels, either with hand-designed interventions
         or by combining forward passes, we can partially control the policy. We show that
         this network contains redundant, distributed, and retargetable goal representations,
         shedding light on the nature of goal-direction in trained policy networks.


1   I NTRODUCTION

To safely deploy AI systems, we need to be able to predict their behavior. Traditionally, researchers
do so by evaluating how a model behaves across a range of inputs—for example, with model-written
evaluations (Perez et al., 2022), or on static benchmark datasets (Hendrycks et al., 2020; Lin et al.,
2021; Liang et al., 2022). Moreover, practitioners usually align AI systems by specifying good
behavior, such as via expert demonstrations or preference learning (e.g., Christiano et al., 2017;
Hussein et al., 2017; Ouyang et al., 2022; Glaese et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023).
However, behavioral analysis and control methods can be misleading. In particular, models may
appear to be aligned with human goals but competently pursue unintended or even harmful goals
when deployed. This behavior is known as goal misgeneralization and has been demonstrated by
Shah et al. (2022) and Langosco et al. (2023). Moreover, it may be dangerous (Ngo, 2022).
In this work, we therefore investigate the internal objectives (i.e., goals) of trained systems. Intu-
itively, if we understand the goals of a system, we can better predict the system’s behavior in novel
contexts during deployment. We focus on goals, while AI interpretability (e.g., Elhage et al., 2021;
Fan et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021) often pursues a more general understanding of different models.
In particular, we investigate a maze-solving reinforcement learning policy network trained by Lan-
gosco et al. (2023). This network exhibits goal misgeneralization—it sometimes ignores a given
maze’s cheese square in favor of navigating to the top-right corner, which is where the cheese was
placed during training (Fig. 1a). Moreover, because the policy operates in a human-understandable
environment, we can easily interpret its actions and underlying goals. Altogether, this network thus
represents an interesting case study.
First, we demonstrate the trained policy network pursues multiple, context-dependent goals
(§2.1). In ∼5,000 mazes, we examine the policy’s choices at decision squares—maze locations
where the policy must choose between the cheese (the intended generalization) and the historical
location of cheese during training (misgeneralization). By using a few features of each maze, we can
predict whether the policy network misgeneralizes. This predictability suggests the policy pursues
different goals depending on certain maze conditions.
We then find internal representations of these goals. We identify eleven residual channels that
track the location of the cheese (Fig. 1b; §2.2). We demonstrate that these channels primarily
affect the behavior of the policy through the location of the cheese, rather than other maze factors.
This shows there are circuits in the trained policy network that track this goal. To our knowledge,
we are the first to pinpoint internal goal representations in a trained policy network.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: Understanding and controlling a maze-solving policy. (a) We examine a maze-solving
policy network that navigates within a maze towards a goal location, marked by cheese. During
training, the cheese was placed in the upper right 5 × 5 corner of the maze—the historical goal
location. However, during deployment, the cheese may be placed anywhere. The white dot shows
a decision square where the policy must choose between navigating to the cheese and the top-right
corner. (b) We identify residual channels whose activations track the location of the cheese. (c)
We manually set one of these activations to +5.5. (d) We retarget the policy. Due to the modified
activation during the forward pass, the policy goes to the location implied by the edited activation.


We corroborate these findings by showing we can steer the policy without additional training (§3).
We modify the activations either through manual hand-designed edits to the eleven channels, or by
combining the activations corresponding to forward passes. By doing so, we change the policy’s
behavior in predictable ways. Instead of updating the network, we steer the network by interacting
with its “internal motivational API.”
Overall, our research clarifies the internal goals and mechanisms in pretrained policy networks. We
find that these systems have a nuanced and context-dependent set of goals that can be partially
understood and even controlled through activation engineering approaches.


2     U NDERSTANDING THE M AZE -S OLVING P OLICY N ETWORK

We study a maze-solving policy network trained by Langosco et al. (2023). The network solves
mazes to reach a goal: the cheese. But it exhibits goal misgeneralization. It sometimes capably
pursues an unintended goal at deployment. In this case, the policy often navigates towards the top-
right corner (where the cheese was placed during training) rather than to the actual cheese (Fig. 1a).
The network is deep, with 3.5M parameters and 15 convolutional layers—see Appendix A for further
details. During training, the cheese is placed within the top right 5×5 corner of each randomly
generated maze. During deployment, the cheese may be anywhere. The mazes are procedurally
generated using the Procgen benchmark (Cobbe et al., 2020). We also consider other policy networks
which were pretrained with different historical cheese regions.
We chose this network because it exhibits goal misgeneralization. Furthermore, the network is
large enough to be challenging for humans to understand. Finally, the maze environment is easy to
visualise, and policies in this environment can be easily understood as making spatial tradeoffs.

Section overview. We now focus on understanding the goals and goal representations of the maze-
solving policy network. First, we examine whether we can predict the generalization behavior of the
network by performing a statistical analysis of the factors that affect the policy’s behavior (§2.1).
Following this, we identify several residual channels within the network that track the location of
the cheese (§2.2). We find the network pursues multiple context-dependent goals, and these goals
are internally represented in redundant, distributed ways.

2.1   U NDERSTANDING T HE M AZE -S OLVING P OLICY T HROUGH B EHAVIORAL S TATISTICS

In this environment, the training algorithm does not produce a policy that consistently navigates
to the cheese (Fig. 2). Specifically, in some mazes, the policy navigates to the cheese, but in other


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            Maze A                   Maze B                     Maze C                      Maze D


Figure 2: The policy network pursues multiple goals. During training, the cheese was always in
the top right corner of the maze. We show trajectories in four mazes not from the training distribu-
tion. In mazes A and B, the policy ignores the cheese and navigates to the historical goal location
(the top-right corner). However, in mazes C and D, the agent navigates to the cheese.


mazes, the same policy navigates to the historical cheese location.1 This suggests the network has the
capability to pursue at least two distinct objectives: (i) navigating to the cheese; and (ii) navigating
to the top-right corner. We now examine whether behavior can be predicted based on environmental
factors. If environmental factors are predictive of the goal pursued by the network, this suggests the
goal selected by the network to pursue is context-dependent, rather than chosen at random.

Experiment details. We now examine whether we can predict whether the policy navigates to the
cheese or the historical cheese location based on maze factors. To do so, we considered 5K mazes
where the policy must choose between these goals at a decision square (marked by white dots in
Fig. 1; see also Fig. 13 in the appendix). We conducted 10 iterations of train/validation splitting
with a validation size of 20%. In each iteration, we performed ℓ1 -regularised logistic regression to
predict whether a network navigates to the cheese for a given environment.
We hypothesized several different environmental factors that may affect the policy’s behavior. How-
ever, we run our primary analysis only with the following features, which had robust effects across
the different analyses: (i) the Euclidean distance from the top-right corner to the cheese; (ii) the step
distance from the decision square to the cheese; and (iii) the Euclidean distance from the decision
square to the cheese. See Appendix B for further details and illustration of these features.
Results. Logistic regression on these features achieves an average accuracy of 82.4%, substan-
tially exceeding the 71.4% accuracy of always predicting “reaches cheese.” Our three maze features
provide substantial information about the goal the policy pursues, which is evidence that the policy
pursues context-dependent goals. As explored more thoroughly in Appendix B, the Euclidean dis-
tance from the decision square to the cheese predicts the network’s behavior, even after controlling
for the step distance from the decision square to the cheese.2 This indicates that the network’s goal
pursuit is perceptually activated by visual proximity to cheese.

2.2       F INDING G OAL -M OTIVATION C IRCUITS IN THE M AZE -S OLVING P OLICY N ETWORK

We have seen that the policy network pursues multiple, context-dependent goals. The network likely
contains circuits that correspond to these goals. We identify circuits for the goal of navigating to-
wards the cheese location. Specifically, we find eleven channels about halfway through the network
that track the location of the cheese. We consider the network activations after the the first residual
block of the second IMPALA block (see Fig. 11 in the appendix). At this point of the forward pass,
there are 128 separate 16 × 16 channels, meaning there are 32,768 activations.
First, we find that some of these channels track the location of the cheese. Fig. 3 shows the activa-
tions of channel 55 for mazes where the goal is placed in different locations (further examples in
Appendix D.1). The positive activations (marked in red) correspond to the location of the cheese.
      1
     In certain mazes (such as Fig. 1), the policy doesn’t navigate to the cheese or to the top-right corner.
      2
     These findings are mostly consistent across over a dozen different policy networks trained with different
historical cheese locations (see Appendix B).


                                                      3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      2



    1


                      3


Figure 3: Network channels track the goal location. We show the activations for channel 55 after
the first residual block of the second IMPALA block. The activations of channel 55 are a 16×16 grid.
We plot the activation values for the same maze when the cheese is placed in different locations. (b-
d) show that channel 55 tracks the cheese. See Appendix D.1 for more examples.


By visual inspection, we found that 11 out of these 128 channels track the cheese, showing that the
goal representation is redundant. We refer to these 11 channels as the “cheese-tracking” channels.
Suppose these “cheese-tracking channels” do, in fact, track the cheese. Then if we resample their
activations (Chan et al., 2022) from another maze with the cheese in the same location,3 this resam-
pling should not affect the behavior of the network. Moreover, if we resample these activations from
a maze where the cheese is placed in a different location, the network should behave as if the cheese
were placed in that location. We now test this hypothesis.
First, we visually investigate the effect of resampling the activations of the cheese tracking channels
from different mazes (Fig. 4; more examples in Appendix D.2). Indeed, we find that resampling
the activations of these “cheese-tracking” channels modifies the network of the behavior if the ac-
tivations were sampled from another maze where the cheese is in a different location. In contrast,
resampling the activations from a maze where the cheese is in the same location does not modify the
behavior. Overall, these findings provide further evidence that these 11 channels affect the network’s
final decision mostly based on the cheese location in the maze.
We measure how frequently resampling the cheese tracking channels changes the most likely action
at a decision square. If these channels mostly affect the network’s behavior based on the cheese
location, resampling these channels from mazes where the cheese is in the same location should
only rarely affect the behavior at a decision square. Moreover, resampling from mazes where the
cheese is placed in a different location would be more likely to affect the decision square behavior.
Across 200 mazes, resampling the cheese-tracking channels from mazes with a different cheese
location changes the most probable action at a decision square in 40% of cases, which is much
more than when resampling from mazes with the same cheese location (11%). However, because
resampling from mazes with the same cheese location can sometimes affect the network behavior,
this suggests the cheese tracking channels also (weakly) affect the network behavior through factors
other than the location of the cheese.


3       C ONTROLLING THE M AZE -S OLVING P OLICY N ETWORK

In the previous section, we showed the maze-solving policy pursues multiple, context-dependent
goals. Moreover, about halfway through the network, multiple residual channels track the location
of the goal. We now corroborate these findings by leveraging this understanding to design inter-
ventions that control the network’s behavior. Our approach does not require collecting additional
data or retraining the network, but instead utilizes existing circuits. We consider two classes of in-

     3
       Specifically, we compute the network activations for a different maze (maze B) where the cheese is placed
in the same location as in the original maze (maze A). To “resample the activations”, we replace the relevant
network activations when computing the policy for maze A with the activation values computed using a network
forward pass on maze B.


                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: Resampling cheese-tracking activations from different mazes. (a) Unmodified network
behavior. (b) Resampling these activations from other mazes with the same cheese location does not
affect the policy’s behavior. (c) In contrast, if we replace the activations from a maze where the
cheese is placed at a different location, the network behaves as if the cheese is placed at the location.
If the cheese-tracking channel activations are resampled from a maze where the cheese is close to
the historical cheese location, the policy navigates to the cheese. (d) If the cheese-tracking channel
activations are resampled from a maze where the cheese is far from the historical cheese location,
the policy ignores the cheese. Please see Appendix D.2 for more examples.


            (a) Success                (b) Success                 (c) Success                 (d) Failure

Figure 5: Controlling the maze-solving policy by modifying a single activation. By modifying
just a single network activation, we control where the policy navigates. We set a single activation in
channel 55, one of the cheese-tracking channels, to a large positive value (+5.5; see also Fig. 1c).
The red dots show the location corresponding to the activation intervention, computed by linearly
mapping the 16 × 16 activation grid to the 25×25 game grid. (a-c) Successful policy retargeting.
This intervention successfully makes the policy navigate to the red dot (the targeted location) and
ignore the cheese in the maze. (d) We cannot make the policy navigate to arbitrary maze-locations.
See Appendix D.3 for more examples.


terventions: (i) manually modifying the activations in the cheese-tracking channels (§3.1); and (ii)
combining activations corresponding to different forward passes (§3.2).


3.1        C ONTROLLING THE P OLICY BY M ODIFYING THE C HEESE C HANNELS

Previously, we identified eleven residual channels whose activations track the location of the cheese
in the maze. If these activations determine network behavior by tracking the cheese location, intu-
itively, by modifying the activations in those channels, one should be able to modify the behavior of
the policy. We now show that this is indeed the case.
First, we consider a simple, hand-designed intervention where we directly modify the activations of
one of the cheese-tracking channels. Specifically, we set just one activation in channel 55 to a large
positive value (+5.54 ; c.f. Fig. 1c). We then consider the modified policy whose action probabilities
are computed by completing the network’s forward pass with this modification.

      4
          We considered a range of effect sizes, and manually optimized them on the maze at seed 0.


                                                          5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In Fig. 5, we show this simple intervention retargets the policy. The network often navigates towards
the region of the maze corresponding to the activation edit. We emphasize that changing just one
activation (out of 32,768) drastically affects the behavior of the network. However, it can only
partially retarget the policy. Moreover, just as the trained network sometimes ignores the cheese, we
find that the retargeted network sometimes ignores the edited activation location.

                                        Retargetability heatmaps. To quantify the impact of our re-
                                        targeting procedure, we compute the normalized path proba-
                                        bility for paths from the starting position in a maze to each
                                        square of that maze. This is the joint probability that the pol-
                                        icy navigates directly to a given square in the maze, normalized
                                        by the path distance. Specifically, we compute the geometric
                                        mean of the action probabilities leading to a given square from
                                        the start position. In particular, for a path of n steps with con-
                                        stant per-step action probability, the normalized path probabil-
                                        ity is independent of n.
Figure 6: Normalized path prob-         We visualise normalized path probability heatmaps for the
ability heatmap. The colour of          paths from the initial position in the maze to each square.
each maze square shows the nor-         For example, Fig. 6 reveals that the policy tends to navigate
malized path probability for the        towards the historical cheese location. The normalized path
path from the starting position in      probabilities are higher at maze squares closer to the path be-
the maze to the square for the un-      tween the bottom-left and the top-right corners of the maze.
modified policy.
Some locations are more easily steered to. Figure 7c shows the effect of intervening on channel
55 to target each square of the maze. That is, for each square, we retarget the policy to that square
with an activation edit. We then compute the normalized path probability for the path to the target
square, given the modified forward pass. For these experiments, to reduce variance, we removed
cheese from the maze.

Intervening on all 11 channels slightly improves retargetability. Similar to the single-channel
intervention, we set one of the activations of each channel to a positive value (+1.05 ). Comparing
the heatmaps for this intervention (Fig. 7a, b) with the single-channel intervention, this edit slightly
increases the normalized path-probabilities. On 13 × 13 mazes,6 the averaged path probability over
all legal maze squares is 0.647 from just modifying channel 55, while modifying all hypothesized
cheese-tracking channels boosts the probability to 0.695.

There are more cheese-tracking circuits. We now compute the normalized path probabilities
when targeting each square of the maze by placing the cheese in the location. If the only cheese-
tracking circuits were related to the cheese-tracking channels we identified, then our activation edits
would probably achieve the same retargetability as if the cheese were placed in that location. How-
ever, by actually moving the cheese around the maze, we achieve even stronger retargetability than
do our activation edits (Fig. 7d). This suggests that there are additional unidentified cheese-seeking
mechanisms, beyond the 11 channels.


   5
     We optimised the magnitude of the edit to increase retargetability for both the single-channel and 11-
channel interventions.
   6
     Appendix E plots how retargetability decreases with maze size.


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 7: Retargetability heatmaps. The color of each maze square shows the normalized path
probability for the path from the starting position in the maze to the square for the modified policy
which targets that square. We modify the activations of the relevant channels so that they contain
a positive value near the relevant square. The heatmap in (a) shows the base probability that each
tile can be retargeted to. Intervening on a single channel (b) increases retargetability less than
intervening on all cheese-tracking channels (c). However, all retargeting methods we investigated
were less effective than directly moving the cheese to a tile (d), indicating that we did not find all
relevant cheese-tracking circuits in the network.


3.2       C ONTROLLING THE P OLICY B Y C OMBINING F ORWARD PASSES

Beyond simple manual edits, we can modify the behavior of the policy by combining the activations
of different forward passes of the network. These interventions do not require retraining the policy
but instead leverage existing circuits. Specifically, we design different goal-modifying “steering
vectors” (Subramani et al., 2022). By adding or subtracting these vectors to network activations, we
modify the behavior of the network.

Notation. Let Activ(m, xcheese , xagent ) ∈ R128×16×16 be the activations after the first residual
block of the second IMPALA block of the network (see Fig. 11 in the appendix). At this point of
the network, there are 128 channels, each of which corresponds to a 16 × 16 grid.7 Activ is a
function of the maze layout m, the position of the cheese xcheese , and the position of the agent xagent .
m ∈ {0, 1}25×25 represents whether position in the maze is filled with a wall or not. Further, let
xstart
  agent be the starting position of the agent in a maze.


Reducing cheese-seeking behavior. First, we design a “cheese vector” that weakens the pol-
icy’s pursuit of cheese. The cheese vector is computed as the difference in activations when the
cheese is present and not present in a given maze. Specifically, we calculate the cheese vector as
Activcheese (m, xcheese ) := Activ(m, xcheese , xstart                  start
                                                 agent ) − Activ(m, ∅, xagent ). For intervention coeffi-
cient α ∈ R,
            Activ′(m, xcheese , xagent ) := Activ(m, xcheese , xagent ) + α · Activcheese (m, xcheese ),    (1)
and replace the original activations Activ with the modified activations Activ′. This intervention
can be considered to define a custom bias term at the relevant residual-addition block. Figure 8
shows how subtracting the cheese vector affects the policy in a single maze.

The quantitative effect of subtracting the cheese vector. We consider 100 mazes and analyse
how this subtraction affects the behavior of the policy on decision squares. Recall that decision
squares are the spots of the maze where the policy must choose to navigate to the cheese or the top
right corner.
In Fig. 9a, subtracting the cheese vector (i.e., α = −1)8 substantially reduces the probability of
cheese-seeking actions. However, adding the cheese vector (i.e., α = +1) does not boost cheese-
seeking action probabilities.
      7
     The 11 cheese-tracking channels are also present at this layer.
      8
     For both the cheese and top-right vectors, we tried optimizing α but found that it didn’t make an apprecia-
ble difference - straightforward addition and subtraction worked best.


                                                         7
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  (a) Decisions before intervention                 (b) Subtracted cheese vector                              (c) The actions which changed

 Figure 8: Subtracting the cheese vector often appears to make the policy ignore the cheese.
 We run a forward pass at each valid maze square s to get action probabilities π(a | s). For each
 square s, we plot a “net probability vector” with components x := π(right | s) − π(left | s)
 and y := π(up | s) − π(down | s). The policy always starts in the bottom left corner. By default,
 the policy goes to the cheese when near the cheese, and otherwise goes along a path towards the
 top-right (although it stops short of the top right corner).
                                                     .


                                    (a): Cheese Vector                                                   (b): Top Right Vector
                              1.0                                                                  1.0
                                                    Original
                                                                  P(Top Right | Decision Square)
P(Cheese | Decision Square)


                                                    Added
                              0.8                                                                  0.8
                                                    Subtracted
                              0.6                                                                  0.6

                              0.4                                                                  0.4

                              0.2                                                                  0.2

                              0.0                                                                  0.0


 Figure 9: Controlling the policy by combining network forward passes. For 100 mazes, we
 compute the decision-square probabilities assigned to the actions which lead to the cheese (a) and
 to the top-right corner (b). For example, in (a), a value of 0.75 under “original” indicates that at
 the decision square of one maze, the unmodified policy assigns 0.75 probability to the first action
 which heads towards the cheese. Subtracting the cheese vector and adding the top-right vector each
 produce strong effects.



 Steering the policy towards the top-right corner. We design a “top-right corner” motivational
 vector whose addition increases the probability that the policy navigates towards the top-right corner.
                                                                                 ′                      ′
 We compute Activtop-right (m, xcheese ) := Activ(m, xcheese , xstart                   start
                                                                agent ) − Activ(m , ∅, xagent ), where m
 is the original maze now modified so that reachable top-right point is higher up (see Fig. 19 in the
 appendix). Figure 10 visualizes the effect of adding the top-right vector.
 In Fig. 9b, we analyse the effect of different activation engineering approaches that use Activtop-right .
 We find that adding Activtop-right (i.e., α = +1) increases the probability the policy navigates to
 the top-right corner, but surprisingly, subtracting the top-right corner vector does not decrease the
 probability the policy navigates to the top-right. Lastly, in our experience, we can simultaneously
 add the top-right vector and subtract the cheese vector in order to achieve both effects. We were
 surprised that these activation vectors did not “destructively interfere” with each other.
 Overall, our results demonstrate that we can control the behavior of the policy, albeit imperfectly,
 by combining different forward passes of the network. We were surprised, since the network was
 never trained to behave coherently under the addition of these “bias terms.”


                                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(a) Decisions before intervention      (b) Added top-right vector        (c) The actions which changed

Figure 10: Adding the “top-right vector” often appears to attract the policy to the top-right
corner. Originally, the policy does not fully navigate to the top-right corner, instead settling towards
the bottom-right. After adding the top-right vector, the policy navigates to the extreme top-right.
                                                   .


4    R ELATED W ORK

Interpretability. Understanding AI has been a longstanding goal (e.g., Gilpin et al., 2018; Rudin
et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2021; Fan et al., 2021; Hooker et al., 2019, inter alia). Mechanistic
approaches (Olah, 2022; Elhage et al., 2022) look to understand neural network circuits. Recently,
mechanistic interpretability has helped e.g. understand grokking (Nanda et al., 2023). Lieberum
et al. (2023) suggest that these approaches can scale to large models. Far less interpretability work
has been done on reinforcement learning policy networks (Hilton et al., 2020; Bloom & Colognese,
2023; Rudin et al., 2022), which is our setting. To our knowledge, we are the first to interpret a
non-toy policy network, and to pinpoint goal representations therein.

Steering network behavior. We intervened on a policy network’s activations to steer its behavior,
considering both hand-designed edits (§3.1) and combining forward passes (§3.2). We did not use
extra training data to do so. In contrast, the most popular approaches for steering AI use training
data, by e.g. specifying preferences over different behaviors (Christiano et al., 2017; Leike et al.,
2018; Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022b; Rafailov et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2022a) or through
expert demonstrations (Ng et al., 2000; Torabi et al., 2018).

Activation engineering. Our policy interventions (§3) are examples of activation engineering
approaches. This newly-emerging class of techniques re-use existing model capabilities. In general,
these approaches can steer network behavior without behavioral data and add neglible computational
overhead. For example, Subramani et al. (2022); Turner et al. (2023); Li et al. (2023) steer the
behavior of language models by adding in activation vectors. In contrast, our work shows these
techniques can steer a reinforcement learning policy.


5    D ISCUSSION

We studied the goals and goal representations of a pretrained policy network. We found that this
network pursues multiple, context-dependent goals (§2.1). We found 11 channels that track the
location of the cheese within each maze (§2.2). By modifying just a single activation, or by adding
in simple activation vectors, we steered which goals the policy pursued (§3). Our work shows the
goals of this network are redundant, distributed, and retargetable. In general, policy networks may
be well-understood as pursuing multiple context-dependent goals.


R EFERENCES
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn
  Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862,
  2022a.

Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones,
  Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, Carol Chen, Catherine Ols-
  son, Christopher Olah, Danny Hernandez, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Dustin Li, Eli Tran-
  Johnson, Ethan Perez, Jamie Kerr, Jared Mueller, Jeffrey Ladish, Joshua Landau, Kamal Ndousse,
  Kamile Lukosuite, Liane Lovitt, Michael Sellitto, Nelson Elhage, Nicholas Schiefer, Noemi Mer-
  cado, Nova DasSarma, Robert Lasenby, Robin Larson, Sam Ringer, Scott Johnston, Shauna
  Kravec, Sheer El Showk, Stanislav Fort, Tamera Lanham, Timothy Telleen-Lawton, Tom Con-
  erly, Tom Henighan, Tristan Hume, Samuel R. Bowman, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Ben Mann, Dario
  Amodei, Nicholas Joseph, Sam McCandlish, Tom Brown, and Jared Kaplan. Constitutional AI:
  Harmlessness from AI Feedback, December 2022b. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2212.
  08073. arXiv:2212.08073 [cs].

Joseph Bloom and Paul Colognese. Decision Transformer Interpretability. Febru-
  ary 2023.  URL https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/bBuBDJBYHt39Q5zZy/
  decision-transformer-interpretability.

Collin Burns, Haotian Ye, Dan Klein, and Jacob Steinhardt. Discovering latent knowledge in lan-
  guage models without supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.03827, 2022.

Lawrence Chan, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, Nicholas Goldowsky-Dill, Ryan Greenblatt, Jenny Nitishin-
  skaya, Ansh Radhakrishnan, Buck Shlegeris, and Nate Thomas. Causal scrubbing: A method for
  rigorously testing interpretability hypotheses. In Alignment Forum, 2022.

Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
  reinforcement learning from human preferences. Advances in neural information processing sys-
  tems, 30, 2017.

Karl Cobbe, Christopher Hesse, Jacob Hilton, and John Schulman. Leveraging Procedural Gener-
  ation to Benchmark Reinforcement Learning, July 2020. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
  1912.01588. arXiv:1912.01588 [cs, stat].

Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann,
  Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, et al. A mathematical framework for
  transformer circuits. Transformer Circuits Thread, 1, 2021.

Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Catherine Olsson, Neel Nanda, Tom Henighan, Scott Johnston, Sheer
  ElShowk, Nicholas Joseph, Nova DasSarma, Ben Mann, Danny Hernandez, Amanda Askell, Ka-
  mal Ndousse, Andy Jones, Dawn Drain, Anna Chen, Yuntao Bai, Deep Ganguli, Liane Lovitt,
  Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Jackson Kernion, Tom Conerly, Shauna Kravec, Stanislav Fort, Saurav Ka-
  davath, Josh Jacobson, Eli Tran-Johnson, Jared Kaplan, Jack Clark, Tom Brown, Sam McCan-
  dlish, Dario Amodei, and Christopher Olah. Softmax linear units. Transformer Circuits Thread,
  2022. https://transformer-circuits.pub/2022/solu/index.html.

Lasse Espeholt, Hubert Soyer, Remi Munos, Karen Simonyan, Vlad Mnih, Tom Ward, Yotam
  Doron, Vlad Firoiu, Tim Harley, Iain Dunning, Shane Legg, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. IMPALA:
  Scalable Distributed Deep-RL with Importance Weighted Actor-Learner Architectures. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1407–1416. PMLR, July
  2018. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/espeholt18a.html. ISSN:
  2640-3498.

Feng-Lei Fan, Jinjun Xiong, Mengzhou Li, and Ge Wang. On interpretability of artificial neural
  networks: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Radiation and Plasma Medical Sciences, 5(6):741–
  760, 2021.

Leilani H. Gilpin, David Bau, Ben Z. Yuan, Ayesha Bajwa, Michael Specter, and Lalana Kagal.
  Explaining Explanations: An Overview of Interpretability of Machine Learning. In 2018 IEEE 5th
  International Conference on Data Science and Advanced Analytics (DSAA), pp. 80–89, October
  2018. doi: 10.1109/DSAA.2018.00018.


                                              10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Amelia Glaese, Nat McAleese, Maja Trebacz, John Aslanides, Vlad Firoiu, Timo Ewalds, Mari-
 beth Rauh, Laura Weidinger, Martin Chadwick, Phoebe Thacker, et al. Improving alignment of
 dialogue agents via targeted human judgements. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14375, 2022.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and
  Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2009.03300, 2020.
Jacob Hilton, Nick Cammarata, Shan Carter, Gabriel Goh, and Chris Olah. Understanding rl vision.
  Distill, 2020. doi: 10.23915/distill.00029. https://distill.pub/2020/understanding-rl-vision.
Sara Hooker, Dumitru Erhan, Pieter-Jan Kindermans, and Been Kim. A benchmark for interpretabil-
  ity methods in deep neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32,
  2019.
Ahmed Hussein, Mohamed Medhat Gaber, Eyad Elyan, and Chrisina Jayne. Imitation learning: A
  survey of learning methods. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 50(2):1–35, 2017.
Gareth James, Daniela Witten, Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, et al. An introduction to statistical
  learning, volume 112. Springer, 2013.
Lauro Langosco, Jack Koch, Lee Sharkey, Jacob Pfau, Laurent Orseau, and David Krueger. Goal
  Misgeneralization in Deep Reinforcement Learning, January 2023. URL http://arxiv.
  org/abs/2105.14111. arXiv:2105.14111 [cs].
Jan Leike, David Krueger, Tom Everitt, Miljan Martic, Vishal Maini, and Shane Legg. Scalable
  agent alignment via reward modeling: a research direction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.07871,
  2018.
Kenneth Li, Oam Patel, Fernanda Viégas, Hanspeter Pfister, and Martin Wattenberg. Inference-
  Time Intervention: Eliciting Truthful Answers from a Language Model, July 2023. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2306.03341. arXiv:2306.03341 [cs].
Percy Liang, Rishi Bommasani, Tony Lee, Dimitris Tsipras, Dilara Soylu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Yian
  Zhang, Deepak Narayanan, Yuhuai Wu, Ananya Kumar, et al. Holistic evaluation of language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.09110, 2022.
Tom Lieberum, Matthew Rahtz, János Kramár, Neel Nanda, Geoffrey Irving, Rohin Shah, and
  Vladimir Mikulik. Does Circuit Analysis Interpretability Scale? Evidence from Multiple Choice
  Capabilities in Chinchilla, July 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2307.09458.
  arXiv:2307.09458 [cs].
Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. Truthfulqa: Measuring how models mimic human
  falsehoods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.07958, 2021.
Neel Nanda, Lawrence Chan, Tom Lieberum, Jess Smith, and Jacob Steinhardt. Progress mea-
  sures for grokking via mechanistic interpretability, January 2023. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2301.05217v2.
Andrew Y Ng, Stuart Russell, et al. Algorithms for inverse reinforcement learning. In Icml, vol-
  ume 1, pp. 2, 2000.
Richard Ngo. The alignment problem from a deep learning perspective.                 arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2209.00626, 2022.
Chris Olah.  Mechanistic Interpretability, Variables, and the Importance of Interpretable
  Bases, June 2022.     URL https://www.transformer-circuits.pub/2022/
  mech-interp-essay/index.html.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ethan Perez, Sam Ringer, Kamilė Lukošiūtė, Karina Nguyen, Edwin Chen, Scott Heiner, Craig
  Pettit, Catherine Olsson, Sandipan Kundu, Saurav Kadavath, et al. Discovering language model
  behaviors with model-written evaluations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.09251, 2022.
Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Stefano Ermon, Christopher D Manning, and Chelsea
  Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.18290, 2023.
Cynthia Rudin, Chaofan Chen, Zhi Chen, Haiyang Huang, Lesia Semenova, and Chudi Zhong.
  Interpretable machine learning: Fundamental principles and 10 grand challenges. Statistics Sur-
  veys, 16(none):1–85, January 2022. ISSN 1935-7516. doi: 10.1214/21-SS133. Publisher: Amer.
  Statist. Assoc., the Bernoulli Soc., the Inst. Math. Statist., and the Statist. Soc. Canada.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal Pol-
  icy Optimization Algorithms, August 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1707.06347.
  arXiv:1707.06347 [cs].
Rohin Shah, Vikrant Varma, Ramana Kumar, Mary Phuong, Victoria Krakovna, Jonathan Uesato,
  and Zac Kenton. Goal misgeneralization: Why correct specifications aren’t enough for correct
  goals. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.01790, 2022.
Nishant Subramani, Nivedita Suresh, and Matthew E. Peters. Extracting Latent Steering Vec-
  tors from Pretrained Language Models, May 2022. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2205.
  05124. arXiv:2205.05124 [cs].
Faraz Torabi, Garrett Warnell, and Peter Stone. Behavioral Cloning from Observation, May 2018.
  URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1805.01954. arXiv:1805.01954 [cs].
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
  lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
  tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
Alex Turner, Lisa Thiergart, David Udell, Gavin Leech, Ulisse Mini, and Monte MacDiarmid.
  Activation Addition: Steering Language Models Without Optimization, August 2023. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/2308.10248. arXiv:2308.10248 [cs].
Yu Zhang, Peter Tiňo, Aleš Leonardis, and Ke Tang. A survey on neural network interpretability.
  IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computational Intelligence, 5(5):726–742, 2021.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 11: A high-level visualization of the policy network architecture, using IMPALA blocks from
Espeholt et al. (2018). The red-outlined layer contains the 11 goal-tracking channels and is where
the “cheese vector” and “top-right vector” were applied. For more details, refer to Langosco et al.
(2023).


A    T RAINING D ETAILS
We did not train the network which we studied. Langosco et al. (2023) trained 15 maze-solving
3.5M-parameter deep convolutional network using Proximal Policy Optimization (Schulman et al.,
2017). For each of n = 1, . . . , 15, network n was trained in mazes where cheese was randomly
placed in a free tile in the top-right n × n squares of the maze. We primarily study the n = 5
network.
When the policy reached the cheese, the episode terminated and a reward of +10 was recorded.
Each model was trained on 100K procedurally generated levels over the course of 200M timesteps.
Figure 11 diagrams the high-level architecture.
At each timestep, the policy observes a 64 × 64 RGB image, as shown by Fig. 12. The policy has
five actions available: A := {↑, →, ↓, ←, ado nothing }.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                   (a) What the policy observes        (b) Human-friendly visualization

Figure 12: The mazes are defined on a 25 × 25 game grid. For some mazes, the accessible maze is
smaller, and the rest is padded. Furthermore, the network observes a 64 × 64 RGB image (Fig. 12a).
In contrast, we visualize mazes as in Fig. 12b: without padding, and as a higher-resolution image.


B    B EHAVIORAL S TATISTICS
We wanted to better understand the generalization behavior of the network. During training, the
cheese was always in the top-right n × n corner. During testing, the cheese can be anywhere in the
maze. In the test distribution, visual inspection of sampled trajectories suggested that the network
has goals related to at least two historical reward proxies: the cheese, and the top-right corner.
To understand generalization behavior, we wanted to understand which maze features correlate with
the network’s decision to pursue the cheese or the corner. For each of the 15 pretrained networks,
we uniformly randomly sampled (without replacement) 10,000 maze seeds between 0 and 1e6. We
sampled a rollout in each seed. We recorded various statistics of the maze and rollout, such as
whether the agent reached the cheese. We then discarded mazes without decision squares (Fig. 13),
since in these mazes the policy does not have to choose between the cheese or the corner. We also
discarded mazes with cheese in the top-right 5×5 corner, because i) we wanted to test generalization
behavior, and ii) the cheese is probably just a few steps from the decision square. This left us with
5,239 rollouts.


Figure 13: A decision square is the square where there is divergence between the paths to the cheese
and to the top-right corner. In the first maze, the decision square is shown by a red dot. The second
maze does not have a decision square.

We considered a range of metrics. We considered two notions of distance and five pairs of maze
landmarks, and then measured their 10 possible combinations. The distances comprised:

     1. The Euclidean L2 distance in the game grid, d2 .
     2. The maze path distance, dpath . Each maze is simply connected, without loops or “islands.”
        Therefore, there is a unique shortest path between any two maze squares.

The pairs of maze landmarks were:


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      1. The top-right 5 × 5 region and the cheese.
      2. The top-right 5 × 5 region and the decision square.
      3. The cheese and the decision square.
      4. The cheese and the top-right square.
      5. The decision square and the top-right square.

Figure 14 visualizes four of these feature combinations.


             (a) L2 (decision sq., cheese)              (b) Steps from the decision square to the cheese


             (c) L2 (cheese, top-right sq.)                  (d) L2 (decision sq., top-right 5 × 5)

                            Figure 14: Four of the features we regress upon.

We also regressed upon the L2 norm of the cheese coordinate within the 25 × 25 game grid (where
the bottom-left corner is the origin (0, 0)). All else equal, larger coordinate norm is correlated with
the cheese being closer to the top-right corner (Fig. 15).
To discover which of the 11 features are predictive, we trained single-variable regression models
using ℓ1 -regularized logistic regression. As a baseline, always predicting that the agent gets the
cheese yields an accuracy 71.4%. Among the 11 variables investigated, 6 variables outperformed
this baseline (Table 1). The rest performed worse than the no-regression baseline (Table 2).

                                                Variable    Prediction accuracy
                            d2 (cheese, top-right 5 × 5)            0.775
                           d2 (cheese, top-right square)            0.773
                           d2 (cheese, decision square)             0.761
                         dpath (cheese, decision square)            0.754
                          dpath (cheese, top-right 5 × 5)           0.735
                         dpath (cheese, top-right square)           0.732

Table 1: Variables that outperform the no-regression baseline of 71.4%. We found that these vari-
ables have negative regression coefficients, which matched our expectation that increased distance
generally discourages cheese-seeking behavior.


                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Euclidean distance between cheese and top right square
                                                             35


                                                             30


                                                             25


                                                             20


                                                             15


                                                             10


                                                              5


                                                              0
                                                                  0          5          10          15        20         25        30

                                                                                             Norm of cheese coordinate


Figure 15: Among mazes with decision squares, there is a Pearson correlation of −.508 between the
norm of the cheese coordinate and the distance. That is, the larger the norm, the closer the cheese is
(in L2 ) to the top-right square of the 25 × 25 grid.

                                                                                                         Variable   Prediction accuracy
                                                                                                ∥cheese coord∥2           0.713
                                                                          d2 (decision square, top-right square)          0.712
                                                                        dpath (decision square, top-right square)         0.709
                                                                         dpath (decision square, top-right 5 × 5)         0.708
                                                                           d2 (decision square, top-right 5 × 5)          0.708

                                                                  Table 2: Variables that underperform the no-regression baseline of 71.4%.


B.1                                                         H ANDLING MULTICOLLINEARITY

Table 1 yielded 6 individually predictive features. However, many of these features are strongly
correlated (Fig. 16 and Fig. 17). In these situations, we must take extra care when regressing on all
6 variables and then interpreting the regression coefficients.
We measure the variance inflation factor (VIF) in order to quantify the potential multicollinearity
(James et al., 2013). VIF greater than 4 is considered indicative of multicollinearity.


                                                                                                         16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   Steps between cheese and decision square


                                              50



                                              40



                                              30



                                              20



                                              10



                                              0
                                                   0        5                10               15            20

                                                       Euclidean distance between cheese and decision square


Figure 16: Among mazes with decision squares, there is a Pearson correlation of .892 between these
two distances.


                                                                                        Features    VIF

                                                                  d2 (cheese, decision square)       5.19
                                                                          d2 (cheese, top-right)    74.53
                                                                   d2 (cheese, 5 × 5 top-right)     75.27
                                                                dpath (cheese, decision square)      5.73
                                                                dpath (cheese, 5 × 5 top-right)      8.52
                                                                        dpath (cheese, top-right)    8.33

Table 3: Variation inflation factors for the 6 predictive variables. These variables display large
multicollinearity.


                                                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Correlation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1


           Euclidean distance between cheese and decision square


             Taxicab distance between cheese and decision square


                        Steps between cheese and decision square                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.5


                       Steps between cheese and top right square


           Euclidean distance between cheese and top right square


             Taxicab distance between cheese and top right square
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0

   Euclidean distance between decision square and top right square


     Taxicab distance between decision square and top right square


               Steps between decision square and top right square
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                −0.5

                          Steps between cheese and top-right 5x5


                  Steps between decision square and top-right 5x5
                                                                     Euclidean distance between cheese and decision square


                                                                                                                             Taxicab distance between cheese and decision square


                                                                                                                                                                                   Steps between cheese and decision square


                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Steps between cheese and top right square


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Euclidean distance between cheese and top right square


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Taxicab distance between cheese and top right square


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Euclidean distance between decision square and top right square


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Taxicab distance between decision square and top right square


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Steps between decision square and top right square


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Steps between cheese and top-right 5x5


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Steps between decision square and top-right 5x5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                −1


Figure 17: The correlations between maze features, considering only mazes with decision squares.


                                                                                                                                            18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.2     A SSESSING STABILITY OF REGRESSION COEFFICIENTS

With the multicollinearity in mind, we perform an ℓ1 -regularized multiple logistic regression on
the 6 predictive variables to assess their stability and importance. We compute results for 2,000
randomized test/train splits. The results are shown in Table 4.

                                                                Attribute    Coefficient
                              Steps between cheese and top-right 5 × 5        −0.003
                Euclidean distance between cheese and top-right 5 × 5          0.282
                            Steps between cheese and top-right square          1.142
               Euclidean distance between cheese and top-right square         −2 .522
                             Steps between cheese and decision-square         −1 .200
               Euclidean distance between cheese and decision-square          0 .523
                                                             Intercept         1.418

Table 4: Coefficients from the initial ℓ1 -regularized multiple regression. The 3 variables from Sec-
tion 2.1 are italicized. Regression accuracy is 84.1%.

Over the 2,000 regressions, the three italicized variables in Table 4 are the only variables to not sign
flip. To further validate these results, we found that our conclusions held on another dataset of 10 K
randomly seeded mazes.
We also regressed on 200 random subsets of the 6 variables. The aforementioned 3 variables never
experienced a sign flip, strengthening our confidence that multicollinearity has not distorted our
original regressions. Taken together, this is why Section 2.1 presents results for these three features.

B.2.1    R EGRESSING ON THE STABLE FEATURES
A regression using only the three stable variables retains an accuracy of 82.4%, averaged over 10
splits (Table 5). This is a 1.7% accuracy drop from the initial multiple regression on all 6 variables
(Table 4).

                                                                Attribute    Coefficient
               Euclidean distance between cheese and top-right square         −1.405
                            Steps between cheese and decision-square          −0.577
               Euclidean distance between cheese and decision-square          −0.516
                                                            Intercept         1.355

Table 5: Regression accuracy is 82.4%. Coefficients when regressing only on stable variables.
We caution that our analysis is not meant to hinge on the coefficient magnitudes, which are often
contingent and unreliable metrics. Instead, we think their sign and stability are better correlational
evidence for the impact of these features on the policy’s decisions.

We found that while adding a fourth variable (from the 6 above) can increase regression accuracy
slightly, the fourth variable has flipped sign. We interpret this as further evidence that the other
variables do not represent interpretable, meaningful influences on the policy’s decision-making.

B.3     S PECULATION ON CAUSALITY

Figure 18 demonstrates the large impact of increasing path distance to cheese, while holding constant
the other two stable variables.
Table 6 examines how dropping each stable variable impacts the regression accuracy. This provides
evidence on the predictive importance of each feature.
Considering both the qualitative and statistical findings, we have strong confidence that
dstep (cheese, decision-square) influences decision-making.     We are more cautious about
d2 (cheese, decision-square), although its removal causes a notable accuracy drop similar to that


                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            (a) Low dpath (decision sq., cheese)           (b) High dpath (decision sq., cheese)

Figure 18: The causal effect of increased path distance to cheese. We illustrate policy behavior
using the “vector field” view introduced by Fig. 8. The decision square is boxed in red. Hold-
ing constant d2 (decision sq., cheese) (in green) and d2 (decision sq., top-right sq.), an increase in
dpath (decision sq., cheese) (in blue) makes the policy far less likely to pursue the cheese.

                                         Regression variables    Accuracy
                                d2 (cheese, top-right square)
                               dstep (cheese, decision-square)    82.4%
                                 d2 (cheese, decision-square)

                               dstep (cheese, decision-square)    75.9%
                                 d2 (cheese, decision-square)

                                 d2 (cheese, top-right square)    81.9%
                                 d2 (cheese, decision-square)

                                d2 (cheese, top-right square)     81.7%
                               dstep (cheese, decision-square)

Table 6: Regression accuracy after dropping variables. Similar drops in accuracy occur for dropping
dstep (cheese, decision-square) and d2 (cheese, decision-square).


of dstep (cheese, decision-square), a variable we are confident about. Overall, we suspect both of
these variables affect decision-making, even though optimal policies would generally only depend
on step distance (due to the discounting term).


                                                   20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B.4   DATA FROM OTHER MODELS

We briefly examined other pretrained models from Langosco et al. (2023). For each of the models
trained on cheese in the top-right n × n corner for n = 3, . . . , 15, we run the ℓ1 -regularized logistic
regression on the three stable variables. Each setting regresses upon about 550 mazes.


                                                   21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Size     Steps from decision sq. to cheese     L2 (decision sq., cheese)   L2 (top-right sq., cheese)
     3                  −0.681                            0.000                       −1.935
     4                  −0.276                            −0.476                      −1.438
     5                  −0.348                            −0.745                      −1.278
     6                  −1.606                            −0.324                      −1.361
     7                  −1.087                            −0.208                      −1.670
     8                  −0.759                            −0.606                      −1.833
     9                  −0.933                            −0.112                      −1.943
    10                  −1.051                            −0.040                      −2.075
    11                  −1.102                            0.000                       −1.212
    12                  −0.860                            0.000                       −1.732
    13                  −1.002                            −0.045                      −2.286
    14                  −0.743                            0.150                       −1.394
    15                  −0.663                            −0.402                      −1.726

Table 7: Regression coefficient signs are somewhat stable across n settings. The regression
coefficients found by ℓ1 -regularized logistic regression. A size of n indicates that the cheese was
spawned in the top-right n × n region of each maze during training. Each size value corresponds to
a separate pretrained model from Langosco et al. (2023). Recall that this work mostly examines the
n = 5 case (and thus that row is bolded). The n = 1, 2 cases did not pursue cheese outside of the
top-right 5 × 5 region, and so are omitted.


C    C OMPUTATION OF S TEERING V ECTORS
We discuss the “contrast pair” (Burns et al., 2022) we used to compute the top-right steering vector
(as defined in Section 3.2).


         (a) The maze modified to have a reachable            (b) The original maze
         top-right-most square

Figure 19: We run a forward pass on both mazes. The top-right vector consists of the activations
for (a) minus the activations for (b), at the relevant layer (see Fig. 11). This operation can be
performed algorithmically for any maze, although we found that the top-right vector from maze A
often transfers to other mazes.

Empirically, having a path to the extreme top-right increases the policy’s attraction towards the top-
right corner. We hypothesize that the policy tracks the “priority” of navigating to the top right corner,
and adding in the top-right vector increases that priority.


                                                     22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D       F URTHER E XAMPLES OF N ETWORK B EHAVIOR
D.1     F URTHER E XAMPLES OF F IG . 3: Network Channels Track The Goal Location



                   2



    1


                   3


                                     Figure 20: Channel 7.


                   2



    1


                   3


                                     Figure 21: Channel 8.


                   2



    1


                   3


                                    Figure 22: Channel 42.


                                              23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  2



  1


                  3


                                   Figure 23: Channel 44.


                  2



  1


                  3


                                   Figure 24: Channel 55.


                  2



  1


                  3


                                   Figure 25: Channel 77.


                  2



  1


                  3


                                   Figure 26: Channel 82.



                                             24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  2



  1


                  3


                                   Figure 27: Channel 88.


                  2



  1


                  3


                                   Figure 28: Channel 89.


                  2



  1


                  3


                                   Figure 29: Channel 99.


                  2



  1


                  3


                                   Figure 30: Channel 113.



                                             25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.2   F URTHER E XAMPLES OF F IG . 4: Resampling Cheese-Tracking Activations From Different
      Mazes

Here we show 3 examples of each size maze from the first 100 seeds. The resampled locations
are always in the top right and bottom right corners, respectively. Resampling locations that were
farther from the path to the top-right corner (Appendix E for further details) were more difficult to
steer towards. In most instances of resampling from cheese located in the bottom right, the policy
instead steered towards the historical goal location in the top right.


                                 Figure 31: Maze size 3x3: seed 1.


                                Figure 32: Maze size 3x3: seed 10.


                                Figure 33: Maze size 3x3: seed 11.


                                                 26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              Figure 34: Maze size 5x5: seed 3.


                              Figure 35: Maze size 5x5: seed 7.


                              Figure 36: Maze size 5x5: seed 19.


                              Figure 37: Maze size 7x7: seed 26.



                                             27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              Figure 38: Maze size 7x7: seed 34.


                              Figure 39: Maze size 7x7: seed 54.


                              Figure 40: Maze size 7x7: seed 6.


                              Figure 41: Maze size 7x7: seed 20.



                                             28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                              Figure 42: Maze size 7x7: seed 52.


                            Figure 43: Maze size 11x11: seed 35.


                            Figure 44: Maze size 11x11: seed 37.


                            Figure 45: Maze size 11x11: seed 42.



                                             29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            Figure 46: Maze size 13x13: seed 51.


                            Figure 47: Maze size 13x13: seed 74.


                            Figure 48: Maze size 13x13: seed 84.


                             Figure 49: Maze size 15x15: seed 9.



                                             30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            Figure 50: Maze size 15x15: seed 25.


                            Figure 51: Maze size 15x15: seed 36.


                            Figure 52: Maze size 17x17: seed 50.


                            Figure 53: Maze size 17x17: seed 64.



                                             31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            Figure 54: Maze size 17x17: seed 76.


                            Figure 55: Maze size 19x19: seed 24.


                            Figure 56: Maze size 19x19: seed 46.


                            Figure 57: Maze size 19x19: seed 81.



                                             32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             Figure 58: Maze size 21x21: seed 8.


                            Figure 59: Maze size 21x21: seed 32.


                            Figure 60: Maze size 21x21: seed 53.



                        (b): Resampling from        (c): Resampling from    (d): Resampling from
 (a): Original Maze          same location            red cheese location     red cheese location


                            Figure 61: Maze size 23x23: seed 12.



                                               33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            Figure 62: Maze size 23x23: seed 13.


                            Figure 63: Maze size 23x23: seed 67.


                            Figure 64: Maze size 25x25: seed 40.


                            Figure 65: Maze size 25x25: seed 55.



                                             34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            Figure 66: Maze size 25x25: seed 71.


                                             35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.3   F URTHER E XAMPLES OF F IG . 5: Controlling The Maze-Solving Policy By Modifying A
      Single Activation

Here we take the same specific activations from Fig. 5, with intervention magnitude +5.5, and
apply them to other mazes of the same size. Arbitrary retargetting does not always work, especially
for activations farther away from the top-right path. See Appendix E for more information on the
top-right path. We typically observe that modified activations far from the top-right path are not
successfully retargeted to, as shown by the most-probable path. Instead, the policy navigates to
the historical goal location. In fact, some seeds do not see any change in the most probable path,
although quantitative analyses in Appendix E detail the changing probabilities of all paths through
different maze sizes and interventions.


                         Figure 67: Patching specific activations: seed 0.


                         Figure 68: Patching specific activations: seed 2.


                         Figure 69: Patching specific activations: seed 16.


                                                36
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                       Figure 70: Patching specific activations: seed 51.


                       Figure 71: Patching specific activations: seed 74.


                       Figure 72: Patching specific activations: seed 84.


                       Figure 73: Patching specific activations: seed 85.


                       Figure 74: Patching specific activations: seed 99.


                                              37
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Figure 75: Patching specific activations: seed 107.


                      Figure 76: Patching specific activations: seed 108.


                      Figure 77: Patching specific activations: seed 132.


                      Figure 78: Patching specific activations: seed 169.


                      Figure 79: Patching specific activations: seed 183.


                                              38
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Figure 80: Patching specific activations: seed 189.


                      Figure 81: Patching specific activations: seed 192.


                                              39
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E        Q UANTITATIVE A NALYSIS OF R ETARGETABILITY
In order to quantify how retargetable certain interventions are, we ran several analyses. The top-
right path is the path from the policy’s starting location in the bottom left, to the top right corner.
Figure 82 shows a heatmap of each square’s path distance from the top-right path.


Figure 82: Each square’s path distance from the top-right path. The brighter the red, the longer the
distance.

We find that the probability of successfully retargeting the policy decreases as the path distance from
the top-right path increases, as in Fig. 83. These results corroborate the data and heatmaps discussed
in §3.1.
The data constituting this analysis is pulled from the first 100 seeds. Since the distance to the top
right path and the probability of retargeting are square-specific characteristics and not dependent on
the size of the maze, we average over all maze sizes. This explains the increased variability in the
latter portion of the graph, as higher distances to the top right path were only found in larger mazes,
which made up a subset of the mazes in consideration.
We also charted the distance from the top-right path against the ratio of
P (tile|retargeting)/P (tile|normal), see Fig. 84. A similar trend of decreasing retargetability
with increasing distance from the top-right path can be seen, but the ratio remains above 1
throughout. That is, we are able to increase the probability of reaching a specific tile through
retargeting, no matter the distance from the top-right path.
We additionally quantify the effectiveness of each type of intervention discussed in §3.1. We exper-
iment with modifying all9 cheese-tracking channels with intervention magnitude 1.0, the effective10
cheese channels with intervention magnitude 2.3, and channel 55 with intervention magnitude 5.5.
In Fig. 85, we show that modifying more channels increases the probability of successful retargeting
over the whole maze in comparison to modifying a single channel. Crucially, this is true even with
larger magnitudes in the single-channel interventions. This data shows that intervening on more of
the circuits distributed throughout the network is more effective. Finding such circuits then is highly
important for controlling networks through activation engineering.


     9
         These are channels 7, 8, 42, 44, 55, 77, 82, 88, 89, 99, 113.
    10
         These are channels 8, 55, 77, 82, 88, 89, 113.


                                                           40
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                        0.9
Probability of Successful Retargeting


                                        0.8

                                        0.7

                                        0.6

                                        0.5

                                        0.4

                                        0.3

                                        0.2

                                              0   10          20          30          40   50
                                                       Distance from Top Right Path
                                                              Figure 83


                                                                   41
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                  5.0

                                  4.5
Ratio of Successful Retargeting


                                  4.0

                                  3.5

                                  3.0

                                  2.5

                                  2.0

                                  1.5

                                  1.0
                                        0   10          20          30          40   50
                                                 Distance from Top Right Path
                                                        Figure 84


                                                             42
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Average probability of retargetting success


                                              0.80                                     All Cheese Channels
                                                                                       Effective Channels
                                              0.75                                     Channel 55
                                              0.70


                                              0.65


                                              0.60


                                              0.55


                                              0.50
                                                     3   5   7   9   11    13     15   17   19   21   23   25
                                                                          Maze size
                                                                      Figure 85


                                                                          43
