Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D OMAIN B RIDGE : G ENERATIVE MODEL - BASED
DOMAIN FORENSIC FOR BLACK - BOX MODELS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         In forensic investigations of machine learning models, techniques that determine a
         model’s data domain play an essential role, with prior work relying on large-scale
         corpora like ImageNet to approximate the target model’s domain. Although such
         methods are effective in finding broad domains, they often struggle in identifying
         finer-grained classes within those domains. In this paper, we introduce an en-
         hanced approach to determine not just the general data domain (e.g., human face)
         but also its specific attributes (e.g., wearing glasses). Our approach uses an image
         embedding model as the encoder and a generative model as the decoder. Be-
         ginning with a coarse-grained description, the decoder generates a set of images,
         which are then presented to the unknown target model. Successful classifications
         by the model guide the encoder to refine the description, which in turn, are used
         to produce a more specific set of images in the subsequent iteration. This itera-
         tive refinement narrows down the exact class of interest. A key strength of our
         approach lies in leveraging the expansive dataset, LAION-5B, on which the gen-
         erative model Stable Diffusion is trained. This enlarges our search space beyond
         traditional corpora, such as ImageNet. Empirical results showcase our method’s
         performance in identifying specific attributes of a model’s input domain, paving
         the way for more detailed forensic analyses of deep learning models.


1   I NTRODUCTION
The surge of machine learning and deep learning models in various applications has spurred an
emerging interest in understanding and investigating these models, particularly in forensics. A piv-
otal aspect of these investigations revolves around deducing the data domain of an unknown model
– understanding not just the broad categories it may accept, but the specific classes within those
categories. Such detailed insights are invaluable, aiding in model transparency, validation, and
perhaps more critically, in identifying potential biases or vulnerabilities. In addition, many tradi-
tional investigation techniques, ranging from membership inference (Shokri et al., 2017) to model
cloning (Papernot et al., 2017), have also predominantly hinged on the foundational premise: prior
knowledge or at least a well-informed guess about the data domain of the target model.
Recent works (Zhang et al., 2023) have sought to bridge this knowledge chasm by leveraging expan-
sive corpora, such as ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009). Such datasets, with their vast array of images
spanning myriad categories, offer a promising starting point. However, their static nature and limited
granularity pose inherent limitations. A dataset like ImageNet, despite its impressive volume, still
operates within predefined bounds, both in terms of categories and the depth within each category.
This makes discerning finer-grained class attributes within broader domains a challenging endeavor.
In this paper, we propose a new approach. Instead of relying solely on static corpora, we use gen-
erative algorithms to help in our search. Specifically, we combine the power of the Stable Diffusion
model (Rombach et al., 2021), which has been trained on the extensive LAION-5B (Schuhmann
et al., 2022) dataset, with the semantic encoding capabilities of CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) and
BLIP (Li et al., 2022). Together, this combination facilitates an iterative search process that not only
identify the broad data domain of a model but digs in on specific attributes within that domain.
Our proposed method, using an iterative mechanism, embarks on its investigative journey with a
broad initial description. This description is used to generate a set of images, which are then pre-
sented to the unknown model for classification. Based on the classifications results, the initial de-


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


scription undergoes iterative refinements and eventually converges to an accurate description of the
target model’s data domain.

Contributions:
• We propose a new method to determine the data domain of unknown black-box machine learning
  models, leveraging pretrained generative models and language models.
• We formulate an objective function that captures both the relevance and generality of a potential
  candidate that represents the data domain. To optimize this function, we present a heuristic search
  algorithm tailored for the task.
• We empirically validate our method across different scenarios: (a) identifying the input data do-
  main for classifiers with pre-established ground truth, (b) utilizing datasets procured via our pro-
  posed method for subsequent investigations, and (c) discerning the input data domain for models
  in real-world model repositories.


2     BACKGROUND

In this paper, we leverage two pretrained models: CLIP (Contrastive Language–Image Pre-
training (Radford et al., 2021)) and Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2021).

2.1   CLIP: C ONNECTING T EXT AND I MAGE

CLIP maps both images and texts to embeddings, employing the Vision Transformer for images and
a transformer architecture for texts.
The embedding space of image and text is shared, where semantically similar image-text pairs are
close, and semantically different image-text pairs are distant.

2.2   S TABLE D IFFUSION : T EXT TO I MAGE G ENERATION

The Stable Diffusion model generates images from CLIP text or image embeddings using a stochas-
tic process. Firstly, a random seed generates Gaussian noise, forming the initial latent representation.
This is followed by U-Net’s (Ronneberger et al., 2015) iterative denoising while conditioning on the
given text or image embedding. Finally, after sufficient iterations to refine the latent image repre-
sentation, a VAE (Variational Autoencoder) (Kingma & Welling, 2014) decoder converts this latent
representation into the final output image.


3     P ROBLEM S ETUP

3.1   C APABILITIES OF THE I NVESTIGATOR

Consider an investigator with black-box and hard-label only access to a model, denoted as M,
which predicts over distinct classes. The investigator can adaptively submit inputs to the model and
in return, receive the corresponding predicted hard labels. Here we denote the predicted hard label
as arg max M(x) for the input data x.
The investigator has access to a decoder Dec(e; s) that probabilistically generates a data sample
(i.e., image) based on an embedding e and a random seed s, and an encoder Enc(x) that gives an
embedding for a data sample x.

3.2   G OAL OF I NVESTIGATION

The goal of the investigation is to characterize each of the target classes. For each class, the outcome
is an embedding e, which can be fed into the decoder to generate varied data samples of the target
class with different random seeds. In other words, Dec(e; s) is a generative model for the target
class. We formulate our goal as two objectives:


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Relevance: This objective assesses the consistency of target model predictions for data samples
generated from a given embedding. High relevance indicates that the target model consistently
classifies these generated data into the target class.
Generality: While an embedding with highly specific semantics might lead to high relevance, it
may cause lack of variety in generated data samples. An embedding with more general semantics is
preferable as it may better represent the varied distribution of data points within the target class.
The objective function can be formalized as:
              V (e) = Prs [arg max M(Dec(e; s)) = i] − λEs [cos(Enc(Dec(e; s)), e)]                         (1)
• Prs [arg max M(Dec(e; s)) = i] quantifies the relevance of an embedding e. It is the probabil-
  ity that, when a sample is generated from the embedding e, the target model M classifies it as
  belonging to class i.
• Es [cos(Enc(Dec(e, s)), e)] quantifies the generality inherent to the embedding e. It is the expected
  cosine similarity between the original embedding and the version that’s been decoded and then re-
  encoded1 .
• λ is a predefined constant.

4       D OMAIN B RIDGE : T HE D OMAIN S EARCH A PPROACH
In this section, we present our approach of determining the data domain of a target image classifier
M. We define I as the image space where each data point is an image, and E as the embedding
space where each point is a CLIP embedding. For each target class i, we search for an embedding
within E that optimizes the objective function.
Since the target classifier likely comprises classes that can be textually distinguished, we limit our
search to a discrete subset of E that consists of embeddings that correspond exactly to specific,
known textual descriptions2 . Given the deterministic nature of CLIP’s embedding process, this
narrowed search scope is equivalent to the space of textual descriptions T .
Stable Diffusion provides a probabilistic mapping from E to I, representing Dec in our formulation.
The CLIP image embedder, denoted CLIPI2E , provides a deterministic mapping from I to E, repre-
senting Enc in our formulation. To connect T and I, we introduce the Description Decoder G and
the Image Encoder E. They enable our search algorithm to operate directly with text descriptions.
• Description Decoder, G: This component encapsulates Dec from the objective function.
  – A given textual description p is first mapped to its respective embedding e deterministically
    using the CLIP text embedder, represented as CLIPT2E . This embedding e, with a random seed
    s, facilitates image generation through the Stable Diffusion-based Dec.
  – Formally: G(p; s) = Dec(CLIPT2E (p); s).
• Image Encoder, E: This component encapsulates Enc from the objective function.
  – A given image x is first mapped to its respective embedding e deterministically by Enc, which
    is the CLIP image embedder CLIPI2E . Following this, the CLIP Interrogator (Pharmapsy-
    chotic, 2023), denoted as CLIPE2T , identifies a textual description whose embedding is close
    to e, thereby mapping the image embedding to the space of textual descriptions.
  – Formally: E(x) = CLIPE2T (Enc(x)).
We also introduce three additional components to make the search more efficient.
• Description Summarizer, S: Using an LLM model, S condenses verbose descriptions into shorter,
  yet descriptive, versions.
    1
      An embedding of a general concept can generate a diverse set of data samples, each carrying unique
semantics. As a result, the embedding of these data samples will scatter across the space, exhibiting a small
cosine similarity to e. Conversely, an embedding with highly specific meaning may generate a set of closely
related data samples, thus resulting a greater similarity to e.
    2
      Outside this subset, the embedding space is continuous. There is a vast number of possible embeddings that
do not correspond exactly to any textual description. They contain additional subtleties which are not captured
by textual descriptions. Although applying the objective function within the text description space streamlines
our search, it might overlook certain visual subtleties not readily expressible in text.


                                                       3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


• Description Grouper, Z: Z collates multiple coherent descriptions into a single unified descrip-
  tion, achieved through an LLM model.
• Description Enricher, R: R enriches a broad description by infusing detailed attributes, which can
  span subclasses or traits such as color, shape, and pose. This process leverages an LLM model.
These above five components form two opposing forces. On one side, the Description Decoder G,
target model M, and Image Encoder E work together to sample through detailed and expressive
descriptions to find those with high relevance to target class i. Complementing this, the Description
Enricher R predict and append specific attributes, exploring additional paths to descriptions with
high relevance. In contrast, the Description Summarizer S and Description Grouper Z collaborate
to condense the description. Their joint efforts aim to trim its verbosity and enhance its generality.

                            𝓖 𝒑; 𝒔 = 𝐃𝐞𝐜(𝐂𝐋𝐈𝐏𝐓𝟐𝐄(𝒑); 𝒔)                                                                     𝑝!"!#!$%

                                                                                            𝑝&!                               𝑝&"                 …                   𝑝&#
    Text Space                      Embedding                    Image Space
                                                    𝐃𝐞𝐜(𝒆; 𝒔)
  white car driving
  down a road with…
                          𝐂𝐋𝐈𝐏𝐓𝟐𝐄     Space
                                                                                                  …                                  …            …                          …


                                                                                                                               …
  white sports car
  parked on a dirt…
                          𝐂𝐋𝐈𝐏$𝟐𝐓                    𝐄𝐧𝐜(𝐱)
                                                                                                     Images
          …


                                                                                                                       Target Model 𝓜
                      𝒑                         𝒆                           𝐱     Node 𝑝          𝐱𝟏, 𝐱𝟐, … , 𝐱𝒎                                       Extracted Descriptions
                                                                                                                                                           𝑝$! , 𝑝$! , … , 𝑝$#
                                                                                                                   Filter By Prediction Results

                                                                                  vehicle                                                         white car driving down a road with…
                                                                                                                      Correctly Classified
                               𝓔(𝐱) = 𝐂𝐋𝐈𝐏𝐄𝟐𝐓(𝐄𝐧𝐜(𝐱))                                                                   𝐱$! , 𝐱$" , … , 𝐱$#
                                                                                                                                                     a silver car driving on a road…

                                                                                Description                                                        white sports car parked on a dirt…
                                                                                 Decoder
        Description                  Description              Description           𝓖


                                                                                                                                                                    …
         Enricher                    Summarizer                Grouper
                                                                                                                       Image Encoder 𝓔             sports car parked on a road near…


Figure 1: Left: An overview of the components in our framework. Right: An overview of the
iterative description refinement process (detailed in Section 4.1).


4.1        S EARCH A LGORITHM

We use a heuristic search algorithm to identify the optimal description. Conceptually, the algorithm
operates in a Breadth-First Search (BFS) manner over a tree structure. The process is visualized in
Figure 1, with an illustrative example provided in Appendix A.1.

4.1.1           I NITIALIZATION
Step 1: Construct a tree where each node is a textual description, augmented with its relevance score.
The root node, denoted as pinitial , is a general description representing a broad domain.

4.1.2           I TERATIVE D ESCRIPTION R EFINEMENT
For each leaf node p:
Step 2: Generate m distinct images x1 , x2 , . . . , xm using the Description Decoder G based on p.
Step 3: Classify x1 , x2 , . . . , xm using the target model M. Denote the k images that are classified
                                                                                           k
under target class i as xc1 , xc2 , . . . , xck . Augment node p with the relevance score: m .
Step 4: If node p is at shallow depths, but does not generate any image that is classified to target
class (i.e., k = 0), proceed to Step 5. Otherwise, proceed to Step 6.
Step 5: Apply the Description Enricher R to enrich the description p, incorporating additional
attributes for specificity. If the enriched descriptions lead to correct classifications, add them as
child nodes to p. Then, for each child node, repeat from Step 2.
Step 6: Nodes p (except pinitial ) is compared against its parent node. If node p fails to surpass its
parent in terms of relevance score, it is terminated. Otherwise, proceed to Step 7.
Step 7: Apply the Image Encoder E to extract textual descriptions pc1 , pc2 , . . . , pck from correctly
classified images xc1 , xc2 , . . . , xck .


                                                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Step 8: For each pci , if it is excessively verbose (length surpassing a set threshold), apply the
Description Summarizer S to create l summarized variants. Both original and summarized variants
are evaluated based on their relevance score. The description with highest relevance replaces pci .
Step 9: If the tree expands rapidly (large k), apply the Description Grouper Z to cluster similar
descriptions, preventing excessive branching.
Step 10: Add the processed descriptions as child nodes to p. For each child, repeat from Step 2.

4.1.3    T ERMINATION
Step 11: Terminate the algorithm when the tree reaches its preset maximum depth, or the relevance
score shows no further improvement.
After termination, evaluate each node using the objective function presented in Equation 1 to com-
pute its overall score, which combines both relevance and generality. Identify the node with the
highest score. In cases where multiple nodes share the top score, apply the Descriptions Grouper Z
to select the most representative description. Finally, apply the summarization as in Step 8 to yield
a refined description as the output.


5     R ELATED W ORKS

To the best of our knowledge, there remains a significant gap in comprehending the data domain of
an undisclosed target model. Only a handful of studies have ventured into this niche, with one no-
table approach relying on extensive datasets, such as ImageNet, to approximate the model’s domain.
This existing method utilizes two main assets: a substantial dataset and supplementary information
like data hierarchies and annotations. The core of their approach is a function that select samples
based on both the model’s operational behaviors and the inherent meanings found in the dataset’s
metadata. An algorithm then searches through all possible data groupings using this objective func-
tion. However, this approach has its limitations. Most prominently, the datasets they use, like
ImageNet, are restricted in scope, capping at around 1,000 categories. This bottleneck impedes a
more detailed or “fine-grained” search due to the broad nature of such datasets.
Techniques like model inversion (Yang et al., 2019; Fredrikson et al., 2015) have similar goals as
ours, but work in a different stage of the investigation. While effective in generating representative
images for models with well-defined distributions, like those dedicated to faces, their effectiveness
rely on the domain information of the model, which is the outcome of our method. Moreover, they
are unable to describe the target model’s classes in textual form, a feature that our method offers.


6     E VALUATIONS

6.1     E XPERIMENT S ETUP

In this section, we present four experiments to assess the effectiveness of our method. To ensure
consistency across all experiments, we employ the Stable Diffusion 1.5 model as the Description
Decoder. The Image Encoder is implemented using a model named CLIP Interrogator (Pharmapsy-
chotic, 2023). It employs CLIP VIT L-14 and BLIP models, with the caption generated by BLIP
being concatenated to the keywords produced by CLIP as the final output. We harness the power of
the GPT-4 API, which is utilized in our Description Summarizer, Grouper, and Enricher.
In our first experiment, we focus on investigations on pretrained target models. These models are
trained on two distinct datasets: CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky, 2009) and Places365 (Zhou et al., 2017).
We benchmark the performance of our method against the existing corpus-based approaches to pro-
vide a comparison. Our second experiment extends the first by performing a follow-up investigation
using model cloning. In this scenario, we generate images based on descriptions obtained from our
initial investigation. This allows us to compare the cloned model’s performance with that of the
corpus-based baseline method. In the third experimental setup, we delve into more intricate sce-
narios by investigating target models that specialize in fine-grained classifications. Specifically, we
examine a face attribute classifier trained on the CelebA dataset (Liu et al., 2015), which contains 40


                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


distinct attributes. Each attribute is subject to binary classification by the target model. Finally, in
our fourth experiment, we take our approach into real-world applicability. We select some models
from the Hugging Face Model Hub and subject them to our proposed method.

6.2   C OMPARISON WITH BASELINE

In this experiment, we deploy our proposed method to investigate a target model pretrained on the
CIFAR-10 dataset (Krizhevsky, 2009). Comprised of 60,000 color images, each of size 32 × 32, the
CIFAR-10 dataset is partitioned into 10 distinct classes with 6,000 images allocated to each class.
The dataset is further divided into a training set of 50,000 images and a test set of 10,000 images.
For the architecture of the target model, we utilize a Simplified DLA (Deep Layer Aggregation)
framework (Yu et al., 2018). We use 45,000 images from the training set for training. The target
model achieves an accuracy of 94.9% on the test set.


Table 1: Comparison between the proposed method and corpus-based method (for first five classes
in CIFAR-10 target model.)
      CIFAR-10 class names               Corpus-based approach                  The proposed approach
           airplane             airliner, wing, warplane, military plane                planes
                                 convertible, sports car, minivan, beach
            automobile                                                                     car
                                wagon, station wagon, wagon, estate car
                                   little blue heron, Egretta, caerulea,
                bird                    jay, jacamar, magpie, junco,             bird sitting on a branch
                                  snowbird, ostrich, Struthio camelus
                                      tabby cat, Persian cat, Siamese
                cat                                                                        cat
                                         cat, Egyptian cat, tiger cat
                                       hartebeest, impala, Aepyceros
               deer                                                              deer standing in a field
                                              melampus, gazelle


We enumerate through the 1,000 class names in ImageNet as the initial descriptions. For each
target class in the target model, the search algorithm terminates within two iterations after hitting a
saturation point where all generated images get classified into the correct class. The outcomes of
the first five classes are shown in Table 1. We also apply the corpus-based approach for the same
investigation and show its results in the same table for comparison.
Note that we directly take the outcome of the investigation without any manual post-processing.
Outcomes such as “bird sitting on a branch” and “deer standing in a field” can be manually shortened
further to “bird” and “deer”.
Due to the possibility of using various expressions to describe the same object, we manually match
the results of our investigation with the class names in CIFAR-10 for validation. Our findings indi-
cate that the proposed method successfully determines the correct domain for all classes. In contrast,
the corpus-based approach misclassifies one class, labeling “truck” as “entertainment center”.


Table 2: Comparison between the proposed method and corpus-based method (for first five classes
in Places365 target model.)
      Places365 class names             Corpus-based approach                    The proposed approach
              airfield           airliner, wing, warplane, military plane         airplane on the runway
          airplane cabin           cinema, movie theater, movie house           row of seats in an airplane
         airport terminal                 church, church building                     airport terminal
              alcove            church, church building, triumphal arch            room with arch frame
               alley           streetcar, tram, tramcar, trolley, trolley car          a narrow alley


In a parallel experiment, we apply our method to a target model pretrained on the Places365
dataset (Zhou et al., 2017), utilizing the WideResNet architecture (Zagoruyko & Komodakis, 2016).
The standard training set for Places365 contains approximately 1.8 million images, distributed
across 365 diverse scene categories, with each category hosting up to 5,000 images. This target
model achieves a top-1 accuracy of 54.65% and a top-5 accuracy of 85.07% on the test set.


                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We carry out experiments using two different sets of initial descriptions. The first set utilizes the
1,000 class names from ImageNet, while the second set starts with the generic term “place”. Both
versions yield identical results in terms of identifying the target model’s domain. However, using
ImageNet class names as starting points require up to 8 iterations to terminate, whereas the “place”
description takes a maximum of just 2 iterations.
The results for the first five classes are presented in Table 2. For comparison, we also include the
outcomes obtained using the traditional corpus-based approach in the same table. We validate the
findings by manually comparing them with the class names in the Places365 dataset. Our proposed
method accurately identifies the domain for 360 out of the 365 classes. In contrast, the corpus-based
approach correctly identifies the domain for only 159 classes.

6.3    P ERFORMANCE IN F OLLOW- UP I NVESTIGATION

To further assess the effectiveness of our proposed method, we perform a follow-up investigation
using model cloning. We take the class descriptions obtained from our initial investigation and
use them to generate a set of images using the Description Decoder G. These images serve as an
auxiliary dataset for the cloning process.
We use the same target model with a simplified DLA architecture, as discussed in Section 6.2, for the
cloning process. Since the investigator accesses the target model as a black-box without knowledge
of the model’s architecture, we use a different model, GoogLeNet (Szegedy et al., 2015), as the
architecture for the newly cloned model.


                 Table 3: Performance in follow-up investigation: model cloning.
                Target     Scenario 1:    Scenario 2:         Scenario 3:          Scenario 4:
               original    CIFAR-10      corpus-based      proposed method      proposed method
      Class
               accuracy     (cloning)      (cloning)           (cloning)     (independent training)
  airplane      95.3%         84.5%          35.8%               90.4%               98.1%
 automobile     97.8%         90.7%          44.6%               85.5%               98.5%
     bird       92.8%         68.1%          15.2%               75.1%               93.3%
      cat       88.6%         74.7%          41.3%               84.2%               93.8%
     deer       96.6%         80.8%          46.5%               80.3%               92.5%
     dog        91.9%         69.2%          54.0%               83.6%               95.0%
     frog       97.4%         86.2%          20.1%               82.5%               93.4%
    horse       96.5%         78.5%          31.1%               86.0%               93.0%
     ship       96.0%         90.7%          43.2%               91.9%               97.9%
    truck       96.4%         89.8%          23.2%               88.5%               96.8%
  Average       94.9%        81.3%          35.5%               84.8%                95.2%


We carry out the experiment in four different scenarios:
• Since the target model was trained using 45,000 training images from CIFAR-10, we use the
  remaining 5,000 training images for model cloning. This scenario serves as a reference.
• We use the investigation results to generate 500 images for each class, totaling 5,000 images, and
  use them for model cloning. The conventional cloning method is applied, meaning the labels of
  the images are predictions made by the target model on these generated images.
• Instead of using the conventional cloning process, a new model is independently trained using the
  50,000 generated images and their corresponding class labels.
• For comparison, we also sample 5,000 images from the subset selected by the corpus-based ap-
  proach from ImageNet and use them for cloning.
From Table 3, we observe that the cloning performance is significantly better with our proposed
method than with the corpus-based approach, when both use the same number of images (5,000)
for cloning. Additionally, our method’s performance even exceeds that of the reference scenario,
which employs a subset of the original CIFAR-10 dataset for cloning. When the model is trained
independently using generated 50,000 images, its accuracy even outperforms the target model’s
accuracy on the CIFAR-10 test set.


                                                 7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


6.4      P ERFORMANCE ON F INE - GRAINED D OMAINS

To access the proposed method’s capability in investigating fine-grained domains, we conduct an
experiment on a facial attributes classifier designed for binary classification of 40 fine-grained face
attributes. The target model, based on the MobileNet architecture (Howard et al., 2017), is trained
on the CelebA (Liu et al., 2015) dataset and achieves an accuracy of 90.12% on the test set.
From Table 4, it becomes evident that our proposed method successfully identifies the common
theme of face images across all classes and uncovers the underlying domain of most attributes 3 .
However, the method encounters limitations as it starts to focus on face portraits in its early itera-
tions. This focus hampers its ability to effectively find attributes like “chubby” or “wearing neck-
lace” which are more accurately determined by features beyond the facial area in the target model.
Furthermore, the algorithm reveals some biases in the generative model; for instance, when inves-
tigating the attribute “black hair”, the output skews towards “woman, black hair” likely because
the model disproportionately generated images of women during that iteration. Another intriguing
finding is with the attribute “big nose” where the search converges not to “big nose” but to “sims
4” presumably because characters in Sims 4 often have exaggerated facial features. More insights
related to these phenomena will be discussed in Section 6.6.


                       Table 4: Performance on fine-grained face attributes classifier.
     Attributes               Investigation outcomes                Attributes           Investigation outcomes
 5 o Clock Shadow                 man, short beard                     Male               man, beard, mustache
 Arched Eyebrows              woman, thick eyebrows             Mouth Slightly Open       woman, opened mouth
     Attractive                woman, ultra-realistic                Mustache                man, mustache
  Bags Under Eyes                person, crazy eyes                Narrow Eyes                    person
        Bald                      man, bald head                    No Beard                man, tie and shirt
        Bangs               woman, long hair and bangs              Oval Face                    woman
      Big Lips                  woman, red lipstick                  Pale Skin              woman, pale skin
      Big Nose                      man, sims 4                    Pointy Nose                man, thin face
     Black Hair                  woman, black hair               Receding Hairline        man, receding hairline
     Blond Hair                 woman, blond hair                  Rosy Cheeks                   woman
       Blurry                  portrait, hyperrealism               Sideburns                  man, beard
    Brown Hair                  woman, brown hair                     Smiling                person, smiling
  Bushy Eyebrows                  man, mustache                    Straight Hair            woman, long hair
       Chubby                          person                       Wavy Hair               woman, curly hair
    Double Chin                        person                    Wearing Earrings           woman, earrings
     Eyeglasses                   person, glasses                  Wearing Hat                 person, hat
       Goatee                       man, beard                   Wearing Lipstick          woman, red lipstick
     Gray Hair                     man, gray hair                Wearing Necklace                woman
   Heavy Makeup                woman, bright makeup              Wearing Necktie                   man
 High Cheekbones           woman, pronounced cheekbones               Young                   person, young


Notably, our method also sheds light on potential flaws and biases within the target model. For
example, the target model appears to classify the attribute “no beard” based not solely on facial
features, but also on attire. Consequently, images generated with the description “man, tie, and
shirt” are consistently classified as “no beard”. This highlights the method’s capability to uncover
issues like overfitting or embedded backdoors within the model.

6.5      I NVESTIGATION OF U NKNOWN M ODELS IN H UGGING FACE

In this section, we take our approach into real-world applicability. We select some models from the
Hugging Face Model Hub as target models. We carried out an investigation on a binary image clas-
sifier designed to ascertain the presence of pneumonia in chest X-ray images4 . While the proposed
method could not distinguish between positive and negative classes, it successfully identified that
both domains pertain to “black and white chest x-ray images, showcasing ribs”.
   3
       The term “portrait” is omitted from the table since it appears across all investigative outcomes.
   4
       https://huggingface.co/dima806/chest_xray_pneumonia_detection.


                                                          8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Additionally, we evaluated a brand-specific shoe classifier that categorizes images into “Nike”, “Adi-
das”, and “Converse” classes5 . Our approach not only discerned that the target model focuses on the
shoe domain but also accurately identified the brand associated with each class.
We further extended our evaluation to a food classifier capable of distinguishing among 100 different
types of food6 . Our method successfully identified the correct domain for 97 of these classes. It
performed well on fine-grained classifications such as “deviled eggs” and “Greek salad”. However,
the method fell short on three specific soup classes: “french onion soup”, “hot and sour soup”, and
“miso soup”. Upon closer inspection, we found that the limitations might lie in the image encoder
component, which tends to describe the soup’s ingredients rather than its conventional name.

6.6      D ISCUSSION

Robustness of the proposed approach. One key advantage of our algorithm is its self-correcting
effect. When the algorithm discovers a description generating images that predominantly fall into the
target class i, it acts as a catalyst, magnifying the search for similar effective descriptions. This leads
to a rapid accumulation of accurate descriptions centered around class i. Thus, even a single suc-
cessful “seed” description can initiate a cascade of effective descriptions, steering the search swiftly
towards the target. However, incorrect descriptions are naturally eliminated within an iteration or
two, as images generated from them fail to be classified to the target class i. This effect ensures
that the algorithm remains focused, even if incorrect descriptions are abundant initially. Despite
its efficiency, the algorithm may converge to a local optimum if the initial descriptions are general
and the search space is large. Our Description Enricher attempts to mitigate this, but it requires
more computational effort and can slow down convergence. Future work may seek to optimize this
balance between investigation effectiveness and computational efficiency.

Efficiency of the proposed approach. Efficiency is a notable consideration in the deployment of
our algorithm. Utilizing computationally intensive models like Stable Diffusion, CLIP and BLIP
across a wide range of initial descriptions can be resource-intensive. One avenue for optimization
is the consolidation of similar object classes into composite descriptions, thereby allowing multiple
objects to be generated in a single image. This could reduce the number of unique descriptions
and hence the overall computational cost. However, implementing such a strategy would depend on
the robustness of the generative model. Future research could explore these avenues for optimizing
efficiency without compromising algorithmic effectiveness.

7       C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we have presented a novel approach for forensic investigation of machine learning
models that centers on determining not only the general data domain but also the nuanced attributes
within it. Traditional methods, while effective in identifying broader categories, falter when tasked
with discerning specific attributes. Our method offers a way to bridge this gap through a novel
domain search technique. Leveraging the strengths of the Stable Diffusion generative model and
the image-to-text models, we offer a workflow for iterative, feedback-driven investigation into the
unknown realms of a machine learning model’s data domain. Our empirical evaluation showcases
the method’s proficiency in identifying details within a model’s input domain, establishing its utility
in a wide range of applications including model transparency, validation, and bias detection. This
provides an invaluable toolkit for deepening our understanding of machine learning models, opening
up avenues for more robust, transparent, and equitable machine learning systems.

Future Work: While our method marks a significant step forward in machine learning model
investigation, several promising directions for future work remain. These include expanding the
approach to other types of data like text and audio, refining the stability and speed of the iterative
process, and exploring ways to automate the handling of multi-modal data domains. Another key
avenue for future work would be to examine the ethical considerations and potential misuse of such
investigative techniques, to ensure that they are applied responsibly.

    5
        https://huggingface.co/xma77/shoes_model.
    6
        https://huggingface.co/Epl1/food_classifier.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Fei-Fei Li. Imagenet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In CVPR, pp. 248–255, 2009.
Matt Fredrikson, Somesh Jha, and Thomas Ristenpart. Model inversion attacks that exploit confi-
 dence information and basic countermeasures. In ACM CCS, pp. 1322–1333, 2015.
Andrew G. Howard, Menglong Zhu, Bo Chen, Dmitry Kalenichenko, Weijun Wang, Tobias Weyand,
  Marco Andreetto, and Hartwig Adam. Mobilenets: Efficient convolutional neural networks for
  mobile vision applications. CoRR, 2017.
Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes. In ICLR, 2014.
Alex Krizhevsky. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Technical report, Univ.
  Toronto, 2009.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Caiming Xiong, and Steven C. H. Hoi. BLIP: bootstrapping language-image
  pre-training for unified vision-language understanding and generation. In ICML, volume 162, pp.
  12888–12900, 2022.
Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep learning face attributes in the wild.
  In ICCV, pp. 3730–3738, 2015.
Nicolas Papernot, Patrick D. McDaniel, Ian J. Goodfellow, Somesh Jha, Z. Berkay Celik, and Anan-
  thram Swami. Practical black-box attacks against machine learning. In AsiaCCS, pp. 506–519,
  2017.
Pharmapsychotic. Clip interrogator. https://github.com/pharmapsychotic/clip-interrogator, 2023.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya
  Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In ICML,
  volume 139, pp. 8748–8763, 2021.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. arXiv preprint, 2112.10752, 2021.
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedi-
  cal image segmentation. In MICCAI, volume 9351, pp. 234–241, 2015.
Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade Gordon, Ross Wightman, Mehdi
  Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, Patrick Schramowski,
  Srivatsa Kundurthy, Katherine Crowson, Ludwig Schmidt, Robert Kaczmarczyk, and Jenia Jit-
  sev. LAION-5B: an open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models. In
  NeurIPS, 2022.
Reza Shokri, Marco Stronati, Congzheng Song, and Vitaly Shmatikov. Membership inference at-
  tacks against machine learning models. In IEEE S&P, pp. 3–18, 2017.
Christian Szegedy, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, Pierre Sermanet, Scott E. Reed, Dragomir Anguelov,
  Dumitru Erhan, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Andrew Rabinovich. Going deeper with convolutions.
  In CVPR, pp. 1–9, 2015.
Ziqi Yang, Jiyi Zhang, Ee-Chien Chang, and Zhenkai Liang. Neural network inversion in adversarial
  setting via background knowledge alignment. In ACM CCS, pp. 225–240, 2019.
Fisher Yu, Dequan Wang, Evan Shelhamer, and Trevor Darrell. Deep layer aggregation. In CVPR,
  pp. 2403–2412, 2018.
Sergey Zagoruyko and Nikos Komodakis. Wide residual networks. In BMVC, 2016.
Jiyi Zhang, Han Fang, Hwee Kuan Lee, and Ee-Chien Chang. Finding meaningful distributions of
   ML black-boxes under forensic investigation. CoRR, 2023.
Bolei Zhou, Agata Lapedriza, Aditya Khosla, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. Places: A 10 mil-
  lion image database for scene recognition. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
  Intelligence, 2017.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX

A.1    E XAMPLE OF THE S EARCH P ROCESS

• Start with a broad description, pinitial . Supposing the investigator suspects the target model recog-
  nizes various birds, they could begin with “bird”. Without specific knowledge, using ImageNet’s
  categories can be a good fallback.
• Generate m images from pinitial . From “bird”, the Description Decoder may produce images of
  sparrows, eagles, and parrots.
• Submit images to M, and identify those classified as class i. Suppose the target class takes images
  of “parrots”. Out of the images, those depicting parrots would be retained.
• Use the Image Encoder to extract descriptions from these images. The parrot images may produce
  descriptions like “green parrot”, “parrot on branch”, and “flying parrot”.
• Generate a new batch of images based on the descriptions and send them to target model for
  classification.
• If there are too many descriptions, the Description Grouper could take the aforementioned descrip-
  tions and group them to “parrot”. Spawn a new batch of images based on the refined description.
• If “parrot” yields a limited variety of parrots and is unable to produce images that can be correctly
  classified by M, the Description Enricher could suggest “parrot, flying” or “parrot, tropical”.
• Terminate if after several iterations, the majority of generated images are consistently classified as
  the target class by M, and no significant improvement is observed, the algorithm would halt and
  propose the best description.

A.2    E XAMPLE OF THE I NVESTIGATION ON CIFAR-10 T RAINED TARGET M ODEL

To illustrate the investigation of the CIFAR-10 trained target model, we use one of the class “au-
tomobile” as an example. In the final iteration of the search algorithm, we generate approximately
200 images. Each one of these images is correctly classified by the target model as belonging to the
“automobile” class. Here we present text descriptions for three of these images, generated by the
image encoder:
• there is a silver car parked in a parking lot near a field, glass and metal : : peugot onyx, valiant,
  high resolution auction photo, by Lattanzio Gambara, extremely luminous bright design, tufted
  softly, auto and design magazine, milk duds, hawkeye, fins, ’20
• arafed old car parked on the side of the road with a surfboard on top, by Antanas Sutkus, profes-
  sional product shot, ds, the odyssey, inspired by Pieter Franciscus Dierckx, full width, nomadic
  urbanism, with great domes and arches, archive photograph, beaver, left - hand drive, prototype
• arafed old car with a flat tire on the street, unsplash transparent, polished : :, the flying dutchman,
  360º, rubber hose, inspired by Victor Meirelles, black and white photo.iso200, left - hand drive,
  race style, on a hot australian day, wrecked cars, mr bean, hyper photo realistic
While the Description Summarizer and Description Grouper correctly combine all the descriptions
into a single token “car”, we also include a more detailed version of the summary here for your
reference.
“A long and detailed list of sentences, each describing a car and its associated attributes. The
descriptions include both physical aspects of the cars and artistic elements like photography styles
or inspirations. Here’s a summary to encapsulate the essence of the list:
The sentences offer rich, descriptive visuals of various cars, each with its own unique attributes
and context. Cars range from vintage to modern, from Peugots to Porsches, and they are situated
in diverse settings like city streets, parking lots, and gravel roads. The cars are captured through
various artistic lenses, including high-quality product shots, hyper-realistic renders, and vintage
film styles. There are also many references to the photos’ artistic inspirations, from classic painters
to contemporary digital artists.”
Statistic of the descriptions:


                                                   11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


• Diverse Car Models Mentioned: Peugot Onyx, Porsche 911, Alfa Romeo Giulia, Pontiac Sedan,
  etc.
• Photography Styles: High-resolution, Monochrome, Anamorphic widescreen, Hyper-realistic, etc.
• Artistic Inspirations: Victor Meirelles, Pieter Franciscus Dierckx, Eero Snellman, Carl Gustaf
  Pilo, etc.
• Settings: Parking lots, Side of the road, City streets, Near fields, etc. Number of References to
  Photo Platforms or Magazines: Unsplash, 500px, Auto and Design Magazine, etc.

A.3   CLIP S KIP PARAMETER

Stable Diffusion relies on the CLIP text embedder, a neural network, to transform text descriptions
into embeddings. This process involves multiple layers, each becoming progressively more specific.
The CLIP text embedder used with Stable Diffusion 1.5, comprises 12 layers of text embedding,
each composed of matrices of varying sizes. CLIP skip determines when the CLIP network should
cease processing the text description. The CLIP skip setting influences the level of generality of the
generated images. A higher CLIP skip value leads to an earlier halt in processing, resulting in more
general images, while a lower value results in deeper processing, yielding more specific images. In
our proposed method, the Description Decoder G employs a larger CLIP Skip value during the early
iterations to enhance generation diversity. As the iterations progress, we adjust the CLIP Skip value
to a smaller setting, allowing for the identification of specific, fine-grained classes.


                                                 12
