Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C HAIN - OF -V ERIFICATION R EDUCES H ALLUCINATION
IN L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         Generation of plausible yet incorrect factual information, termed hallucination,
         is an unsolved issue in large language models. We study the ability of language
         models to deliberate on the responses they give in order to correct their mistakes.
         We develop the Chain-of-Verification (C OV E) method whereby the model first (i)
         drafts an initial response; then (ii) plans verification questions to fact-check its
         draft; (iii) answers those questions independently so the answers are not biased
         by other responses; and (iv) generates its final verified response. In experiments,
         we show C OV E decreases hallucinations across a variety of tasks, from list-based
         questions from Wikidata, closed book MultiSpanQA and longform text generation.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Large Language Models (LLMs) are trained on huge corpora of text documents with billions of
tokens of text. It has been shown that as the number of model parameters is increased, performance
at tasks such as closed book QA improve in accuracy, and larger models can generate more correct
factual statements (Radford et al., 2019; Petroni et al., 2019). However, even the largest models can
still fail, particularly on lesser known torso and tail distribution facts (Sun et al., 2023a), i.e. those
that occur relatively rarely in the training corpora. In those cases where the model is incorrect, they
instead generate an alternative response which is typically plausible looking (e.g., a similar entity, but
an incorrect one). These factually incorrect generations are referred to as hallucinations (Maynez
et al., 2020). Further, in longform tasks consisting of generating multiple sentences or paragraphs, the
hallucination problem can be exacerbated due to the issue of exposure bias (Wang & Sennrich, 2020).
The current wave of language modeling research goes beyond next word prediction, and has focused
on their ability to reason. Improved performance in reasoning tasks can be gained by encouraging
language models to first generate internal thoughts or reasoning chains before responding (Wei et al.,
2022; Adolphs et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022; Lanchantin et al., 2023), as well as updating their
initial response through self-critique (Press et al., 2022; Madaan et al., 2023). In this work we
follow this line of research to study how and when language-model-based reasoning can be used to
reduce hallucinations. We develop an approach, called Chain-of-Verification (CoVe) which, given
an initial draft response, first plans verification questions to check its work, and then systematically
answers those questions in order to finally produce an improved revised response. We find that
independent verification questions tend to provide more accurate facts than those in the original
longform answer, and hence improve the correctness of the overall response. We study variations on
this recipe across a range of tasks: from list-based questions, closed booked QA and longform text
generation. We first propose a joint approach for generating the entire verification chain left-to-right,
which improves performance and decreases hallucinations compared to the baseline language model.
However, models that attend to existing hallucinations in the context from their own generations tend
to repeat the hallucinations. Hence we also introduce further improvements with factored variants
which separate out the verification chain steps, in terms of which context is attended to. We show
how these factored variants give further performance gains across all three tasks considered.

2    R ELATED W ORK
Hallucination is a general problem in language model generations that appears across many tasks,
from summarization (Maynez et al., 2020) to open-domain dialogue (Roller et al., 2020), and has not


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Query

     Name some politicians who were born in NY, New York.

     1. Baseline Response

     Here are some politicians who were born in NY, New York:
     1. Hillary Clinton - former secretary of state and former Democratic presidential nominee
     2. Donald Trump - former president of the United States
     3. Michael Bloomberg - former Mayor of New York City and former Democratic presidential candidate
      … <list continues..>

     2. Plan Verifications                     3. Execute Verifications

                                              Hillary Clinton was born in Chicago, Illinois, United
  - Where was Hillary Clinton born?
                                              States on October 26, 1947.
  - Where was Donald Trump born?             Donald Trump was born on June 14, 1946, in Queens,
                                             New York City, New York, United States
  - Where was Michael Bloomberg born?
                                             Michael Bloomberg was born on February 14, 1942, in
  … <questions continue..>                   Boston, Massachusetts, United States.
                                                                          …
    4. Final Verified Response

      Here are some politicians who were born in NY, New York:
      1. Donald Trump - former president of the United States
      2. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez - Democratic member of the U.S. House of Representatives
       … <list continues..>


Figure 1: Chain-of-Verification (CoVe) method. Given a user query, a large language model generates
a baseline response that may contain inaccuracies, e.g. factual hallucinations. We show a query here
which failed for ChatGPT (see section 12 for more details). To improve this, CoVe first generates a
plan of a set of verification questions to ask, and then executes that plan by answering them and hence
checking for agreement. We find that individual verification questions are typically answered with
higher accuracy than the original accuracy of the facts in the original longform generation. Finally,
the revised response takes into account the verifications. The factored version of CoVe answers
verification questions such that they cannot condition on the original response, avoiding repetition
and improving performance.


been resolved by simply scaling up training data or model size (Zhang et al., 2023). For a survey of
the hallucination issue, see Ji et al. (2023) and Ye et al. (2023). A majority of the methods for reducing
hallucination can be divided into roughly three categories: training-time correction, generation-time
correction and via augmentation (tool-use).
In training-time correction methods, an attempt is made to improve the raw left-to-right generations
of an encoder-decoder or decoder-only language model by either training or otherwise adjusting
the model weights to decrease the probability of hallucinated generations. This includes using
reinforcement learning (Roit et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023), constrastive learning (Chern et al., 2023b;
Sun et al., 2023b) and other methods (Li et al., 2023; Narayan et al., 2023).
In generation-time correction, a common theme is to make reasoning decisions “on top of” the base
LLM in order to make them more reliable. For example, by considering the probabilities of the
generated tokens (Mielke et al., 2022; Kadavath et al., 2022). In Manakul et al. (2023) multiple
samples are drawn from the model to detect hallucinations. In Varshney et al. (2023) hallucinations
are identified using low confidence scores, and their correctness is checked through a validation
procedure, mitigated, and then the generation is continued. An alternative to using the confidence
scores is to leverage inconsistencies in the LLMs output to detect hallucination. Cohen et al. (2023)
show that using inconsistencies for QA tasks can outperform using confidence scores for hallucination
detection. Cohen et al. (2023) simulate an interactive multi-agent LM vs. LM debate setup to detect


                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


hallucinations for factoid QA, Agrawal et al. (2023) check for hallucinated references, while Mündler
et al. (2023) extract relational triples from generations and verify them against another LLM. C OV E
also uses a related self-consistency approach but we show our approach can correct hallucinated facts
in longform generations by generating and answering verification questions by solely using the same
LLM.
A third approach is to use external tools to help mitigate hallucinations, rather than relying solely on
the abilities of the language model itself. For example, retrieval-augmented generation can decrease
hallucinations by using factual documents for grounding (Shuster et al., 2021; Jiang et al., 2023b;
Yu et al., 2023) or chain-of-thought verification (Zhao et al., 2023). Other approaches include using
tools for fact-checking (Chern et al., 2023a; Galitsky, 2023; Peng et al., 2023), or linking to external
documents with attribution (Menick et al., 2022; Rashkin et al., 2023; Gao et al., 2023).
There are also a number of related works in improving reasoning for logical and mathematical tasks,
even if they do not address reducing hallucination explicitly. Several approaches have been shown to
improve results with extended reasoning steps by the system, such as chain-of-thought (Wei et al.,
2022), deductive verification (Ling et al., 2023), and self-verification (Miao et al., 2023; Jiang et al.,
2023a; Weng et al., 2022). The latter tries to predict the (masked) question given the answer for math
problems, and use that as evidence that this is the correct solution.


3     C HAIN - OF -V ERIFICATION

Our approach assumes access to a base LLM that – despite potentially being prone to hallucination –
is capable of being prompted with general instructions in either a few-shot or zero-shot fashion. A key
assumption of our method is that this language model, when suitably prompted, can both generate
and execute a plan of how to verify itself in order to check its own work, and finally incorporate this
analysis into an improved response.
Our overall process, which we call Chain-of-Verification (CoVe), thus performs four core steps:

      1. Generate Baseline Response: Given a query, generate the response using the LLM.

      2. Plan Verifications: Given both query and baseline response, generate a list of verification
         questions that could help to self-analyze if there are any mistakes in the original response.

      3. Execute Verifications: Answer each verification question in turn, and hence check the answer
         against the original response to check for inconsistencies or mistakes.

      4. Generate Final Verified Response: Given the discovered inconsistencies (if any), generate a
         revised response incorporating the verification results.

Each of these steps is performed by prompting the same LLM in different ways to obtain the desired
response. While steps (1), (2) and (4) all can be invoked with a single prompt, we investigate
variations of step (3) including joint, 2-step and factored versions. These variants either involve a
single prompt, two prompts or else independent prompts per question, where more sophisticated
decomposition can yield improved results.
We describe these steps in more detail below. An overview of the approach is illustrated in Figure 1,
and in the Appendix in Figure 3.


3.1    BASELINE R ESPONSE

Given a query, we generate left-to-right as usual using the LLM, with no special tricks. While this is
the first step in the CoVe pipeline, it also serves as the baseline we wish to improve in our experiments
(i.e., we will directly compare this baseline response with the final verified response from our overall
method).
Given such baseline generations are typically prone to hallucination, CoVe attempts to identify these
hallucinations, and correct them, in the following steps.


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.2   P LAN V ERIFICATIONS

Conditioned on the original query and the baseline response, the model is prompted to generate
a series of verification questions that test the factual claims in the original baseline response. For
example if part of a longform model response contains the statement “The Mexican–American War
was an armed conflict between the United States and Mexico from 1846 to 1848”, then one possible
verification question to check those dates could be “When did the Mexican American war start and
end?”. We note that verification questions are not templated and the language model is free to phrase
these in any form it wants, and they also do not have to closely match the phrasing of the original text.
In our experiments, we perform such verification planning by providing a few-shot prompt of
(response, verification) demonstrations to our LLM. See section 11 for the few-shot prompts we will
use in our experiments. We note it is also possible with a sufficiently performant instruction-following
LLM that this could be performed zero-shot.

3.3   E XECUTE V ERIFICATIONS

Given the planned verification questions, the next step is to answer them in order to assess if any
hallucinations exist. While techniques such as retrieval-augmentation could be used in this process,
such as verification via search engine, in this work we do not explore tool-use. Instead, we consider
only using the LLM itself in all steps of CoVe, hence the model is used to check its own work. We
investigate several variants of verification execution, called joint, 2-Step, factored and factor+revise.

Joint In the joint method, the planning and execution (steps 2 and 3) are accomplished by using a
single LLM prompt, whereby the few-shot demonstrations include both verification questions and
their answers immediately after the questions. In this approach separate prompts are not needed.

2-Step A potential disadvantage of the joint method is that because the verification questions must
condition on the baseline response in the LLM context, and the method is joint, the verification
answers have to condition on the initial response as well. This may increase the likelihood of
repetition, another known issue of modern LLMs (Holtzman et al., 2019). This means the verification
questions might hallucinate similarly to the original baseline response, which defeats the purpose.
We hence instead separate the planning and execution into separate steps, both with their own LLM
prompt. The planning prompt conditions on the baseline response in the first step. The verification
questions generated from planning are answered in the second step, where crucially the context given
to the LLM prompt only contains the questions, and not the original baseline response and hence
cannot repeat those answers directly.

Factored Another, more sophisticated approach, is to answer all questions independently as separate
prompts. Again, crucially, those prompts do not contain the original baseline response and are hence
not prone to simply copying or repeating it. The factored approach has the further advantage of
removing any potential interference not only from the baseline response, but also between answer
contexts, and is somewhat related to the recent (concurrent) work of Radhakrishnan et al. (2023)
for subquestion answering by factored decomposition, hence we adopt their naming. It can also
potentially handle more verification questions by virtue of them not all having to fit with the same
single context. While this is potentially more computationally expensive, requiring the execution
of many more LLM prompts, they can be run in parallel, and hence be batched. In order to do
this, we first have to take the set of generated questions from subsection 3.2 and parse them into
separate questions, which is a relatively easy task as the few-shot demonstrations we provide indicate
they should be generated as a comma-separated list. We can then split them out into separate LLM
prompts.

Factor+Revise After answering the verification questions, the overall CoVe pipeline then has to
either implicitly or explicitly cross-check whether those answers indicate an inconsistency with the
original responses. In the factor+revise approach, we execute this as a deliberate step via an extra
LLM prompt, which may make it easier for the final system to reason about this step explicitly.
Differently to answering the verification questions, the cross-checking phase needs to condition
on both the baseline response and the verification question and answer. We thus execute this as
separate LLM prompts, one “cross-check” prompt for each question, with again a set of few-shot


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


demonstrations showing the desired output. For example if the original baseline response contained
the phrase “It followed in the wake of the 1845 U.S. annexation of Texas. . . ” and CoVe generated a
verification question When did Texas secede from Mexico? which was answered with 1836 then an
inconsistency should be detected by this step.

3.4      F INAL V ERIFIED R ESPONSE

Finally, the improved response that takes verification into account is generated. This is executed by a
final few-shot prompt where the context takes into account all of the previous reasoning steps, the
baseline response and verification question answer pairs, so that the corrections can take place. If the
Factor+Revise approach is used from subsection 3.3 then the output of the cross-check inconsistency
detection is provided as well.


4       E XPERIMENTS

We use various experimental benchmarks to measure the efficacy of CoVe in reducing hallucination,
comparing against a number of baselines.

4.1      TASKS

The benchmarks we use range from list-based questions where the required answer is a set of entities,
to where the answer is a longform generation of multiple freeform sentences.

4.1.1      W IKIDATA
We start by testing CoVe on a set of automatically generated questions using the Wikidata API1 . We
create list questions of the form: “Who are some [Profession]s who were born in [City]?”.
For example, “Who are some politicians who were born in Boston?”. The answer to these
questions is a set of entities, where the gold list is obtained from the Wikidata knowledge base. This
results in a dataset of 56 test questions, each typically containing ∼600 known gold entities, but
typically an LLM will produce a much shorter list. We then use the precision metric (micro-averaged)
to measure performance, in addition to reporting the averaged number of positive and negative entities
produced.

4.1.2      W IKI -C ATEGORY L IST
We then proceed to a harder set-generation task. We use the Q UEST (Malaviya et al., 2023) dataset
that was created using Wikipedia Category lists. We convert these category names to questions by
simply prepending a “Name some”. Owing to the varied questions such as Name some Mexican
animated horror films or Name some Endemic orchids of Vietnam we believe this task can pose a
greater challenge. We collate all examples in the dataset that do not require logical operations to
create a set of 55 test questions each having 8̃ answers. Similar to the Wikidata task, we measure
precision (micro-averaged) to measure performance, in addition to reporting the averaged number of
positive and negative entities produced.

4.1.3      M ULTI S PAN QA
We next test our approach on an reading comprehension benchmark, MultiSpanQA (Li et al., 2022).
MultiSpanQA comprises of questions that have multiple independent answers (derived from a series
of multiple discontiguous spans in the text, with questions originally from the Natural Questions
dataset). We consider a closed-book setting, where we do not provide supporting documents, and
hence consider a subset of questions which are factoid-based, so that our base LLM is more likely to
be able to answer them. We thus use a test set of 418 questions with shorter answers per span (up to
3 tokens per item). For example, Q: Who invented the first printing press and in what
year?, A: Johannes Gutenberg, 1450.
    1
        https://query.wikidata.org/


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Test Precision and average number of positive and negative (hallucination) entities for
list-based questions on the Wikidata and Wiki-Category list tasks.

                                      Wikidata                         Wiki-Category list
                                      (Easier)                             (Harder)
   LLM                  Method              Prec. (↑)   Pos.   Neg.       Prec. (↑)   Pos.   Neg.
   Llama 2 70B Chat     Zero-shot           0.12        0.55   3.93       0.05        0.35   6.85
   Llama 2 70B Chat     CoT                 0.08        0.75   8.92       0.03        0.30   11.1
   Llama 65B            Few-shot            0.17        0.59   2.95       0.12        0.55   4.05
   Llama 65B            CoVe (joint)        0.29        0.41   0.98       0.15        0.30   1.69
   Llama 65B            CoVe (two-step)     0.36        0.38   0.68       0.21        0.50   0.52
   Llama 65B            CoVe (factored)     0.32        0.38   0.79       0.22        0.52   1.52


4.1.4     L ONGFORM GENERATION OF B IOGRAPHIES
We next validate the performance of CoVe on longform text generation. In this setting, we evaluate
our method on generating biographies, adopting the benchmark proposed in by Min et al. (2023).
Here the model is simply prompted to generate a biography of a selected entity using the prompt:
“Tell me a bio of <entity>”. We evaluate the efficacy of our approach using the FACT S CORE
metric (Min et al., 2023) developed in that work, which uses a retrieval-augmented language model
to fact-check the response (Instruct-Llama, “Llama + Retrieval + NP”), which they showed correlates
well with human judgments.

4.2     BASELINES

We use Llama 65B, a strong open model as our base LLM (Touvron et al., 2023a), and use greedy
decoding for all models. As Llama 65B is not instruction fine-tuned, we employ few-shot examples
particular to each task for measuring performance on each of our benchmarks. This serves as our
main baseline which CoVe tries to improve upon. CoVe uses the same Llama 65B base, but includes,
for the same few-shot examples, demonstrations of verification questions and final verified responses,
following Figure 1 and section 3. Thus, we measure the ability to improve over the original baseline
response for the same LLM. For CoVe, we compare different variants, particularly the joint and
factored versions on all tasks.
We also compare to Llama instruction fine-tuned models, for which we use Llama 2 (Touvron et al.,
2023b). We measure both zero-shot performance on the task, or zero-shot with chain-of-thought by
adding “Let’s think step by step” to the zero-shot prompt. We find that the instruction fine-tuned
models tend to generate extraneous content when queried. This can especially be a problem for the
list-based tasks. To deal with this we add an extra line to our prompt: “List only the answers
separated by a comma”. We also add another layer of post-processing to extract the answers by
using an off-the-shelf NER model to further avoid this issue as this helped. However, we still expect
few-shot to improve over this, especially for tasks like Multi-Span-QA where the answers are not all
named entities, and the few-shot examples effectively show the domain of the task.
For the longform generation of biographies we also compare to several existing model results reported
in Min et al. (2023), in particular InstructGPT (Ouyang et al., 2022), ChatGPT 2 and PerplexityAI 3 .

4.3     R ESULTS

We are interested in empirically answering the following research questions:

RQ1 Can C OV E effectively reduce the rate of hallucinatory content produced by the LLM?
RQ2 Can C OV E be used to fix or remove incorrect generations without decreasing the amount of
      correct content?
   2
       https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt
   3
       www.perplexity.ai


                                                   6
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            Table 2: Closed book MultiSpanQA test performance, comparing CoVe with various baselines.

                                     LLM                          Method                         F1 (↑)                 Prec.          Rec.
                                     Llama 2 70B Chat             Zero-shot                      0.20                   0.13           0.40
                                     Llama 2 70B Chat             CoT                            0.17                   0.11           0.37
                                     Llama 65B                    Few-shot                       0.39                   0.40           0.38
                                     Llama 65B                    CoVe (joint)                   0.46                   0.50           0.42
                                     Llama 65B                    CoVe (factored)                0.48                   0.50           0.46


  Table 3: Longform generation of biographies with metrics defined from Min et al. (2023). Models
  marked with ∗ are reported from previous work. FACT S CORE automatically computed using “Instruct-
  Llama” ( Retrieve → LM + NP), the best open-access model.

              LLM                                Method                                                            FACT S CORE. (↑)                Avg. # facts

              InstructGPT∗                       Zero-shot                                                         41.1                            26.3
              ChatGPT∗                           Zero-shot                                                         58.7                            34.7
              PerplexityAI∗                      Retrieval-based                                                   61.6                            40.8
              Llama 2 70B Chat                   Zero-shot                                                         41.3                            64.9
              Llama 2 70B Chat                   CoT                                                               41.1                            49.0
              Llama 65B                          Few-shot                                                          55.9                            16.6
              Llama 65B                          CoVe (joint)                                                      60.8                            12.8
              Llama 65B                          CoVe (factored)                                                   63.7                            11.7
              Llama 65B                          CoVe (factor+revise)                                              71.4                            12.3
              GPT-3                              Few-shot                                                          45.3                            15.6
              GPT-3 + ChatGPT                    ChatProtect Mündler et al. (2023)                                48.5                            14.6
              GPT-3 + InstructGPT                SCG-LL Manakul et al. (2023)                                      60.6                            6.0
              GPT-3 + DeBERTA                    SCG-NLI Manakul et al. (2023)                                     61.7                            6.3
              GPT-3 + InstructGPT                CoVe (factor+revise)                                              68.6                            9.0



                                                                    Llama Few-shot
                                                                    Llama CoVe (joint)
            0.8                                                     Llama CoVe (factored)                    0.8
                                                                    Llama CoVe (factor+revise)
                                                                    InstructGPT
            0.6                                                     ChatGPT                                  0.6
FactScore


                                                                                                 FactScore


                                                                    Perplexity.ai
                                                                    Llama 2 Chat Zero-shot
            0.4                                                     Llama 2 Chat CoT                         0.4

            0.2                                                                                              0.2

            0.0                                                                                              0.0
                  very rare   rare   medium    freq   very freq                                                     very rare   rare     medium     freq   very freq
                                      Rarity                                                                                              Rarity

  Figure 2: FACT S CORE performance distribution across head, torso and tail facts for CoVe variants
  and various baselines on longform generation of biographies.


  Our main results across the four benchmark tasks are given in Table 1, Table 2 and Table 3, and our
  main findings are as follows.
  CoVe improves precision on list-based answer tasks We find that CoVe provides large gains in
  precision on the list-based tasks, e.g. more than doubles the precision from the Llama 65B few-shot
  baseline for the Wikidata task (from 0.17 to 0.36). We find from the positive and negative breakdown
  that there is a large reduction in the number of hallucinated answers (negatives: 2.95 → 0.68) while
  only a relatively small reduction in the number of non-hallucinations (positives: 0.59 → 0.38).


                                                                              7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


CoVe improves performance on closed book QA We also find that CoVe brings improvements in
general QA problems, as measured on MultiSpanQA. We observe a 23% improvement in F1 over the
few-shot baseline (0.39 → 0.48), where the improvements come from gains in both precision and
recall.

CoVe improves precision on longform generation These results also extend to longform genera-
tion, where we actually see larger gains than in the QA setting. FACT S CORE increases 28% (55.9 →
71.4) from the few-shot baseline, with again only a relatively small reduction in average number of
facts provided (16.6 → 12.3). We also show the breakdown of improvements across facts in Figure 2,
where one can see CoVe improves results for both rare and more frequent facts.

Instruction-tuning and CoT do not reduce hallucinations We find that the few-shot baseline that
employs a pre-trained Llama model outperforms Llama-2-Chat, an instruction tuned model, across
all the tasks. The few-shot examples lead the model to give outputs in line with those expected for the
task, whereas general instruction tuning produces more hallucinations or incorrect outputs. Zero-shot
chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting also fails to improve the results for these tasks.

Factored and 2-step CoVe improve performance We observe a consistent performance improve-
ment across all tasks from applying the factored CoVe approach compared to joint CoVe. For
example improvement from 60.8 → 63.7 in FACT S CORE in longform generation. Similarly, the
2-step approach also outperforms the joint approach, as tested on the Wikidata and Wiki-Category list
tasks, with 2-step giving the best results for Wikidata, and factored the best for Wiki-Category. All
these results support our hypothesis that verifying questions should not attend to the original baseline
response as they may be prone to repeating it (as the joint method can do).

Further explicit reasoning helps remove hallucinations In the longform generation task we also
explore more sophisticated reasoning steps in the CoVe “factor+revise” method, which explicitly
cross-checks whether verification answers indicate an inconsistency. We see large gains in the
FACT S CORE metric from this further explicit reasoning from 63.7 (factored) → 71.4 (factor+revise).
This gives further indication that appropriate and explicit reasoning in LLMs can bring improvements
in mitigating hallucinations.

CoVe-based Llama outperforms InstructGPT, ChatGPT and PerplexityAI On the longform
generation task, our baseline few-shot Llama 65B is outperformed by the ChatGPT and Perplex-
ityAI models in terms of the FACT S CORE metric. However, applying CoVe to Llama 65B lifts
its performance above ChatGPT and InstructGPT, as well as PerplexityAI. This is particularly
impressive compared to PerplexityAI considering that is a model that can support its facts with
retrieval-augmentation, whereas CoVe uses only the base language model itself with improved rea-
soning via deliberation (verification). However, Figure 2 shows PerplexityAI still outperforms CoVe
for very rare facts where retrieval is essential, but CoVe outperforms PerplexityAI for frequent facts.

CoVe outperforms existing hallucination mitigation baselines We compare CoVe to three
recently released longform hallucination mitigation approaches — NLI and LLM, the two best-
performing variants of SelfCheckGPT (Manakul et al., 2023) and ChatProtect Mündler et al. (2023).
Our results in Table 3 show that C OV E outperforms all these baselines. More details on our
implementations of the baselines can be found in section 9. For SelfCheckGPT we experiment
with different thresholds (in Table 6) and choose a threshold that results in a high FACT S CORE
without removing a lot of facts. We note that some models produce fewer overall facts than others,
however, the FACT S CORE metric is normalized and hence comparable across models. We verified this
experimentally by clipping Llama-2-70B chat’s output to present fewer facts (as it contains the largest
number in its output out of all models), but this did not change its FACT S CORE substantially, e.g.
clipping to 10 sentences increased its score from 41.3 → 42.7. We note the length of the generations
of the few-shot-based models is essentially governed by the few-shot examples, which in turn are
constrained by the context length.

Shortform verification questions are more accurately answered than longform queries In a
longform response, LLMs are prone to generate a number of hallucinations. However, it can often be
the case that the LLM itself would know these hallucinations are wrong if queried specifically for


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


that individual fact, independent of the rest of the longform generation, see Figure 1, Figure 3, and
section 12. This can be seen quantitatively on the Wikidata task, where only ∼17% of the Llama
few-shot baseline answer entities are correct in list-based questions. However, when querying each
individual entity via a verification question, we find ∼70% are correctly answered.

Open LLM-based verification questions outperform yes/no-based and rule-based verification
questions In our method, CoVe, the verification questions generated by the LLM expect answers
that are true facts. Another alternative type of verification questions would be templated verification
questions, which can be generated cheaply, and binary questions. We first compare to heuristically
constructed questions by replacing the LLM questions with templated yes/no questions of the form
“Does X answer the question” for list-based questions with elements X in the answer. Results on the
Wiki-Category task, given in Table 4, show a reduced precision with rule-based verification questions.
We then move on to binary questions where we include the fact as part of the verification question
and ask it in a yes/no answer format. We evaluate this difference in Table 4, and find that yes/no type
questions perform worse for the factored version of CoVe. Some anecdotal examples are included
in Appendix section 12 for ChatGPT where we find the model tends to agree with facts in a yes/no
question format whether they are right or wrong. We believe this difference would be larger for
longform generation where the types of required verification questions can be more diverse, and
LLM-based verification becomes even more necesary.

Inference overhead Approaches that detect hallucinations via inconsistencies require repeated
prompts to the LLM. C OV E essentially requires 1 LLM call for generating the baseline response, 1
LLM call for each sentence to plan the verifications, 1 LLM call to verify each fact and 1 LLM call
for each fact to generate the consistent response. We also note that the LLM calls for verification for
each fact can be parallelized. This is comparable and in certain cases fewer LLM calls compared to
other approaches for hallucination mitigation. We provide a more in-depth analysis in section 8.

5    C ONCLUSION
We introduced Chain-of-Verification (CoVe), an approach to reduce hallucinations in a large language
model by deliberating on its own responses and self-correcting them. In particular, we showed that
models are able to answer verification questions with higher accuracy than when answering the
original query by breaking down the verification into a set of simpler questions. Secondly, when
answering the set of verification questions, we showed that controlling the attention of the model
so that it cannot attend to its previous answers (factored CoVe) helps alleviate copying the same
hallucinations. Overall, our method provides substantial performance gains over the original language
model response just by asking the same model to deliberate on (verify) its answer. An obvious
extension to our work is to equip CoVe with tool-use, e.g., to use retrieval augmentation in the
verification execution step which would likely bring further gains.

6    L IMITATIONS
While our Chain-of-Verification (CoVe) method seeks to reduce hallucinations, it does not remove
them completely from generations. This means that CoVe can still generate incorrect or misleading
information for a given query, even if it improves over the baseline. We also note that in our
experiments we have only addressed hallucinations in the form of directly stated factual inaccuracies.
However, hallucinations could come in other forms, such as during incorrect reasoning steps, as part
of opinions, etc. We also note that the generations CoVe produces come with verifications which,
if viewed by the user, add more interpretability to its decisions, but come at the cost of increased
computational expense due to generating more tokens in the output, similar to other reasoning
methods such as Chain-of-Thought.
Our method seeks to make a large language model produce improved responses by spending more
time deliberating to identify its own mistakes. While we have shown this gives clear improvements,
the upper bound to the improvement is clearly limited by the overall capabilities of the model, e.g. in
identifying and knowing what it knows. In this regard, an orthogonal line of research, as discussed in
section 2 is the use of external tools by language models, to gain further information beyond what is
stored in its weights. While we do not explore that avenue in this work those techniques would likely
be fruitful to combine with the findings here.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Leonard Adolphs, Kurt Shuster, Jack Urbanek, Arthur Szlam, and Jason Weston. Reason first, then
  respond: Modular generation for knowledge-infused dialogue. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.05204,
  2021.
Ayush Agrawal, Lester Mackey, and Adam Tauman Kalai. Do language models know when they’re
  hallucinating references? arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18248, 2023.
I Chern, Steffi Chern, Shiqi Chen, Weizhe Yuan, Kehua Feng, Chunting Zhou, Junxian He, Graham
   Neubig, Pengfei Liu, et al. Factool: Factuality detection in generative ai–a tool augmented
   framework for multi-task and multi-domain scenarios. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13528, 2023a.
I-Chun Chern, Zhiruo Wang, Sanjan Das, Bhavuk Sharma, Pengfei Liu, Graham Neubig, et al.
  Improving factuality of abstractive summarization via contrastive reward learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2307.04507, 2023b.
Roi Cohen, May Hamri, Mor Geva, and Amir Globerson. Lm vs lm: Detecting factual errors via
  cross examination. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13281, 2023.
Boris A Galitsky. Truth-o-meter: Collaborating with llm in fighting its hallucinations. 2023.
Luyu Gao, Zhuyun Dai, Panupong Pasupat, Anthony Chen, Arun Tejasvi Chaganty, Yicheng Fan,
  Vincent Zhao, Ni Lao, Hongrae Lee, Da-Cheng Juan, et al. Rarr: Researching and revising what
  language models say, using language models. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 16477–16508, 2023.
Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. The curious case of neural text
  degeneration. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09751, 2019.
Ziwei Ji, Nayeon Lee, Rita Frieske, Tiezheng Yu, Dan Su, Yan Xu, Etsuko Ishii, Ye Jin Bang,
  Andrea Madotto, and Pascale Fung. Survey of hallucination in natural language generation. ACM
  Computing Surveys, 55(12):1–38, 2023.
Weisen Jiang, Han Shi, Longhui Yu, Zhengying Liu, Yu Zhang, Zhenguo Li, and James T Kwok.
 Backward reasoning in large language models for verification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.07758,
 2023a.
Zhengbao Jiang, Frank F Xu, Luyu Gao, Zhiqing Sun, Qian Liu, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Yiming Yang,
  Jamie Callan, and Graham Neubig. Active retrieval augmented generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.06983, 2023b.
Saurav Kadavath, Tom Conerly, Amanda Askell, Tom Henighan, Dawn Drain, Ethan Perez, Nicholas
  Schiefer, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Nova DasSarma, Eli Tran-Johnson, et al. Language models (mostly)
  know what they know. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05221, 2022.
Jack Lanchantin, Shubham Toshniwal, Jason Weston, Arthur Szlam, and Sainbayar Sukhbaatar.
  Learning to reason and memorize with self-notes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.00833, 2023.
Haonan Li, Martin Tomko, Maria Vasardani, and Timothy Baldwin. Multispanqa: A dataset for
  multi-span question answering. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American
  Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp.
 1250–1260, 2022.
Kenneth Li, Oam Patel, Fernanda Viégas, Hanspeter Pfister, and Martin Wattenberg. Inference-time
  intervention: Eliciting truthful answers from a language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03341,
  2023.
Zhan Ling, Yunhao Fang, Xuanlin Li, Zhiao Huang, Mingu Lee, Roland Memisevic, and Hao Su.
  Deductive verification of chain-of-thought reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03872, 2023.
Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri
 Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, et al. Self-refine: Iterative refinement
 with self-feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17651, 2023.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Chaitanya Malaviya, Peter Shaw, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Quest:
  A retrieval dataset of entity-seeking queries with implicit set operations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2305.11694, 2023.
Potsawee Manakul, Adian Liusie, and Mark JF Gales. Selfcheckgpt: Zero-resource black-box
  hallucination detection for generative large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08896,
  2023.
Joshua Maynez, Shashi Narayan, Bernd Bohnet, and Ryan McDonald. On faithfulness and factuality
  in abstractive summarization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.00661, 2020.
Jacob Menick, Maja Trebacz, Vladimir Mikulik, John Aslanides, Francis Song, Martin Chadwick,
  Mia Glaese, Susannah Young, Lucy Campbell-Gillingham, Geoffrey Irving, et al. Teaching
  language models to support answers with verified quotes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11147, 2022.
Ning Miao, Yee Whye Teh, and Tom Rainforth. Selfcheck: Using llms to zero-shot check their own
  step-by-step reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.00436, 2023.
Sabrina J Mielke, Arthur Szlam, Emily Dinan, and Y-Lan Boureau. Reducing conversational agents’
  overconfidence through linguistic calibration. Transactions of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 10:857–872, 2022.
Sewon Min, Kalpesh Krishna, Xinxi Lyu, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Pang Wei Koh, Mohit Iyyer,
  Luke Zettlemoyer, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Factscore: Fine-grained atomic evaluation of factual
  precision in long form text generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14251, 2023.
Niels Mündler, Jingxuan He, Slobodan Jenko, and Martin Vechev. Self-contradictory hallucinations
  of large language models: Evaluation, detection and mitigation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15852,
  2023.
Shashi Narayan, Joshua Maynez, Reinald Kim Amplayo, Kuzman Ganchev, Annie Louis, Fantine
  Huot, Anders Sandholm, Dipanjan Das, and Mirella Lapata. Conditional generation with a
  question-answering blueprint. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 11:
  974–996, 2023.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
  27730–27744, 2022.
Baolin Peng, Michel Galley, Pengcheng He, Hao Cheng, Yujia Xie, Yu Hu, Qiuyuan Huang, Lars
  Liden, Zhou Yu, Weizhu Chen, et al. Check your facts and try again: Improving large language
  models with external knowledge and automated feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.12813, 2023.
Fabio Petroni, Tim Rocktäschel, Patrick Lewis, Anton Bakhtin, Yuxiang Wu, Alexander H Miller,
  and Sebastian Riedel. Language models as knowledge bases? arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.01066,
  2019.
Ofir Press, Muru Zhang, Sewon Min, Ludwig Schmidt, Noah A Smith, and Mike Lewis. Measuring
  and narrowing the compositionality gap in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03350,
  2022.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Ansh Radhakrishnan, Karina Nguyen, Anna Chen, Carol Chen, Carson Denison, Danny Hernandez,
  Esin Durmus, Evan Hubinger, Jackson Kernion, Kamilė Lukošiūtė, et al. Question decomposition
  improves the faithfulness of model-generated reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.11768, 2023.
Hannah Rashkin, Vitaly Nikolaev, Matthew Lamm, Lora Aroyo, Michael Collins, Dipanjan Das,
  Slav Petrov, Gaurav Singh Tomar, Iulia Turc, and David Reitter. Measuring attribution in natural
  language generation models. Computational Linguistics, pp. 1–66, 2023.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Paul Roit, Johan Ferret, Lior Shani, Roee Aharoni, Geoffrey Cideron, Robert Dadashi, Matthieu
  Geist, Sertan Girgin, Léonard Hussenot, Orgad Keller, et al. Factually consistent summarization
  via reinforcement learning with textual entailment feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00186,
  2023.
Stephen Roller, Emily Dinan, Naman Goyal, Da Ju, Mary Williamson, Yinhan Liu, Jing Xu, Myle
  Ott, Kurt Shuster, Eric M Smith, et al. Recipes for building an open-domain chatbot. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2004.13637, 2020.
Kurt Shuster, Spencer Poff, Moya Chen, Douwe Kiela, and Jason Weston. Retrieval augmentation
  reduces hallucination in conversation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.07567, 2021.
Kai Sun, Yifan Ethan Xu, Hanwen Zha, Yue Liu, and Xin Luna Dong. Head-to-tail: How knowledge-
  able are large language models (llm)? aka will llms replace knowledge graphs? arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2308.10168, 2023a.
Weiwei Sun, Zhengliang Shi, Shen Gao, Pengjie Ren, Maarten de Rijke, and Zhaochun Ren. Con-
 trastive learning reduces hallucination in conversations. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
 Artificial Intelligence, volume 37, pp. 13618–13626, 2023b.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023a.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
  Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher, Cris-
  tian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy Fu,
  Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn,
  Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel
  Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee,
  Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra,
  Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi,
  Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh
  Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen
  Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic,
  Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models,
  2023b.
Neeraj Varshney, Wenlin Yao, Hongming Zhang, Jianshu Chen, and Dong Yu. A stitch in time saves
  nine: Detecting and mitigating hallucinations of llms by validating low-confidence generation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.03987, 2023.
Chaojun Wang and Rico Sennrich. On exposure bias, hallucination and domain shift in neural
  machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.03642, 2020.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdh-
  ery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11171, 2022.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
  Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
Yixuan Weng, Minjun Zhu, Shizhu He, Kang Liu, and Jun Zhao. Large language models are reasoners
  with self-verification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.09561, 2022.
Zeqiu Wu, Yushi Hu, Weijia Shi, Nouha Dziri, Alane Suhr, Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Noah A Smith,
  Mari Ostendorf, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Fine-grained human feedback gives better rewards for
  language model training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.01693, 2023.
Hongbin Ye, Tong Liu, Aijia Zhang, Wei Hua, and Weiqiang Jia. Cognitive mirage: A review of
  hallucinations in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.06794, 2023.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Wenhao Yu, Zhihan Zhang, Zhenwen Liang, Meng Jiang, and Ashish Sabharwal. Improving language
 models via plug-and-play retrieval feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14002, 2023.
Muru Zhang, Ofir Press, William Merrill, Alisa Liu, and Noah A Smith. How language model
 hallucinations can snowball. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13534, 2023.
Ruochen Zhao, Xingxuan Li, Shafiq Joty, Chengwei Qin, and Lidong Bing. Verify-and-edit: A
  knowledge-enhanced chain-of-thought framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.03268, 2023.


                                             13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


7   RULE - BASED VS B INARY VS GENERAL QUESTIONS



Table 4: Comparison of various C OV E verification plan strategies (rows) and verification execution
techniques (columns) on the WikiCategory task.

                                                     Verification Execution
                                                  CoVe (joint) CoVe (factored)
                           Verification Plan      Prec.        Prec.
                           Rule-based questions   0.13         0.16
                           Generated by model:
                            yes/no questions      0.15         0.19
                            general questions     0.15         0.22


8   I NFERENCE OVERHEAD


                    N := Number of text samples, 4 in our experiments
                    k := Number of repeated mitigations, 3 in our experiments
                    s := Number of sentences in the generated passage
                    f := Number of facts in the generated passage


                         Method                                # LLM prompts
                         Few-shot                              1
                         ChatProtect Mündler et al. (2023)    1 + s × k × (3)
                         SCG-LLM Manakul et al. (2023)         n+1+s×n
                         CoVe (factor+revise)                  1+s+2×f

Table 5: Worst-case LLM prompts used by each hallucination mitigation approach in the worst case



Based on the current implementations we find the C OV E induces a similar inference overhead to
other longform hallucination mitigation approaches.


9   I MPLEMENTATION OF BASELINES

We use the existing models provided by Manakul et al. (2023) for the NLI model. For the LLM model
we prompt GPT-3.5-turbo-instruction with the following instruction (as described in Manakul
et al. (2023).

Context: {}
Sentence: {}
Is the sentence supported by the context above?
Answer Yes or No:


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                    NLI             LLM
                                   Threshold   FS     Facts    FS     Facts
                                   High        76.5    3.0     61.7     6.3
                                   Med         60.6    6.0     56.8     8.4
                                   Low         53.0    8.0     53.0     10

                             Table 6: Different threshold results for SelfCheckGPT


10     C OV E - F URTHER DETAILS


      Query

     What was the primary cause of the Mexican-American war?

     1. Baseline Response

     The Mexican–American War was an armed conflict between the United States and Mexico from 1846
     to 1848. It followed in the wake of the 1845 U.S. annexation of Texas, which Mexico considered part of
     its territory in spite of its de facto secession in the 1835 Texas Revolution.


     2. Plan Verifications
                                                                 3. Execute Verifications

  - When did the Mexican American war start and end?           1846-1848                    ✅
  - When did the US annex Texas?                                1845                        ✅
  - When did Texas secede from Mexico?                          1836                        ❌
  … <questions continue..>
                                                                                            …
     4. Final Verified Response

      The Mexican–American War was an armed conflict between the United States and Mexico from 1846
      to 1848. It followed in the wake of the 1845 U.S. annexation of Texas.


Figure 3: For longform generation, the Chain-of-Verification (CoVe) Factor + Revise method is the
most effective in our longform generation experiments. CoVe Factor + Revise has the model indepen-
dently identify (cross-check) which facts are consistent with its executed verifications (indicated by
tickmark and crosses in the figure). With this extra step we aim to disregard the inconsistent facts and
use the consistent facts to regenerate the response.


                                                      15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


11     P ROMPT T EMPLATES

We provide prompt templates for the longform generation of biographies task below for the different
steps and variants of CoVe (see section 3). Templates for the other tasks are similar, but using
few-shot examples from those tasks instead.


11.1   G ENERATE BASELINE R ESPONSE


             Q: Tell me a bio of <person>
             A: <bio of person>

             Q: Tell me a bio of <person>
             A: <bio of person>

             Q: Tell me a bio of <person>
             A: <bio of person>

             Q: Tell me a bio of <person>
             A:
Table 7: Few-shot prompting with 3 few-shot examples for the longform generation of biographies
task. Other tasks use the same standard few-shot setup as well (with 3 examples from that particular
task).



11.2   P LAN V ERIFICATIONS


             Context: Q: Tell me a bio of <person>.
             A: <passage about person>
             Response:
             <fact in passage>, Verification Question
             <fact in passage>, Verification Question

             Context: Q: Tell me a bio of <person>.
             A: <passage about person>
             Response:
             <fact in passage>, Verification Question
             <fact in passage>, Verification Question

             Context: Q: Tell me a bio of <person>.
             A: <passage about person>
             Response:
             <fact in passage>, Verification Question
             <fact in passage>, Verification Question

             Context: Q: Tell me a bio of <person>.
             A: <passage about person>
             Response:
Table 8: Step (2) of CoVe involves planning the verification questions. In the biography task case we
split the longform generation into its individual passages (e.g. sentences in the biography case, this
was done due to excessive context length, which we don’t need to do for the other tasks). The model
then generates a verification question for each fact it observes in each passage (a passage may have
multiple facts).


                                                 16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


11.3   E XECUTE V ERIFICATIONS


             Q: Verification Question
             A: Answer

             Q: Verification Question
             A: Answer

             Q: Verification Question
             A: Answer

             Q: Verification Question
             A:
Table 9: In step (3) of CoVe, the model then generates an answer for each of the verification questions.
Again we use 3 few-shot examples.


11.4   G ENERATE F INAL V ERIFIED R ESPONSE


              Context: <Original Passage>.
              From another source,
              <output of execute verification step: Q + A>
              <output of execute verification step: Q + A>
              Response: <revised and consistent Passage>


              Context: <Original Passage>.
              From another source,
              <output of execute verification step: Q + A>
              <output of execute verification step: Q + A>
              Response: <revised and consistent Passage>

              Context: <Original Passage>.
              From another source,
              <output of execute verification step: Q + A>
              <output of execute verification step: Q + A>
              Response: <revised and consistent Passage>

              Context: <Original passage>.
              From another source,
              <output of execute verification step: Q + A>
              Response:
Table 10: In step (4) of CoVe (factored) the model is then presented with its original generation (split
into passages, e.g. sentences, in the biography case, due to excessive context length which we do not
need to do for the other tasks) along with its own verification step results. The model is told that this
information comes from “another source”. The model is required to synthesize a new final answer
based on facts that are consistent between the two sources.


                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


11.5   FACTOR +R EVISE : I DENTIFY WHICH FACTS ARE CONSISTENT

             Context: <Original Fact>.
             From another source,
             <output of execute verification step: Q + A>
             Response: CONSISTENT. <Consistent fact>

             Context: <Original Fact>.
             From another source,
             <output of execute verification step: Q + A>
             Response: INCONSISTENT.

             Context: <Original Fact>.
             From another source,
             <output of execute verification step: Q + A>
             Response: PARTIALLY CONSISTENT. <Consistent part>
Table 11: In the CoVe (Factor + Revise) variant, as part of step (3) after subsection 11.3, the model is
made to explicitly identify which facts are consistent between the two sources. The consistent facts
can then be spliced together.


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


12    C HAT GPT EXAMPLE SCREENSHOTS


Figure 4: ChatGPT generates several hallucinations for this question, e.g. Hillary Clinton and
Michael Bloomberg.


Figure 5: Even when the longform answer is provided for a rewritten query (see query from
Figure 4), while giving a slightly different answer, ChatGPT still generates several hallucinations for
this question, e.g. Hillary Clinton and Michael Bloomberg.


                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 6: Shortform questions (which could be verification questions) appear to be answered more
factually than the longform answers in Figure 4 and Figure 5.


Figure 7: Another example of hallucinations for a different query, e.g., John F. Kennedy Jr was born
in Washington D.C.


                                                20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 8: Examples where questions asking for a fact are answered correctly, but verifying via a
yes/no question is incorrect (the model tends to agree with the way the question is stated, even if it
was stated incorrectly).



                                                 21
