Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


SAM- GUIDED U NSUPERVISED D OMAIN A DAPTATION
FOR 3D S EGMENTATION

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) in 3D segmentation tasks presents a
         formidable challenge, primarily stemming from the sparse and unordered nature
         of point cloud data. Especially for LiDAR point clouds, the domain discrepancy
         becomes obvious across varying capture scenes, fluctuating weather conditions,
         and the diverse array of LiDAR devices in use. While previous UDA method-
         ologies have often sought to mitigate this gap by aligning features between source
         and target domains, this approach falls short when applied to 3D segmentation due
         to the substantial domain variations. Inspired by the remarkable generalization ca-
         pabilities exhibited by the vision foundation model, SAM, in the realm of image
         segmentation, our approach leverages the wealth of general knowledge embedded
         within SAM to unify feature representations across diverse 3D domains, and fur-
         ther solves the 3D domain adaptation problem. Specifically, we harness the corre-
         sponding images associated with point clouds to facilitate knowledge transfer and
         propose an innovative hybrid feature augmentation methodology, which signifi-
         cantly enhances the alignment between the 3D feature space and SAM’s feature
         space, operating at both the scene and instance levels. Our method is evaluated on
         many widely-recognized datasets, and achieves state-of-the-art performance.


1   I NTRODUCTION
3D scene understanding is fundamental for many real-world applications, such as autonomous driv-
ing, robotics, smart cities, etc. Based on the point cloud, 3D segmentation is a critical task for scene
understanding, which requires assigning semantic labels for each point. Current deep learning-based
solutions (Zhu et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2023) rely heavily on massive annotated data, which are high-
cost and lack generalization capability for handling domain shifts. Unsupervised domain adaptation
is significant for alleviating data dependency. However, unlike images with dense and regular repre-
sentation, point clouds, especially LiDAR point clouds of large scenes, are unstructured and sparse,
and have overt differences in patterns for various capture devices. Although some studies (Yi et al.,
2021; Saltori et al., 2022; Shaban et al., 2023) have extended 2D techniques to solve the 3D UDA
problem, the performance is still limited due to the essential defect of point cloud representation.
Considering that RGB cameras yield dense, color-rich, and structured data, and more importantly,
they represent minor discrepancies across various devices, certain 3D UDA methods (Jaritz et al.,
2020; Cardace et al., 2023; Cao et al., 2023) utilize the synergy of LiDAR and camera capabilities to
achieve more comprehensive and precise perception, and further enhance adaptation capabilities for
3D segmentation tasks. However, these methods usually train 2D and 3D networks simultaneously,
which are difficult to converge and demand substantial online computing resources.
Vision foundation models (VFMs), such as the Segment Anything Model (SAM) (Kirillov et al.,
2023), have garnered significant attention due to their remarkable performance in addressing open-
world vision tasks. Such models are trained on massive image data with tremendous parameters.
Compared with a common model trained on limited data, VFMs have more general knowledge and
much stronger generalization capability. Many works such as Chen et al. (2023b;a) have emerged
recently to transfer the general 2D vision knowledge of VFMs to 3D and have achieved promising
performance.
Based on SAM, focusing on image segmentation, we propose a novel paradigm for 3D UDA seg-
mentation. As shown in Fig. 1, different from previous UDA approaches that strive to align the target


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                       unified feature space

                    3D                                  3D                                SAM
                 Backbone                            Backbone                            Encoder
    Domain A                              Domain A
       point-to-point feature alignment              point-to-SAM feature alignment

                    3D                                  3D                                SAM
                 Backbone                            Backbone                            Encoder
    Domain B                              Domain B
       (a) previous methods for UDA                             (b) our method for UDA


Figure 1: Comparison of 3D UDA paradigms. Different from aligning two feature domains directly,
our method makes both the source domain and target domain align with the SAM feature space.

domain to the source domain so that the model trained on labeled source data can also work on tar-
get data without annotation, our method makes both the source domain and target domain align with
the SAM feature space. SAM feature space contains more general knowledge, which provides a
friendly space to unify the feature representation from different domains. We utilize RGB images to
assist point clouds in our framework. However, unlike methods mentioned above only using images
to provide auxiliary information, we take images as a bridge to align diverse 3D feature spaces to the
SAM feature space, so we do not need to train extra 2D networks and can process the image offline
for less computing resources. Considering that the 3D feature space created by the source-domain
data and the target-domain data is still much smaller than the SAM feature space, we propose a
hybrid feature augmentation method at both scene and instance levels to generate more 3D data with
diverse feature patterns in a broader data domain, which can further benefit the 3D-to-SAM feature
alignment. In particular, we make full use of the masks generated by SAM to mix instance-level
point clouds with the other domains. This technique can maintain the geometric completeness of
instances, which is beneficial for semantic recognition.
To verify the effectiveness of our method, we compare it with current SOTA works on extensive
3D UDA segmentation settings and our method outperforms others by a large margin, improving
about 14% mIoU for VirtualKITTI-to-SematicKITTI, about 15% mIoU for Waymo-to-nuScenes,
and about 20% mIoU for nuScenes-to-SemanticKITTI domain adaptation. Surprisingly, our unsu-
pervised method achieves comparable performance with the supervised method for city-changing
and light-changing settings on the nuScenes dataset. Furthermore, we also test our method on more
challenging tasks, such as panoptic segmentation and domain generalization, and experimental re-
sults show that our method is robust and has good generalization capability.
In summary, our contributions are as follows:

 • We propose a novel unsupervised domain adaptation approach for 3D segmentation, leveraging
   the foundational model SAM to guide the alignment of features from diverse 3D data domains
   into a unified domain.
 • We introduce a hybrid feature augmentation strategy at both scene and instance levels, generating
   more distinct feature patterns across a broader data domain for better feature alignment.
 • We conduct extensive experiments on large-scale datasets and achieve SOTA performance.


2     R ELATED W ORK
2.1    P OINT C LOUD S EMANTIC S EGMENTATION

Point cloud semantic segmentation (Zhu et al., 2021; Guo et al., 2020) is a rapidly evolving field, and
numerous research works have contributed to advancements in this area. The pioneering approach
PointNet (Qi et al., 2017a) directly processes point clouds without voxelization and revolutionizes
3D segmentation by providing a novel perspective on point cloud analysis. Further, PointNet++ (Qi
et al., 2017b) extends PointNet with hierarchical feature learning through partitioning point clouds
into local regions. To handle sparse point cloud data efficiently within large-scale scenes, a frame-
work called SparseConvNet (Graham et al., 2018) has been specifically crafted. It excels in process-
ing sparse 3D data and has been effectively utilized in various applications, including 3D semantic


                                                       2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


segmentation. MinkUNet (Choy et al., 2019) represents a significant advancement in point cloud
semantic segmentation. Employing multi-scale interaction networks, MinkUNet enhances the seg-
mentation of point clouds, effectively addressing the challenges posed by 3D spatial data. Our 3D
segmentation networks are the popular SparseConvNet and MinkUNet. Due to the sparse charac-
teristics of point cloud data, many current methods (Yan et al., 2022; Krispel et al., 2020; He et al.,
2022) add corresponding dense image information to facilitate point cloud segmentation tasks. Our
method also uses image features to assist point cloud segmentation, and additionally, we take ad-
vantage of the 2D segmentation foundation model to achieve effective knowledge transfer.

2.2   D OMAIN A DAPTATION FOR 3D S EGMENTATION

Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) aims at transferring knowledge learned from a source an-
notated domain to a target unlabelled domain, and there are already several UDA methods proposed
for 2D segmentation (Chang et al., 2019; Zhang & Wang, 2020; Kim & Byun, 2020; Zou et al.,
2018). In recent years, domain adaptation techniques have gained increasing traction in the context
of 3D segmentation tasks. Yi et al. (2021) leverage a ”Complete and Label” strategy to enhance
semantic segmentation of LiDAR point clouds by recovering underlying surfaces and facilitating
the transfer of semantic labels across varying LiDAR sensor domains. CosMix (Saltori et al., 2022)
introduces a sample mixing approach for UDA in 3D segmentation, which stands as the pioneering
UDA approach utilizing sample mixing to alleviate domain shift. It generates two new intermedi-
ate domains of composite point clouds through a novel mixing strategy applied at the input level,
mitigating domain discrepancies. However, due to the sparsity and irregularity of the point cloud,
the disparity across different point cloud data domains is larger compared to that across 2D image
domains, which makes it difficult to mitigate the variation across domains.
With the development of multi-modal perception (Bai et al., 2022; Cong et al., 2023) in autonomous
driving, prevalent 3D datasets (Fong et al., 2022; Mei et al., 2022; Behley et al., 2019; Geyer
et al., 2020) include both 3D point clouds and corresponding 2D images, making leveraging multi-
modality for addressing domain shift challenges in point clouds convenient. xMUDA (Jaritz et al.,
2020; 2022) shows the power of combining 2D and 3D networks within a single framework, which
achieves outstanding performance by aggregating the scores from these two branches. This achieve-
ment is attributed to the complementary nature resulting from the diverse modalities processed
by each branch. Peng et al. (2021) introduce Dynamic Sparse-to-Dense Cross-Modal Learning
(DsCML) to enhance the interaction of multi-modality information, ultimately boosting domain
adaptation sufficiency, while Cardace et al. (2023) elucidate this complementarity of image and
point cloud through an intuitive explanation centered on the effective receptive field, and proposes
to feed both modalities to both branches. However, in practice, training two networks with distinct
architectures is difficult to converge and demands substantial computing resources due to increased
memory. Our method uses the pre-trained foundation model to process the image data, guaranteeing
the quality of the image features and enabling the training process to focus on the 3D model.

2.3   V ISION F OUNDATION M ODELS

The rise of foundation models (Devlin et al., 2018; Jia et al., 2021; Touvron et al., 2023) has gar-
nered significant attention which are trained on extensive datasets, consequently demonstrating ex-
ceptional performance. Foundation models (Zou et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b) have seen signif-
icant advancements in the realm of 2D vision, and several research studies have been conducted to
leverage this progress and extend these foundation models to comprehend 3D information. Repre-
sentative works CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) leverage contrastive learning techniques to train both
text and image encoders, CLIP2Scene (Chen et al., 2023b) extends the capabilities of CLIP by incor-
porating a 2D-3D calibration matrix, facilitating a deeper comprehension of 3D scenes. The Meta
Research team recently launched the ‘Segment Anything Model’ (Kirillov et al., 2023), trained on
an extensive dataset of over 1 billion masks from 11 million images. Utilizing efficient prompting,
SAM can generate high-quality masks for image instance segmentation. The integration of flexible
prompting and ambiguity awareness enables SAM with robust generalization capabilities for vari-
ous downstream segmentation challenges. Many methods (Chen et al., 2023a;b; Liu et al., 2023)
take it as an off-the-shelf tool and distillate the knowledge to solve 3D problems by 2D-3D feature
alignment. In our work of tackling the UDA of 3D segmentation, we utilize SAM to provide 2D
prior knowledge for 3D feature alignment in a wider data domain.


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         scene &     instance
        Feature Augmentation

                                       augmented input         Point Encoder M       point embedding Fpoint     Point Decoder

                                    Pinstance
                                                                                             Alignment Loss segmentation
    Psource          Ptarget                                                                      Lalign      prediction

                                                                                                 Segmentation Loss
                                     instance-level points       instance mask                         Lseg

    Isource          Itarget



                                                                                       SAM-guided
    Source Data       Target Data         SAM Encoder        image embedding Fimage point embedding             semantic label Y


          forward operation         loss supervision              3D-2D projection     bilinear interpolation       stop-gradient

Figure 2: Pipeline of our method. The point cloud is fed into the point encoder for point embeddings
at the top, and the corresponding images are passed through the SAM encoder for image embeddings
at the bottom, from which we obtain SAM-guided point embedding with the 2D-3D projection.
Alignment loss is calculated from the SAM-guided features and original features. Furthermore,
augmented inputs by mixing source and target data, providing diverse feature patterns, are utilized
to boost the 3D-to-SAM feature alignment.

3        M ETHOD
3.1           P ROBLEM S TATEMENT

We explore UDA for 3D segmentation, in which we have the source domain, denoted as DS =
{PS , IS , YS } with paired input, namely point cloud PS and image IS , as well as annotated labels
YS for each point, and the target domain denoted as DT = {PT , IT } without any annotation. Using
these data, we train a 3D segmentation model that can generalize well to the target domain.
3D data from different domains have obvious differences in distribution and patterns, leading to
over-fitting problems when models trained in one domain try to analyze data from another. The
main challenge in 3D UDA is to extract useful features despite these domain differences, essentially
aligning features between these distinct domains. Our solution is to map data from different domains
into a unified feature space, ensuring the model performs consistently across domains.

3.2           F RAMEWORK OVERVIEW

The visual foundation model SAM is trained by massive image data, which contains relative general
vision knowledge and provides a friendly feature space to unify diverse feature representations.
Taking 2D images as the bridge, the 3D feature space of different domains can be indirectly unified
by bringing them closer to the SAM feature space based on 2D-to-3D knowledge transfer. Based on
this, we design a novel SAM-guided UDA method for 3D segmentation, as shown in Fig. 2.
Specifically, given a point cloud input P , the point encoder M generates a point embedding Fpoint ∈
Rn×d in the d-dimensional latent feature space. Concurrently, the corresponding image input I is
passed through the SAM encoder for a c-channels image embedding Fimage ∈ Rh×w×c . Utilizing
the correspondence between the point cloud and image, we acquire SAM-guided point embedding
F̂point ∈ Rn×d to compute the alignment loss Lalign with the original point embedding Fpoint ,
serving the purpose of using SAM as a bridge to integrate the features of diverse data domains into a
unified feature space. Notably, during training, the input for feature alignment consists of data from
both source and target domains. We named this process as SAM-guided Feature Alignment. At the
same time, as for labeled data Y , segmentation loss Lseg is also calculated as semantic supervision.
During model training, only the point cloud branch of the whole pipeline is trained, and the gradient
is not calculated in the image branch, which makes our method more lightweight. Furthermore, the


                                                                 4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


point mix-up strategy trains a network on additional data derived from the convex combination of the
source domain and target domain, thus effectively reducing domain shifts in UDA. These additional
data can also provide augmented features of the intermediate domain between the source and target
domains for SAM-guided feature alignment. Beyond the simple concatenation of two point clouds
at the scene level, we use the instance mask output by SAM to select instances’ point clouds from
two domains for mixing up so that local instance-level geometric features can be better maintained
to project to the semantic space. This strategy is called Hybrid Feature Augmentation at Scene
and Instance level. During inference, only point cloud data P is needed for prediction from the 3D
network. Details of our method are introduced below.

3.3   SAM- GUIDED 3D F EATURE A LIGNMENT

Previous UDA methods usually align the feature space of the target domain to that of the source
domain so that the model trained on the source domain with labeled data can also recognize the
data from the novel domain. However, the distributions and patterns of 3D point clouds in vari-
ous datasets have substantial differences, making the alignment very difficult. SAM (Kirillov et al.,
2023), a 2D foundation model, is trained with a huge dataset of 11M images, granting it robust gen-
eralization capabilities to address downstream segmentation challenges effectively. If we can align
features extracted from various data domains into the unified feature space represented by SAM, the
model trained on the source domain can effectively handle the target data with the assistance of the
universal vision knowledge existing in the SAM feature space.
We focus on training a point-based 3D segmentation model, while SAM is a foundation model
trained on 2D images, which presents a fundamental challenge: how to bridge the semantic infor-
mation captured in 2D images with the features extracted from 3D points. Most outdoor large-scale
datasets with point clouds and images provide calibration information to map the 3D points into
the corresponding images. With the projection matrix RL2C , we can easily translate the coordina-
tion of points P from the 3D LiDAR coordinate system to the 2D image coordinate system. This
transformation can be formally expressed as
                                      Pimage = RL2I Plidar .

Once we calculate the 2D positions of points in the image coordinate system, we can determine their
corresponding positions in the SAM-guided image embedding Fimage , which is generated from the
image by the SAM feature extractor. As the positions of points in the image embedding typically
are not integer values, we perform bilinear interpolation based on the surrounding semantic features
in the image embedding corresponding to the point, which to some extent alleviates the effect of
calibration errors and allows us to derive the SAM-guided feature of each point, denoted as
                               F̂point = Bilinear(Fimage , Pimage ).

Then, the original point embedding Fpoint from both source and target domains are all required
to align with their corresponding SAM-guided features F̂point . Specifically, we utilize the cosine
function to measure the similarity of Fpoint and F̂point , employing it as the alignment loss Lalign
during training. With the supervision of Lalign , features obtained by the point encoder M will grad-
ually converge towards the feature space represented by SAM, achieving the purpose of extracting
features within a unified feature space from the input of different domains. The formulation of the
loss function for feature alignment is shown below:
                                Lalign = 1 − cos(F̂point , Fpoint ).

3.4   H YBRID F EATURE AUGMENTATION AT S CENE AND I NSTANCE LEVEL

3D point features of the source-domain data and the target-domain data only cover subsets of the
3D feature space, which are limited to align with the whole SAM feature space with more universal
knowledge. Therefore, more 3D data with diverse feature patterns in a broader data domain is
needed to achieve more effective 3D-to-SAM feature alignment.
Previous works (Xiao et al., 2022; Kong et al., 2023) usually focus on synthesizing data by com-
bining data in the source domain and target domain at the scene level, including polar-based, range-
based, and laser-based, as shown in Fig.3(a). Polar-based point mix-up selects semi-circular point


                                                 5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              Ptarget                                                     Pscene-level mix-up
                                                                                                              Itarget
                                                                                           SAM-guided
              Psource                                                                    Feature Alignment
                          polar-based range-based laser-based                                                 Isource
                                              (a) scenes-level feature augmentation

              SAM                                                          Pinstance-level mix-up
                                                              Pinstance                                       Itarget
    Itarget             instance mask                                                       SAM-guided
                                                                                          Feature Alignment
                                                              Psource                                         Isource
                                    Ptarget
                                              (b) instance-level feature augmentation

    Figure 3: Hybrid feature augmentation by data mixing for better 3D-to-SAM feature alignment.
cloud data from two different domains based on the polar coordinates of the point cloud. Range-
based point mix-up divides the point cloud by its distance from the center, synthesizing circular
point data close to the center and ring point data farther away from the center. Laser-based point
mix-up determines the part of point clouds based on the number of laser beams, combining points
with positive and negative laser pitch angles from different domains for synthesis. These ways of
scene-level feature augmentation can maintain the general pattern of LiDAR point clouds as much
as possible and improve the data diversity. Moreover, they are simple to process without any re-
quirement for additional annotations such as real or pseudo-semantic labels. We adopt these three
kinds of scene-level data augmentation in our method.
However, scene-level data augmentation will, to some extent, destroy the completeness of the point
cloud of instances in the stitching areas and affect the exploitation of local geometric characteris-
tics of point clouds. To further increase the data diversity and meanwhile keep the instance feature
patterns of LiDAR point clouds for better semantic recognition, we propose an instance-level aug-
mentation method. Benefiting from the instance mask output from SAM, we can thoroughly exploit
the instance-level geometric features. Compared with pre-trained 3D segmentation models, SAM
provides more accurate and robust instance masks and enables us to avoid extra warm-up for a
pre-train model, simplifying the whole training process. Therefore, we perform instance-level data
synthesis as Fig.3(b) shows. Specifically, we begin by employing SAM to generate instance masks
for input images from either the source or target domain (We take target data as the example in
the figure). Next, we use the calibration matrix to project the corresponding point cloud into the
image. The instance information of each point is determined according to whether the projection
position of the point cloud falls within a specific instance mask, and then we randomly select some
points with 20 ∼ 30 specific instances, mixed with the point cloud from the other domain by direct
concatenation to achieve point augmentation at the instance level.
In practice, we combine all the ways of feature augmentation at both scene level and instance level
with a random-selection strategy for a more comprehensive feature augmentation, which generates
a more diverse set of point cloud data with varied feature patterns. Then, the augmented points are
fed into the point encoder M to obtain the point embedding Fpoint with distinct feature patterns in
a broader data domain beyond the source domain and target domain for more effective SAM-guided
feature alignment. Notably, to maintain the consistency of the point cloud and the image, we extract
SAM-guided point embedding based on the original image embedding corresponding to the point.
The formulation of feature augmentation is shown below:
                                         Fpoint = M (Aug(Psource , Ptarget ))

4       E XPERIMENT
We first introduce datasets and implementation details. After that, we explore several domain shift
scenarios and compare them with current SOTA UDA methods for 3D segmentation. Then, we con-
duct extensive ablation studies to give a comprehensive assessment of the submodules of our method.
Finally, we extend our method to more challenging tasks to show its generalization capability.


                                                                6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.1   DATASET S ETUP

We first follow the benchmark introduced in xMUDA (Jaritz et al., 2022) to evaluate our method,
comprehending four domain shift scenarios, including (1) USA-to-Singapore, (2) Day-to-Night,
(3) VirtualKITTI-to-SemanticKITTI and (4) A2D2-to-SemanticKITTI. The first two leverage
nuScenes (Caesar et al., 2020) as their dataset, consisting of 1000 driving scenes in total with 40k
annotated point-wise frames. Specifically, The former differs in the layout and infrastructure while
the latter exhibits severe illumination changes between the source and the target domain. The third
is more challenging since it is the adaptation from synthetic to real data, implemented by adapting
from VirtualKITTI (Gaidon et al., 2016) to SemanticKITTI (Behley et al., 2019) while the fourth
involves A2D2 (Geyer et al., 2020) and SemanticKITTI as different data domains, where the domain
discrepancy lies in the distinct density and arrangement of 3D point clouds captured by different de-
vices since the A2D2 is captured by 16-beam LiDAR and the SemanticKITTI uses 64-beam LiDAR.
For the above settings, noted that only 3D points visible from the camera are used for training and
testing, specifically, only one image and corresponding points for each sample are used for training.
Since we only use the image combined with SAM as assistance for the training of a 3D segmentation
network instead of training a new 2D segmentation network, we focus on comparing the performance
of the 3D segmentation network and enabling model training with the whole point cloud sample
even if some part of it is not visible in the images. Thus, we also compare our method with others
trained with the whole 360◦ view of the point cloud, in which three datasets are involved including
nuScenes, SemanticKITTI, and Waymo (Mei et al., 2022). In these settings, we use 6 images in
nuScenes covering 360◦ view, 1 image in SemanticKITTI covering 120◦ view, and 5 images in
Waymo covering 252◦ view. More information is in Sec. A. For metric, We compute the Intersection
over the Union (IoU) for each class and report the mean Intersection over the Union (mIoU).

4.2   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

We make source and target labels compatible across these experiments. For all benchmarks in prior
multi-modal UDA methods, we strictly follow class mapping like xMUDA for a fair comparison,
while we map the labels of the dataset in other experiments into 10 segmentation classes in common.
Our method is implemented by using the public PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) repository MMDe-
tection3D (Contributors, 2020) and all the models are trained on a single 24GB GeForce RTX 3090
GPU. To compare fairly, we use SparseConvNet (Graham et al., 2018) with U-Net architecture as
the 3D backbone network when comparing with all the multi-modal methods followed by xMUDA
and use MinkUNet32 (Choy et al., 2019) when compare with the state-of-the-art uni-modal method
CosMix. For the image branch, the ViT-h variant SAM model is utilized to generate image embed-
ding for SAM-guided feature alignment and instance masks for hybrid feature augmentation in an
offline manner. We keep the proportion of mixed data and normal data from the source and target
domain the same during model training. Before the data is fed into the 3D network, data augmen-
tation such as vertical axis flipping, random scaling, and random 3D rotations are widely used like
all the compared methods. For the model training strategies, we choose a batch size of 8 for both
source data and target data, then mix the data batch for training at each iteration. Besides, we adopt
AdamW as the model optimizer and One Cycle Policy as the learning-rate scheduler.

4.3   E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS AND C OMPARISON

Tab. 1 and Tab. 2 show the experimental results and performance comparison with previous UDA
methods for 3D segmentation under the setup introduced in Sec. 4.1. Each experiment contains two
reference methods in common, a baseline model named Source only trained only on the source
domain and an upper-bound model named Oracle trained only on the target data with annotations.
Tab. 1 focuses on four domain shift scenarios introduced by Jaritz et al. (2022) and comparison with
these multi-modal methods based on xMUDA such as Peng et al. (2021) and Cardace et al. (2023).
Among them, MM2D3D fully exploits the complementarity of image and point cloud and proposes
to feed two modalities to both branches, achieving better performance. Our method outperforms it
by +6.8% (USA → Singapore), +0.3% (Day → Night), +14.6% (v.KITTI → Sem.KITTI), +6.0%
(A2D2 → Sem.KITTI) respectively, because our method aligns all the features into a unified feature
space with the guidance of SAM instead of simply aligning features from image and point cloud
in 2D and 3D network. Tab. 2 focuses on the scenarios where not all the point clouds are visible


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Results under four domain shift scenarios introduced by xMUDA. We report all the 3D
network performance of compared multi-modal UDA methods in terms of mIoU.
 Method                                USA → Singapore           Day → Night               v.KITTI → Sem.KITTI     A2D2 → Sem.KITTI

 Source only                          62.8        +0.0        68.8           +0.0           42.0        +0.0       35.9       +0.0

 xMUDA (Jaritz et al., 2022)          63.2       +0.4         69.2           +0.4           46.7       +4.7        46.0      +10.1
 DsCML (Peng et al., 2021)            52.3       −10.5        61.4           −7.4           32.8       −9.2        32.6      −3.3
 MM2D3D (Cardace et al., 2023)        66.8       +4.0         70.2           +1.4           50.3       +8.3        46.1      +10.2
 Ours                                 73.6       +10.8        70.5           +1.7           64.9       +22.9       52.1      +16.2

 Oracle                               76.0           −        69.2            −             78.4         −         71.9        −


Table 2: Results under four domain shift scenarios with 360◦ point cloud, where not all the points
are visible in the images. We report the 3D network performance in terms of mIoU.
 Method                              nuScenes → Sem.KITTI    Sem.KITTI → nuScenes           nuScenes → Waymo       Waymo → nuScenes

 Source only                          27.7        +0.0        28.1           +0.0           29.4        +0.0       21.8       +0.0

 PL (Morerio et al., 2017)            30.0       +2.3         29.0           +0.9           31.9       +2.5        22.3      +0.5
 CosMix (Saltori et al., 2023)        30.6       +2.9         29.7           +1.6           31.5       +2.1        30.0      +8.2
 MM2D3D (Cardace et al., 2023)        30.4       +2.7         31.9           +3.8           31.3       +1.9        33.5      +11.7
 Ours                                 48.5       +20.8        42.9           +14.8          44.9       +15.5       48.2      +26.4

 Oracle                               70.3           −        78.3            −             79.9         −         78.3        −



in the images and we re-implement three methods by their official codes. Morerio et al. (2017)
uses the prediction from the pre-trained model as pseudo labels for unlabelled data to retrain this
model, which is widely used in UDA methods. Saltori et al. (2023) trains a 3D network with
only the utilization of a point cloud, which generates new intermediate domains through a mixing
scene-level strategy to mitigate domain discrepancies. MM2D3d is the SOTA multi-modal method
as described above, but it needs all the points visible in the image for the best performance. Our
method surpasses them by at least +17.9% (nuScenes → Sem.KITTI), +11.0% (Sem.KITTI →
nuScenes), +13.0% (nuScenes → Waymo), +14.7% (Waymo → nuScenes) respectively by a large
margin, since hybrid feature augmentation can provide more intermediate domains and SAM-guided
feature alignment can help map the whole point cloud into the unified feature space. For qualitative
comparison shown in Fig. 4, predictions in the ellipses demonstrate that source-only and MM2D3D
models often infer wrong and mingling results, especially for the person category, while our method
can provide correct and more fine-grained segmentation. More qualitative results are in Sec. C

4.4       A BLATION S TUDY

To show the effectiveness of each module of our method, we conduct ablation studies on nuScenes-
to-SemanticKITTI UDA. We also show the effect of other visual foundation models on our method.

Table 3: Ablation study. Baseline means the result of the source-only model indicating the lower-
bound and Pseudo Label means re-training the model with pseudo labels.
                                            SAM-guided         Hybrid Feature Augmentation
               Setting    Baseline                                                                  Pseudo Label    mIoU
                                         Feature Alignment     Scene-level        Instance-level
                 (1)             ✓                                                                                  27.7
                 (2)             ✓               ✓                                                                  34.0
                 (3)             ✓                                   ✓                 ✓                            28.6
                 (4)             ✓               ✓                   ✓                                              40.1
                 (5)             ✓               ✓                                     ✓                            39.0
                 (6)             ✓               ✓                   ✓                 ✓                            44.0
                 (7)             ✓               ✓                   ✓                 ✓                 ✓          48.5


Effectiveness of Model Components We first analyze the effects of all the submodules in our
method in Tab. 3, containing SAM-guided Feature Alignment, Hybrid Feature Augmentation, and
Pseudo Label. SAM-guided Feature Alignment aligns all the point features with the corresponding
feature embeddings output by SAM, guiding the 3D network map point cloud into the unified fea-
ture space represented by SAM while Hybrid Feature Augmentation generates additional point cloud
data of the intermediate domain for feature extraction to maximize the effect of feature alignment.
Setting (1), (2), (3), and (6) in the table shows that combining the two submodules improves per-
formance by a large margin. Besides, re-training the model with pseudo labels is a strategy widely
used in UDA tasks and it also improves the performance.


                                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           Source only                          MM2D3D                             Ours                           Gound truth


                              car     bicycle        motorcycle    truck    bus   person   road    sidewalk          vegetation      terrain

      Figure 4: Visualization results of the domain adaptation from nuScenes to SemanticKITTI.
Table 5: Extension on more challenging tasks, such as UDA for Panoptic Segmentation(left) and Do-
main Generalization(right), where N, S, A represent nuScenes, SemanticKITTI and A2D2 dataset.
              Task           Method             PQ       PQ†      RQ       SQ     mIoU                 Method              N,S → A
                             Source only    14.0         21.6     19.9     55.8   27.7                 Baseline              45.0
                             PL             15.9         22.7     22.2     58.1   29.7
      nuScenes → Sem.KITTI
                             Ours           34.3         38.4     42.6     55.9   48.5                  xMUDA
                                                                                                                             44.9
                                                                                                  (Jaritz et al., 2022)
                             Oracle         50.5         52.2     57.8     77.2   70.3                Dual-Cross
                                                                                                                             41.3
                                                                                                    (Li et al., 2022)
                             Source only    15.6         22.1     20.7     52.7   28.2
                                                                                                        BEV-DG
                             PL             16.8         23.0     21.7     48.3   29.0                                       55.1
      Sem.KITTI → nuScenes                                                                          (Li et al., 2023)
                             Ours           24.6         30.7     30.8     60.0   42.9
                             Oracle         40.7         44.9     47.2     83.8   78.3                   Ours                57.2


Effectiveness of Hybrid Feature Augmentation As for the detailed ablation of feature alignment,
we adopt hybrid strategies for diverse data with distinct feature patterns, which not only mix up
points at the scene level in polar-based, range-based, and laser-based ways but also at the instance
level with the help of instance mask output by SAM. Random selection in all these point mix-
up ways forms this feature augmentation. Setting (4), (5), (6) in Tab. 3 shows that both mix-up
methods can help feature alignment with more distinct features but the hybrid strategy raises the
best performance. Further ablations of the Hybrid Feature Augmentation are in Sec. B.
Effectiveness of Visual Foundation Model One of the
insightful designs in our method is that we leverage the Table 4: Generalize with other VFMs.
visual foundation model to provide a potential unified fea-
ture space indirectly aligning point feature. Except for        baseline InternImage SAM
SAM, there exist other visual foundation models such as           27.7       36.9       44.0
InternImage (Wang et al., 2023a) serving for image-based
tasks like classification and segmentation. We replace the SAM’s image encoder with InternImage’s
to guide the feature alignment in the same way. Tab. 4 shows that the performance still can be
improved compared with the baseline, but not as effective as SAM because SAM is a segmentation-
specific foundation model trained with much more data and contains more general knowledge.

4.5      M ORE C HALLENGING TASKS

Since we achieve the purpose of mapping data from different domains into a unified feature space,
the extracted feature can be used for some more challenging tasks. We show some extension results
of our method in Tab. 5. The left subtable shows the results of UDA for panoptic segmentation,
a more challenging task requiring instance-level predictions. With more accurate and fine-grained
semantic prediction, our method achieves promising results. The right subtable shows the results of
domain generalization, in which target data only can be used for testing. With the ability of stronger
data-to-feature mapping, our method outperforms the current SOTA method (Li et al., 2023). In the
future, we seek to explore the potential of our method on more tasks, such as 3D detection.

5      C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we acknowledge the limitations of existing UDA methods in handling the domain
discrepancy present in 3D point cloud data and propose a novel paradigm to unify feature repre-
sentations across diverse 3D domains by leveraging the powerful generalization capabilities of the
vision foundation model, SAM, significantly enhancing the adaptability of 3D segmentation mod-
els. Hybrid feature augmentation strategy is also proposed to use the instance semantics of SAM for
better 3D-SAM feature alignment. We conduct extensive experiments under several UDA scenarios,
showing that our method surpasses all the compared state-of-the-art methods by a large margin.


                                                                       9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E THICS S TATEMENT
3D segmentation has been a long-standing research area in computer vision. Our work in unsuper-
vised domain adaptation for 3D segmentation contributes positively to the community by alleviating
the cost of extensive annotation. The large-scale dataset used in our study are released by other
researchers and has been publicly available for years. The dataset primarily focuses on data related
to autonomous driving scenarios, including road, cars, pedestrians, and more. To the best of our
knowledge, this dataset does not contain any privacy-related information.

R EFERENCES
Xuyang Bai, Zeyu Hu, Xinge Zhu, Qingqiu Huang, Yilun Chen, Hongbo Fu, and Chiew-Lan Tai.
  Transfusion: Robust lidar-camera fusion for 3d object detection with transformers. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1090–1099, 2022.
Jens Behley, Martin Garbade, Andres Milioto, Jan Quenzel, Sven Behnke, Cyrill Stachniss, and
  Jurgen Gall. Semantickitti: A dataset for semantic scene understanding of lidar sequences. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 9297–9307,
  2019.
Holger Caesar, Varun Bankiti, Alex H Lang, Sourabh Vora, Venice Erin Liong, Qiang Xu, Anush
  Krishnan, Yu Pan, Giancarlo Baldan, and Oscar Beijbom. nuscenes: A multimodal dataset for au-
  tonomous driving. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 11621–11631, 2020.
Haozhi Cao, Yuecong Xu, Jianfei Yang, Pengyu Yin, Shenghai Yuan, and Lihua Xie. Mopa:
  Multi-modal prior aided domain adaptation for 3d semantic segmentation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2309.11839, 2023.
Adriano Cardace, Pierluigi Zama Ramirez, Samuele Salti, and Luigi Di Stefano. Exploiting the
  complementarity of 2d and 3d networks to address domain-shift in 3d semantic segmentation.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  98–109, 2023.
Wei-Lun Chang, Hui-Po Wang, Wen-Hsiao Peng, and Wei-Chen Chiu. All about structure: Adapting
 structural information across domains for boosting semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the
 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1900–1909, 2019.
Runnan Chen, Youquan Liu, Lingdong Kong, Nenglun Chen, Xinge Zhu, Yuexin Ma, Tongliang
  Liu, and Wenping Wang. Towards label-free scene understanding by vision foundation models.
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023a.
Runnan Chen, Youquan Liu, Lingdong Kong, Xinge Zhu, Yuexin Ma, Yikang Li, Yuenan Hou,
  Yu Qiao, and Wenping Wang. Clip2scene: Towards label-efficient 3d scene understanding by
  clip. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 7020–7030, 2023b.
Christopher Choy, JunYoung Gwak, and Silvio Savarese. 4d spatio-temporal convnets: Minkowski
  convolutional neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3075–3084, 2019.
Peishan Cong, Yiteng Xu, Yiming Ren, Juze Zhang, Lan Xu, Jingya Wang, Jingyi Yu, and Yuexin
  Ma. Weakly supervised 3d multi-person pose estimation for large-scale scenes based on monoc-
  ular camera and single lidar. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 37, pp. 461–469, 2023.
MMDetection3D Contributors. MMDetection3D: OpenMMLab next-generation platform for gen-
 eral 3D object detection. https://github.com/open-mmlab/mmdetection3d, 2020.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Whye Kit Fong, Rohit Mohan, Juana Valeria Hurtado, Lubing Zhou, Holger Caesar, Oscar Beijbom,
 and Abhinav Valada. Panoptic nuscenes: A large-scale benchmark for lidar panoptic segmentation
 and tracking. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 7(2):3795–3802, 2022.

Adrien Gaidon, Qiao Wang, Yohann Cabon, and Eleonora Vig. Virtual worlds as proxy for multi-
  object tracking analysis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 4340–4349, 2016.

Jakob Geyer, Yohannes Kassahun, Mentar Mahmudi, Xavier Ricou, Rupesh Durgesh, Andrew S
  Chung, Lorenz Hauswald, Viet Hoang Pham, Maximilian Mühlegg, Sebastian Dorn, et al. A2d2:
  Audi autonomous driving dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.06320, 2020.

Benjamin Graham, Martin Engelcke, and Laurens Van Der Maaten. 3d semantic segmentation with
  submanifold sparse convolutional networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9224–9232, 2018.

Yulan Guo, Hanyun Wang, Qingyong Hu, Hao Liu, Li Liu, and Mohammed Bennamoun. Deep
  learning for 3d point clouds: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
  Intelligence, 43(12):4338–4364, 2020.

Dong He, Furqan Abid, and Jong-Hwan Kim. Multimodal fusion and data augmentation for 3d
  semantic segmentation. In IEEE International Conference on Control, Automation and Systems,
  pp. 1143–1148, 2022.

Maximilian Jaritz, Tuan-Hung Vu, Raoul de Charette, Emilie Wirbel, and Patrick Pérez. xmuda:
 Cross-modal unsupervised domain adaptation for 3d semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of
 the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 12605–12614, 2020.

Maximilian Jaritz, Tuan-Hung Vu, Raoul De Charette, Émilie Wirbel, and Patrick Pérez. Cross-
 modal learning for domain adaptation in 3d semantic segmentation. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
 Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 45(2):1533–1544, 2022.

Chao Jia, Yinfei Yang, Ye Xia, Yi-Ting Chen, Zarana Parekh, Hieu Pham, Quoc Le, Yun-Hsuan
  Sung, Zhen Li, and Tom Duerig. Scaling up visual and vision-language representation learning
  with noisy text supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4904–4916.
  PMLR, 2021.

Myeongjin Kim and Hyeran Byun. Learning texture invariant representation for domain adaptation
 of semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
 Pattern Recognition, pp. 12975–12984, 2020.

Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, et al. Segment anything. In Proceed-
  ings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, 2023.

Lingdong Kong, Jiawei Ren, Liang Pan, and Ziwei Liu. Lasermix for semi-supervised lidar semantic
  segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 21705–21715, 2023.

Georg Krispel, Michael Opitz, Georg Waltner, Horst Possegger, and Horst Bischof. Fuseseg: Li-
  dar point cloud segmentation fusing multi-modal data. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter
  Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, pp. 1874–1883, 2020.

Miaoyu Li, Yachao Zhang, Yuan Xie, Zuodong Gao, Cuihua Li, Zhizhong Zhang, and Yanyun
 Qu. Cross-domain and cross-modal knowledge distillation in domain adaptation for 3d semantic
 segmentation. In Proceedings of the ACM International Conference on Multimedia, pp. 3829–
 3837, 2022.

Miaoyu Li, Yachao Zhang, Xu Ma, Yanyun Qu, and Yun Fu. Bev-dg: Cross-modal learning
 under bird’s-eye view for domain generalization of 3d semantic segmentation. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2308.06530, 2023.


                                              11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Youquan Liu, Lingdong Kong, Jun Cen, Runnan Chen, Wenwei Zhang, Liang Pan, Kai Chen, and
  Ziwei Liu. Segment any point cloud sequences by distilling vision foundation models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2306.09347, 2023.
Jieru Mei, Alex Zihao Zhu, Xinchen Yan, Hang Yan, Siyuan Qiao, Liang-Chieh Chen, and Hen-
   rik Kretzschmar. Waymo open dataset: Panoramic video panoptic segmentation. In European
   Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 53–72. Springer, 2022.
Pietro Morerio, Jacopo Cavazza, and Vittorio Murino. Minimal-entropy correlation alignment for
  unsupervised deep domain adaptation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.10288, 2017.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, and etc Massa. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
  learning library. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32, 2019.
Duo Peng, Yinjie Lei, Wen Li, Pingping Zhang, and Yulan Guo. Sparse-to-dense feature matching:
  Intra and inter domain cross-modal learning in domain adaptation for 3d semantic segmentation.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 7108–7117,
  2021.
Charles R Qi, Hao Su, Kaichun Mo, and Leonidas J Guibas. Pointnet: Deep learning on point sets
  for 3d classification and segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 652–660, 2017a.
Charles Ruizhongtai Qi, Li Yi, Hao Su, and Leonidas J Guibas. Pointnet++: Deep hierarchical
  feature learning on point sets in a metric space. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 30, 2017b.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Cristiano Saltori, Fabio Galasso, Giuseppe Fiameni, Nicu Sebe, Elisa Ricci, and Fabio Poiesi. Cos-
  mix: Compositional semantic mix for domain adaptation in 3d lidar segmentation. In European
  Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 586–602, 2022.
Cristiano Saltori, Fabio Galasso, Giuseppe Fiameni, Nicu Sebe, Fabio Poiesi, and Elisa Ricci. Com-
  positional semantic mix for domain adaptation in point cloud segmentation. IEEE Transactions
  on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2023.
Amirreza Shaban, Joonho Lee, Sanghun Jung, Xiangyun Meng, and Byron Boots. Lidar-uda: Self-
 ensembling through time for unsupervised lidar domain adaptation. 2023.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Wenhai Wang, Jifeng Dai, Zhe Chen, Zhenhang Huang, Zhiqi Li, Xizhou Zhu, Xiaowei Hu, Tong
 Lu, Lewei Lu, Hongsheng Li, et al. Internimage: Exploring large-scale vision foundation models
 with deformable convolutions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
 and Pattern Recognition, pp. 14408–14419, 2023a.
Xinlong Wang, Xiaosong Zhang, Yue Cao, Wen Wang, Chunhua Shen, and Tiejun Huang. Seggpt:
  Segmenting everything in context. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.03284, 2023b.
Aoran Xiao, Jiaxing Huang, Dayan Guan, Kaiwen Cui, Shijian Lu, and Ling Shao. Polarmix:
  A general data augmentation technique for lidar point clouds. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 35:11035–11048, 2022.
Yiteng Xu, Peishan Cong, Yichen Yao, Runnan Chen, Yuenan Hou, Xinge Zhu, Xuming He, Jingyi
  Yu, and Yuexin Ma. Human-centric scene understanding for 3d large-scale scenarios. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2307.14392, 2023.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xu Yan, Jiantao Gao, Chaoda Zheng, Chao Zheng, Ruimao Zhang, Shuguang Cui, and Zhen Li.
  2dpass: 2d priors assisted semantic segmentation on lidar point clouds. In European Conference
  on Computer Vision, pp. 677–695. Springer, 2022.
Li Yi, Boqing Gong, and Thomas Funkhouser. Complete & label: A domain adaptation approach
  to semantic segmentation of lidar point clouds. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 15363–15373, 2021.
Yixin Zhang and Zilei Wang. Joint adversarial learning for domain adaptation in semantic segmenta-
  tion. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 34, pp. 6877–6884,
  2020.
Xinge Zhu, Hui Zhou, Tai Wang, Fangzhou Hong, Yuexin Ma, Wei Li, Hongsheng Li, and Dahua
  Lin. Cylindrical and asymmetrical 3d convolution networks for lidar segmentation. In Proceed-
  ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9939–9948,
  2021.
Xueyan Zou, Jianwei Yang, Hao Zhang, Feng Li, Linjie Li, Jianfeng Gao, and Yong Jae Lee. Seg-
  ment everything everywhere all at once. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.06718, 2023.
Yang Zou, Zhiding Yu, BVK Kumar, and Jinsong Wang. Unsupervised domain adaptation for
  semantic segmentation via class-balanced self-training. In European Conference on Computer
  Vision, pp. 289–305, 2018.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A PPENDIX
In this section, We provide more supplementary material to support the findings and observations
drawn in the main body of this paper.

A    DATASET D ETAILS
We conduct extensive experiments under several domain shift scenarios with five well-known large-
scale datasets, including nuScenes (Caesar et al., 2020), SemanticKITTI (Behley et al., 2019), Virtu-
alKITTI (Gaidon et al., 2016), A2D2 (Geyer et al., 2020), and Waymo (Mei et al., 2022). All of these
datasets provide point clouds and corresponding images captured by distinct devices resulting in dif-
ferent data representations, thus we will give more detailed information about them. (1) nuScenes
contains 1000 driving scenes with 20 seconds for each scene, taken at 2Hz. The scenes are split into
train (28,130 keyframes), validation (6,019 keyframes), and corresponding point-wise 3D semantic
labels provided by nuScenes-Lidarseg. (2) SemanticKITTI features a large-angle front camera and a
64-layer LiDAR and the captured data from scenes 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, and 10 are used for train-
ing while scenes 8 as validation at most experiments. Notably, in the experiment of Tab. 1, we use
the split introduced by xMUDA (Jaritz et al., 2022) for fair comparison. (3) VirtualKITTI consists
of 5 driving scenes created with the Unity game engine. VirtualKITTI does not simulate LiDAR
but rather provides a dense depth map with semantic labels, so we use the 2D-to-3D projecting to
generate a point cloud from the depth map. (4) A2D2 consists of 20 drives corresponding to 28,637
frames. The point cloud comes from three 16-layer front LiDARs (left, center, right), and the seman-
tic labeling was carried out in the 2D image. (5) Waymo offers 2,860 temporal sequences captured
by five cameras and one LiDAR in three different geographical locations, leading to a total of 100k
labeled data, making it larger than existing datasets that offer point-wise segmentation labels. We
visualize these five datasets with one sample to show the data domain difference in Fig. 5.

Table 6: Effect of different point mix-up strategies for the hybrid feature augmentation. “No Mix-
up” applies SAM-guided feature alignment with no-mixed data from the source and target domain.
      Setting                       Scene-level Feature Augmentation
                No Mix-up                                                            Instance-level Feature Augmentation   mIoU
                                Polar-based      Range-based       Laser-based
        (1)        ✓                                                                                                       34.0
        (2)                         ✓                                                                                      37.0
        (3)                                            ✓                                                                   38.5
        (4)                                                             ✓                                                  37.6
        (5)                                                                                            ✓                   40.1
        (6)                         ✓                  ✓                ✓                                                  39.0
        (7)                         ✓                  ✓                ✓                              ✓                   44.0



B    M ORE E XPERIMENTAL DATA
We conduct further ablation on the same setting in Sec.4.4 for hybrid feature augmentation to thor-
oughly analyze its effect. We take all the point mix-up strategies used in it apart to conduct separate
experiments and Setting (2), (3), (4), (5) in Tab. 6 shows that all of them contribute to our method.
So we combine them with random selection to form the hybrid feature augmentation. Setting (2),
(3), (4), (5) in Tab. 6 show this comprehensive approach boosts the performance since it can provide
different data with distinct feature patterns as much as possible for SAM-guided feature alignment.
Additionally, we found that this approach can be used in other multi-modal methods as a normal data
augmentation method. Taking MM2D3D (Cardace et al., 2023) as an example, we add this mod-
ule into it and Tab. 7 shows that our feature augmentation approach also improves its performance.
However, this feature augmentation approach contributes to our method in a better way because of
our effective SAM-guided feature alignment.

      Table 7: Generalization of feature augmentation for other multi-modal UDA methods.
                                       MM2D3D                     MM2D3D                        Ours
                  Source only                                                                                    Ours
                                  (Cardace et al., 2023)   w/ feature augmentation    w/o feature augmentation

                       27.7               30.4                      33.2                       34.0              48.5


                                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


            nuScenes


          SemantiKITTI


          VirtualKITTI


             A2D2


            Waymo


Figure 5: Visualization of each used dataset. From left to right, the figure shows the point cloud,
one image corresponding to the point cloud, and the projection of the point cloud on the image.


                Source only           MM2D3D                  Ours               Gound truth


    (1)


    (2)


    (3)


Figure 6: Visualization results of the domain adaptation from more domain shift scenarios, including
(1)SemanticKITII-to-nuScenes, (2) nuScenes-to-Waymo, and (3) Waymo-to-nuScenes.



                                                15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C    M ORE Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS
Except for the visualization results of the domain adaptation from nuScenes to SemanticKITII shown
in the main paper in Fig. 4, we provide additional qualitative results in Fig. 6 representing other intro-
duced domain shift scenarios in the experiment including SemanticKITII-to-nuScenes, nuScenes-to-
Waymo, and Waymo-to-nuScenes. Our method has more accurate predictions for the cars, sidewalk,
terrain, etc.


                                                   16
