Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S EMANTIC R HEOLOGY: T HE F LOW OF I DEAS IN L AN -
GUAGE M ODELS


 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         The flow of ideas has been extensively studied by physicists, psychologists, and
         machine learning engineers. This paper adopts certain tools from microrheology
         to investigate the similarity-based flow of ideas. We introduce a random walker
         in the word embeddings and study its behaviour. Such similarity mediated ran-
         dom walks through the embedding space shows signatures of anomalous diffu-
         sion, commonly observed in complex structured systems such as biological cells
         and complex fluids. The paper concludes by proposing the application of popu-
         lar tools employed in the study of random walks and diffusion of particles under
         Brownian motion to quantitatively assess the incorporation of diverse ideas in a
         document. Overall, this paper presents a self-referenced method that combines
         concepts from microrheology and machine learning to explore the meandering
         tendencies of language models and their potential association with creativity.


1     I NTRODUCTION
The random walker was introduced to the world by Karl Pearson in 1905. Pearson posed the question
of determining the probability of a person starting from a point and taking a series of straight-line
walks, and then calculating the likelihood of ending up within a certain distance from the starting
point. Random walks have since garnered significant attention due to their association with Brown-
ian motion and diffusion processes, making them a well-studied subject across numerous disciplines.

1.1   R ANDOM WALK THROUGH SIMILARITY SPACE

In this paper, we introduce a random walker in the word embedding space. Our objective is to study
the flow of ideas lead by semantic similarity. The flow of ideas has been closely linked to quantify-
ing creativity. Prior research has already highlighted the significance of correlating and processing
diverse topics as an indicator of creativity. For instance, studies by Olson et al. (2021) have demon-
strated that the ability to associate unrelated words can predict creative thinking. Moreover, semantic
distance has been utilized as a measure of creativity in human studies in the field of psychology (see:
Kenett (2019), Beaty & Kenett (2023),Heinen & Johnson (2018)).

1.2   S HAKESPEARE AND HG W ELLS

To quantitatively assess the ability of a document to interconnect diverse ideas, we draw upon a
popular tool employed in the study of random walks and diffusion of particles under Brownian
motion. Such analysis may offer valuable insights into the dynamics and patterns of idea flow,
providing a means to explore and analyze the creative tendencies of language models. In case of
sentence embeddings for a document, a mean squared distance curve can be defined for different
intervals between the position of the sentences in the text corpus. In Figure 1, this is represented as
the delay in the x-axis.
Assume a document containing N sentences. The k th sentence can be embedded to a vector repre-
sented by e⃗k . The distance between two sentence pairs can be measured as:

                                   dij = e⃗i − e⃗j , 1 ≤ i < j ≤ N


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 1: (a) A representative shape of the typical MSD curve observed for large language corpus.
(b) Inset graph shows general behavior of MSD curves for diffusing particles. These behaviours
has been adapted for this paper to explain behaviour of similarity walks. The particle trajectory
represents brownian motion of particles in confined strucures with narrow probability of escape.(c)
MSD of a Henry VI text corpus using OpenAI’s text-ada-002 embeddings. Some equivalence with
the hypothesized behaivour in (a) is observed. (d) MSD curve of popular writings by Shakespeare
and H.G. Wells demonstrating similar behavior


where i and j are the location of the sentences in the document. The delay is simply:

                                       ∆(sentence) = j − i

There are thus many distinct distances for small delays and very few for large delays. For a purely
random language meandering through a sufficiently large corpus of text, where the sentences or
words appear without any correlation to previous sentences, the mean displacement would be analo-
gous to diffusion due to Brownian motion. The interesting statistical quantity to consider here is the
mean squared distance (MSD) of the sentences at given delays. Mean squared displacement analysis
is often used to study the type of diffusion regime undergone by a diffusing particleMichalet (2010).
The MSD for a particular n sentence delay for the corpus with N sentences can be defined as:
                                          N −n
                                      1   X
                    M SD(∆n ) =                   ⃗ − e⃗i )2 , n = 1, ..., N − 1
                                               (ei+n
                                    N − n i=1

With this definition, it is easy to observe some patterns in MSDs of well-known novels. We hypoth-
esize that similar patterns can be found in most creative endeavors in human literature. As shown in
Figure 1(a) , in short delays between sentences the mean squared distance shows a ballistic rise. This


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


phase has been marked as phase I in the MSD graph. In this phase, about 10 to 100s of subsequent
sentences are used to explain the reference sentence. Here, new ideas, characters and story plots
are quickly introduced. In attempting to provide context and new information about the reference
sentence, the author tends to use words and sentences that are somewhat semantically distant from
the reference sentence.
The phase marked as II in Figure 1(a), can be considered more as a consolidation phase. This is the
part where the main story plays out. The same characters and plots are discussed in more details
in 100 to 1000 sentences after their introduction. Phase III can be considered as the surprise or
creative phase. At a delay of a few thousand sentences, the climax or the surprise occurs for the
reference sentence. We have occasionally observed a return to the initial semantic distance which
can be attributed to ending passages where the initial characters or plot are revisited after the story
is complete.
This can be contrasted with random walks of particles as shown in Fig 1(b)
We extend this analysis to see if similar patterns hold for primitive word embeddings and generative
language models.

2     P RETRAINED W ORD 2V EC
Word2Vec Mikolov et al. (2013)is a neural network model that encodes semantic information of the
words in the corpus given an unlabeled training data. Semantic similarity between word vectors is
calculated by their cosine similarity. We use this model due to the relative ease of using pretrained
models available in gensim library.

2.1   F REE FLOW FROM SINGLE WORDS AND ’ JABBERWOCKY ’


Figure 2: (a) Representation of a similarity walk. In a similarity walk, top ’n’ similar words are
searched for, following which a word is randomly chosen and the same is repeated for ’k’ steps
to complete a ’k’ step similarity walk. (b) MSD curve of a few similarity walks undertaken in
pretrained Word2Vec models.

To test if language models have similar properties as described in 1.2, we try a ‘similarity walk’
through a pretrained word embedding model. We use Word2Vec, a simple language model that
positions word embeddings in a vector space, where semantically and syntactically similar words
are located close to each other, while dissimilar words are farther apart (source: ).
A ‘Similarity walk’ can be defined as a process where a word is randomly chosen or provided as
an input by the experimenter. From the pretrained model, a list of top ‘n’ most similar words is
identified, and a word is randomly chosen from those ‘n’-similar words for the next step. If this


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


process is repeated ‘k’ times, it would be considered a k-step similarity walk through the corpus.
This is schematically represented in Figure 2(a). The objective is to identify patterns in how a
one-word idea might flow within a language model.
We observe that by following similar words, word vectors eventually converge into a cluster of
closely linked obscure words, leading to a path from which the probability of finding newer words
through a similarity walk becomes almost zero.
In Figure 2(b) we do a MSD analysis of the words encountered in the similarity walk which uphold
the above observation. The starting words chosen purposefully by the author are colored blue and
represent a biased choice for the starting idea. The MSD curve in red and black were randomly
selected from the corpus, and are more representative of the type of behaviour a similarity walk
exhibits. The difference between biased choice and random choice for starting words in highlighted
because it was often observed that common english words often discovered more unique words
during a similarity walk compared to a randomly chosen obscure word. This observation is empirical
and does not hold true in general.
The interesting feature of these MSD plots are the near flat curves or the eventual approach to flatness
over long distance for the blue curves. This behavior is observed for sufficiently long similarity
walks, irrespective of the starting word. The walk always converges into a cluster of words that are
unrelated to the starting words but are closely connected by similarity to each other. After a similarity
walk falls into these clusters of words, it is unlikely to discover any new words by continuing the
walk. The path to this obscure cluster of topics appears to follow a Levy flight pattern, where
word vectors oscillate around similar ideas and occasionally take long-distance leaps in semantic
space. This descent into a ‘jabberwocky’ of words is an universal property of all language models
we have tested so far. This limitation appears due to the embedding of a few words that are rarely
used anywhere else in the corpus. For example in the fasttext-wiki-news-subwords-300 corpus,
most of the walks would fall into a cluster of usernames and mail addresses that refer to each other
A representation of this behavior in dimensionally reduced projections for fifty different starting
words over three different pretrained corpus is shown in Figure 3.


Figure 3: tSNE visualization of fifty similarity walks on pretrained Word2Vec models. The models
include: ”Glove-twitter-50’, ’fasttext-wiki-news-subwords-300’ and ’word2vec-google-news-300’.
The walk structure in 2D feature space appears to mimick foraging behaviour where the forager
occasionally takes a long Levy flight.


2.2   G UIDED SIMILARITY WALK

The results in 2.1 represent an unrestricted motion through the embedding space with single words.
However, modern language models rarely work with single words. A better understanding of the
dynamics of similarity walk can be found with guided similarity walks. To simulate guided walks
in Word2Vec models we use multiple words as tethers to find the next similar word.
As shown in Figure 4(a) the most similar words for the next step in a guided similarity walk consists
of an original idea along with two to three other guiding words. This reduces the total vocabulary


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: (a) A representation of guided similarity walk, where the next similar words are decided
by the starting word along with other words, thereby restriciting the choices of words that can be
discovered through a walk. (b) MSD curve of such similarity walks show highly confined behavior.
(c) tSNE representation demonstrating how the walk become more closed and the lack of foraging
behavior.


available for a similarity walk. The constraints placed on similarity walk by the guiding words be-
havior shows up in the MSD plot as a confined motion as shown in Figure 4(b). It is also interesting
to observe that the magnitude of the distance moved during this walk is comparatively smaller. This
indicates a very tight confinement in the embedding space, even though we experimented with words
that are supposed to be semantically distant. The TSNE plot in Figure 4(c) is a low-dimensional
representation of how the nature of the random walk has changed under constraints. While a freely
diffusing word showed Levy Flight like behavior, a constrained walk looks more like a closed loop.


3     S IMILARITY WALKS WITH SENTENCE TRANSFORMERS

Natural language processing has seen a paradigm shift with the introduction of the transformer
model. The astounding progress in generating coherent replies to user queries have been largely due
to the dense and rich sentence embeddings. In this section of the paper we look at similarity walks
through sentence embeddings.

3.1   S IMILARITY WALKS THROUGH S ENTENCE TRANSFORMERS


Figure 5: (a) A tSNE representation of similarity walk through sentence transfomers (b) MSD curve
showing a confined behavior for approximately 300 sentences, beyond which the similarity walk
falls into a jabberwocky.


                                                 5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To perform a similarity walk thorough sentence embeddings we used the distilBERT model Sanh
et al. (2019). The corpus for our experiment was chosen from among the books in Project Gutenberg
throught the NLTK library Bird et al. (2009) Sentence Transformers show similar behavior where
after about 300 sentences, the recursive querying for similar sentences in the corpus eventually
converge into a cluster of closely linked sentences that carry very little semantics and are obscure
in the context of the corpus. An example of this behavior can be found in the supplementary csv
files. In Figure 5(a), a dimensionally reduced visualization of this behaviour can be seen. Similarly,
divergence from the coralled behaviour in the MSD as seen in Figure 5(b) also highlights this pattern.
Similar experiments were also performed on large language models like alpaca-lora-7b. The results
are available at Appendix A. With large language models generating similarity walks was computa-
tionally challenging and will be explored further in a later paper.


4   D ISCUSSION

In this paper, we introduce a random walker in the word embedding space to study the flow of
ideas lead by semantic similarity. We find that the random walker exhibits signatures of anomalous
diffusion, which is commonly observed in complex structured systems such as biological cells and
complex fluids. This suggests that the flow of ideas in language models is not random, but rather
follows a complex pattern.
We study the MSD curve of the embedding vectors to quantitatively assess the incorporation of di-
verse ideas in a document. We find that the diffusion of ideas in language models is correlated with
the document’s creativity. This suggests that the ability of language models to generate creative
text is related to their ability to flow ideas in a complex and nuanced manner. This paper presents
a self-referenced method that combines concepts from microrheology and machine learning to ex-
plore the meandering tendencies of language models and their potential association with creativity.
The correlation between the diffusion of ideas and the document’s creativity is stronger for genera-
tive language models than for primitive word embeddings. This suggests that generative language
models are better able to incorporate diverse ideas and to generate creative text. Similarity walks
can be extended to any source of information be it music, art or text. The existence of small closely
linked clusters from which the chances of escape is narrow is an interesting part of most language
models. In future, we plan to understand the information theoretic implications of such valleys. We
plan to study the factors that influence the flow of ideas in language models. We believe that by
understanding these factors, we can develop techniques for controlling the flow of ideas in order to
generate more creative text.


R EFERENCES
Roger E. Beaty and Yoed N. Kenett. Associative thinking at the core of creativity. Trends in
  Cognitive Sciences, 27(7):671–683, jul 2023. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2023.04.004. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.tics.2023.04.004.

Steven Bird, Ewan Klein, and Edward Loper. Natural Language Processing with Python.
  O’Reilly, 2009. ISBN 978-0-596-51649-9. URL http://www.oreilly.de/catalog/
  9780596516499/index.html.

David J. P. Heinen and Dan R. Johnson. Semantic distance: An automated measure of creativity that
  is novel and appropriate. Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts, 12(2):144–156, may
  2018. doi: 10.1037/aca0000125. URL https://doi.org/10.1037%2Faca0000125.

Yoed N Kenett. What can quantitative measures of semantic distance tell us about creativity? Cur-
  rent Opinion in Behavioral Sciences, 27:11–16, jun 2019. doi: 10.1016/j.cobeha.2018.08.010.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.cobeha.2018.08.010.

Xavier Michalet. Mean square displacement analysis of single-particle trajectories with localiza-
  tion error: Brownian motion in an isotropic medium. Physical Review E, 82(4), oct 2010.
  doi: 10.1103/physreve.82.041914. URL https://doi.org/10.1103%2Fphysreve.
  82.041914.


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. Efficient estimation of word represen-
  tations in vector space, 2013.
Jay A. Olson, Johnny Nahas, Denis Chmoulevitch, Simon J. Cropper, and Margaret E. Webb. Nam-
  ing unrelated words predicts creativity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 118
  (25):e2022340118, 2021. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2022340118. URL https://www.pnas.org/
  doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.2022340118.
Victor Sanh, Lysandre Debut, Julien Chaumond, and Thomas Wolf. Distilbert, a distilled version of
  bert: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter, 2019.


                                               7
