Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


LME XPLAINER : A K NOWLEDGE -E NHANCED E X -
PLAINER FOR L ANGUAGE M ODELS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Language models (LMs), such as GPT-4, are powerful tools for natural language
         processing, capable of handling diverse tasks from text generation to question an-
         swering. However, their decision process lacks transparency due to the complex,
         multi-layered, and nonlinear model structures involving millions of parameters.
         This hinders user trust on LMs, especially in safety-critical applications. Due to
         the opaque nature of LMs, a promising approach for explaining how they work
         is by generating explanations on a more transparent surrogate (e.g., a knowledge
         graph (KG)). Such works mostly exploit attention weights to provide explana-
         tions for LM recommendations. However, pure attention-based explanations lack
         scalability to keep up with the growing complexity of LMs. To bridge this im-
         portant gap, we propose LMExplainer, a knowledge-enhanced explainer for LMs
         capable of providing human-understandable explanations. It is designed to effi-
         ciently locate the most relevant knowledge within a large-scale KG via the graph
         attention neural network (GAT) to extract key decision signals reflecting how a
         given LM works. Extensive experiments comparing LMExplainer against seven
         state-of-the-art baselines show that it outperforms existing LM+KG methods on
         the CommonsenseQA and OpenBookQA datasets. We compare the explanation
         generated by LMExplainer with other algorithm-generated explanations as well
         as human-annotated explanations. The results show that LMExplainer generates
         more comprehensive and clearer explanations.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Pre-trained language models (LMs) have recently attracted significant attention due to their im-
pressive state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance on various natural language processing (NLP) tasks
(Brown et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2023; Wei et al.; Zhou et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022). These tasks in-
clude language translation (Conneau & Lample, 2019), text generation (Mireshghallah et al., 2022),
and text classification (Raffel et al., 2020), among others. One of the main advantages of LMs is
their ability to capture the nuances and the complexity of human languages.
However, a major limitation of LMs is a lack of interpretability (Meng et al., 2022). It is often
difficult to provide explanations about their “black box” decision-making processes. LMs use tech-
niques such as attention mechanisms, which allow them to focus on specific parts of the input data
when making decisions (Vaswani et al., 2017; Devlin et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019a). These mecha-
nisms can be difficult for people to understand, as they produce abstract and non-transparent internal
learning representations (Jain & Wallace, 2019). For example, a model embedding might capture
relationships and meanings as a result of passages through millions of neurons. However, such
meanings might not be immediately apparent to humans. This lack of interpretability poses a chal-
lenge to mission critical domains (e.g., healthcare (Loh et al., 2022) and online education (Zytek
et al., 2022)) as it hampers users’ trust on the recommendations made by the models.
Due to the opaque nature of LMs, a promising approach for explaining how they work is by gen-
erating explanations on a more transparent surrogate (e.g., a knowledge graph (KG)). (Geng et al.,
2022) leverages a KG as a submodel to enhance the explainability of LM-based recommendations.
Such methods provide insights into how to interpret the complex model by translating it into more
comprehensible counterparts. Attention-based explanations have also gained significant attention.
For instance, (Vig, 2019) proposes a visualizing method for attention in the LM, enhancing our


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


understanding of how these models allocate focus across input tokens. However, (Zini & Awad,
2022) pointed out that attention is not equal to explanation. Individual token representations are not
enough. A surrogate that maps tokens to specific knowledge elements that align with the reasoning
process of the LM is imperative.
In this paper, we explore the potential of using explanations to serve two purposes: 1) helping hu-
mans in understanding the model, and 2) enhancing the model’s understanding of the task at hand
through interpretation during the explanation process. In this paper, explanation refers to explaining
the model’s decision-making in a human-understandable way, while interpretation refers to under-
standing the internal workings of the model. To address the limitations of current approaches, we
propose the LMExplainer approach. It is a novel method for explaining the recommendations made
by LMs. It is designed to efficiently locate the most relevant knowledge within a large-scale KG via
the graph attention neural network (GAT) (Veličković et al., 2018) to extract key decision signals
reflecting the rationale behind the recommendations made by LMs.
We experimentally evaluate LMExplainer on the question-answering (QA) task using the Com-
monsenseQA (Talmor et al., 2019) and OpenBookQA (Mihaylov et al., 2018) datasets. The
results demonstrate that LMExplainer outperforms SOTA LM+KG QA methods on Common-
senseQA, while achieving comparable performance on OpenBookQA. Furthermore, we demon-
strate that LMExplainer is capable of providing useful insights on the reasoning processes of LMs
in a human understandable form, surpassing prior explanation methods. To the best of our knowl-
edge, LMExplainer is the first work capable of leveraging graph-based knowledge in generating
natural language explanations on the rationale behind LM behaviors.


2   R ELATED W ORK


Post-hoc explanation methods have attracted significant attention in NLP research in recent years.
Ribeiro et al. proposed LIME, which generates explanations by approximating the original model
with a local sample and highlights the most important features. Guidotti et al. extended it with
a decision tree classifier to approximate deep models. However, they cannot guarantee that the
approximations are accurate representations of the original model due to inherent limitations of
decision trees. Thorne et al. generate concepts of classifiers operating on pairs of sentences, while Yu
et al. generate aspects as explanations for search results. Kumar & Talukdar used positive labels to
generate candidate explanations, while Chen et al. used contrastive examples in the form of “why
A not B” to distinguish between confusing candidates. Different from prior work, we integrate
reasoning features and concepts into LMExplainer to explain LM behaviors.
Recently, language models (LMs) such as RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019a) and GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023)
have achieved impressive results. However, these models lack interpretability, which can hinder their
adoption in mission critical real-world applications. Previous interpretable frameworks (Ribeiro
et al., 2016; Sundararajan et al., 2017; Smilkov et al., 2017; Ding & Koehn, 2021; Swamy et al.,
2021) can be applied to LMs. However, they often rely on approximations and simplifications
of the original models, which can result in discrepancies between the model behaviours and the
explanations. In contrast, LMExplainer explains LMs by illustrating the model reasoning process.
KGs are increasingly adopted as a means to improve the interpretability and explainability of LMs
(Huang et al., 2022; Yasunaga et al., 2021; Huang et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019b). KGs are structured
representations of knowledge, and can be used to capture complex semantic relationships that are
difficult to represent in traditional LMs (Ji et al., 2021). Zhan et al. (2022a) retrieves explainable
reasoning paths from a KG and uses path features to predict the answers. Yasunaga et al. (2021) inte-
grates the KG into the model, enabling the model to reason over structured knowledge and generate
more interpretable predictions. However, these explanations can be inconsistent and accurate repre-
sentations of the model reasoning process. In addition, they are difficult for humans to understand
as they are being represented in a graph-based format. By drawing upon insights from prior works,
LMExplainer employs graph embedding to generate explanations to address these limitations.


                                                   2
         Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


         3      T HE P ROPOSED LMExplainer A PPROACH

         The LMExplainer architecture is shown in Figure 1. It consists of three main steps: (1) key el-
         ement extraction and building (Section 3.2), (2) element-graph interpretation (Section 3.3),
         and (3) explanation generation (Section 3.4). In the first step, we extract the relevant elements
         from the input data and the knowledge retrieved from the KG, and build an element-graph rep-
         resentation. In the second step, we leverage GAT to interpret the element-graph and identify the
         reason-elements behind LM predictions. In the third step, we design an instruction-based method to
         generate human-understandable explanations of the decision-making process based on the identified
         reason-elements. LMExplainer is flexible and applicable to a range of LMs (e.g., RoBERTa (Liu
         et al., 2019a), GPT-2 (Radford et al.), and Llama (Touvron et al., 2023)).

                     (1) Key Element Extraction and Building                 (2) Element-graph Interpretation           (3) Explanation Generation (+ Prediction)


                                                                                                                                                            Answer Selection
                                                          LM - Encoder
             Input Context [z]:                                                                       GAT
                                                                                GNN
             [q] What is someone doing if he or                                                                                                   MLP
             she is sitting quietly and his or
             her eyes are moving?
                                                         KG Retrieval
             [ ] A. reading B. meditate C. fall                z
             asleep D. bunk E. think                            q
                                                                        a
                                                                    n


                                                Instruction-based Explanation Generation - Stage 1:             Instruction-based Explanation Generation - Stage 2:
             Ranked Reason-elements:            Q: [x], A: [y′], R: [ ]                                         P: [E0], T: [ ∖{y′}]
             1. quiet chattering mind,
             2. not making sound,               Explanation (why-choose):                                       Explanation (why-not-choose):
             3. mind focuses,                   Since the person is described as sitting quietly                The other options, such as ”B. meditate” or ”C.
             4. glasses for people              and their eyes are moving, it is likely that they               fall asleep”, involve closing one’s eyes or
             with poor eyesight,                are engaged in a visual activity. Based on the                  having a still mind, so it is unlikely that the
             5. war                             keyword ”glasses for people with poor eyesight”,                person is doing either of those activities if
                                                option ”A. reading” is the most likely answer, as               their eyes are moving. Similarly, ”D. bunk”
                                                reading is a common visual activity that requires               and ”E. think” do not seem to be related to the
                                                focusing one’s eyes on a page and is often aided                visual activity of having one’s eyes move while
                                                by glasses for people with poor eyesight.                       sitting quietly


                                                                             (3) Explanation Generation


         Figure 1: The LMExplainer architecture. Given an input content z, we first generate language
         embeddings using a pre-trained LM. Simultaneously, it retrieves relevant knowledge from a KG to
         construct a subgraph. The language embeddings and subgraph are then combined to obtain GNN
         embeddings. This combined representation is then passed through a GAT to obtain the attention.
         The attention serves two purposes. Firstly, it weighs the importance of the GNN embeddings and
         is used with the language embeddings for the final prediction. Secondly, they are used to generate
𝒦￼
𝒜    ￼   explanations by highlighting the most important parts of the reasoning process.

         3.1      TASK D EFINITION

         We define the task of generating reasoning-level explanations for inferences made by LMs. As an
         example, we use a QA task. Given a pre-trained LM fLM with input question q, answer choice set
         A and predicted answer y ′ ∈ A, the goal is to generate an explanation E0 for why fLM chooses
         y ′ and an explanation E1 for why fLM does not choose other options A \ {y ′ }. This task can be
         expressed as:
                                 (E0 , E1 ) ← GenerateExplanation(fLM , q, A, y ′ ).                  (1)

         3.2      K EY E LEMENTS E XTRACTION AND B UILDING

         Certain key elements can significantly influence the reasoning process of LMs. To capture these
         essential elements, we first tokenize a set of sentences {q} ∪ A into tokens {x1 , x2 , . . . , xn }. Let
         z denote this set of resulting tokens. Figure 1 illustrates the “Input Content [z]”. The tokens z are
         then used to construct a multi-relational graph, following the approach from Yasunaga et al.. Firstly,
         the L-hop neighbor Gk of z is extracted from ConceptNet (Speer et al., 2017) to integrate external
         knowledge, following the approach from Feng et al. (2020). However, Gk can still contain a large
         number of edges, which lead to a huge reasoning space. Our main goal is therefore to construct a
         relevant sub-graph of Gk , referred to as the element-graph Ge . This allows us to identify essential
         elements that play a key role, and analyze the relations among them. We integrate the embedding
         from LMs to guide the pruning for Gk . Specifically, for every node v in Gk , we define an associated


                                                                                         3
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 score for pruning purposes, which is expressed as:
                                       vscore = fprob (zemb , vemb ),                                    (2)
  where fprob is the probability computation function of the pre-trained LM, zemb and vemb are the
 embeddings derived from textual representations of z and v respectively, are concatenated to fprob .
  The score captures the correlation between the node v and input content z, and is used to remove
 irrelevant nodes. We select the top K nodes based on their scores. The resulting pruned graph is
 denoted by Ge , which is referred to as the element-graph. We outline the procedure for constructing
 the element-graph in Algorithm 1.

  Algorithm 1: Construct Element-graph
  Data: Input content z
  Result: Pruned element-graph Ge
1 begin
2    Gk ← ExtractFromConceptNet(z)
                                       // Extract the L-hop neighbor from ConceptNet
3    for each node ve in Gk do
4        vscore ← fprob (zemb , vemb )                   // Compute score for pruning
5    end
6    Ge ← SelectTopK(Gk )                             // Prune based on top K scores
7    return Ge
8 end


 3.3   E LEMENT-G RAPH I NTERPRETATION

 Given an element-graph Ge , we follow Yasunaga et al. (2021) to extract the representation for graph
 reasoning. The method leverages the GAT (Veličković et al., 2018) to preserve the structure and
 context of the input through the connections between the nodes. Veličković et al. use the graph
 attention operation to take a set of node features as input and output a corresponding set of new
 node features. Formally, the input to the kth attention layer is denoted as hk = {hk1 , hk2 , . . . , hkN },
 where hkj ∈ RF is the intermediate feature for node vj , F is the input feature size and N is the
 number of nodes in the graph. The attention layer outputs a new set of corresponding node features,
                                                           ′
 hk+1 = {hk+1,1 , hk+1,2 , . . . , hk+1,N } with hkj ∈ RF .
 A parameterized transformation m : RF →   − RM is first applied to hk to generate the transformation
 m(hk ). A parameterized self-attention mechanism a : RF × RF →         − R is then used to obtain
 attention scores on hk . To retain structural information within the graph, attention scope for node
 vi is limited to nodes in its 1-hop neighborhood which is denoted as Ni . Furthermore, the attention
 scores are normalized over the neighborhood Ni to generate attention coefficients:
                                             exp(a(hki , hkj ))
                                      αij = P                     .                                      (3)
                                               exp(a(hki , hkl ))
                                             vl ∈Ni


 The output feature hk+1,i is an attentive linear combination of neighboring features with an optional
 activation:                                       X
                                     hk+1,i = σ(       αij m(hkj ))                                (4)
                                                      vj ∈Ni


 We build the graph reasoning network based on the above graph attention operation. Specifically, we
 employ a parameterized MLP fm for feature transformation. This MLP fm explicitly associates the
 node vi with its neighboring nodes vj ∈ Ni by processing the feature hki , the recorded node type ui
 of node vi and the recorded relation types rij to vj , all of which are sourced from the element-graph.
 The attention scores αij are computed using another parameterized MLP that takes features hki , hkj ,
 node and relation types ui , rij and node scores of vi and vj as input. The detailed information can
 be found in the Appendix B.2.


                                                        4
    Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    The output activation is implemented as a third 2-layer parameterized MLP fσ and the output fea-
    tures are thus obtained by:
                                              X
                                hk+1,i = fσ (     αij m(hkj , ui , rij )) + hkj ,                (5)
                                            vj ∈Ni

    where the output feature size is the same as the input feature size. The initial input features h0 is
    obtained by a linear transformation of node embeddings vemb .

    3.3.1    L EARNING AND I NFERENCE
    In our task, each question q is associated with a set of answer choices A, with only one being
    the correct answer. We leverage the information from the LM embedding and the node embed-
    ding from the element-graph. Specifically, we define the probability of choosing an answer as
    P (a|q) ∝ exp(MLP(HLM , hK , αK )), where hK is the output features and αK is the last-layer
    attention coefficients of a K-layer graph reasoning network given Ge as input, and HLM is the
    representation embedding from LM. The corresponding nodes (i.e., the reason-elements) in Ge are
    used to generate textual explanations about the decision-making process of the LM. We optimize the
    model by minimizing the cross-entropy loss.

  Algorithm 2: Element-graph Interpretation
  Data: Element-graph Ge containing node type embedding ui and relation embedding rij , input
        z.
  Result: Reason-elements
1 begin
2    for each attention layer k in graph reasoning network do
3        for each node vi in Ge do
                     exp(a(hki ,hkj ,ui ,rij ))
4            αij ← P exp(a(h        ki ,hkl ))
                                                            // Compute attention coefficient αij
                     vl ∈Ni
                                                            !
                                P
5            hk+1,i ← fδ              αij m(hkj , ui , rij ) + hki        // Update node feature
                               vj ∈Ni
6         end
 7    end
 8    HLM ← fLM (z)                                                         // Forming HLM
 9    P (a|q) ∝ exp(MLP(HLM , hK , αK ))               // Probability of choosing an answer
10    ReasonElements ← RankNode(Ge , αK ))            // Rank nodes based on the attentions
11    return ReasonElements
12 end


    3.4     ATTENTION - AWARE E XPLANATION G ENERATION

    In prior work, Chen et al. (2021) proposed a counterfactual explanation generator that pairs in-
    put text with counterfactual examples to fine-tune LMs to generate explanations in the form of
    “why A and not B”. However, this approach does not provide a complete explanation of the LM
    decision-making process. In contrast, the LMExplainer explanation generator consists of two steps:
    1) explanation component extraction, and 2) instruction-based explanation generation.

    3.4.1    E XPLANATION C OMPONENT E XTRACTION
    We first extract the key components that are essential to the LM decision-making process. These
    key components consist of the final answer, reason-elements and the attention α. The final answer
    and reason-elements are used to trace the important explanation nodes. The attention is used to
    sort the nodes and select the top w nodes most relevant to the decision. Each node represents an
    element, so we have w most important components for the explanation. We use K to represent the
    set of extracted key components. The output, E, is a natural language explanation. We outline the
    procedure to interpret the element-graph and extract the reason-elements in Algorithm 2.


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.4.2       I NSTRUCTION - BASED E XPLANATION G ENERATION
We integrate the key component set K into our instruction-based explanation generator. To guide the
generation of explanations, we leverage a set of predefined structures, including the input content
z, model predicted output y ′ , the trigger sentences, and the extracted key components K. The
LMExplainer explanation generation involves two stages: (1) why-choose for explaining why the
model chose the specific answer, and (2) why-not-choose for explaining why the model did not
choose the other explanations. In the why-choose stage, we use instructions in the form of “Q: [z],
A: [y ′ ], R: [K]”. The why-choose explanation is denoted as E0 . In the why-not-choose stage, we use
instructions in the form of “P: [E0 ], T: [A \ {y ′ }]”. Q, A, R, P and T are instructions for GPT-3.5-
turbo (Ouyang et al., 2022) to generate the literal explanations of the reasoning process of a given
LM. The generator outputs a natural language explanation in the form of a sentence or a paragraph.
The details of our instruction are shown in Appendix C.3.

4       E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION
4.1       E XPERIMENT S ETTINGS

In our experiments, we use the CommonsenseQA (Talmor et al., 2019) and OpenBookQA (Mihaylov
et al., 2018) datasets to evaluate the performance of the candidate approaches. CommonsenseQA
consists of 12,247 questions created by crowd-workers, which are designed to test commonsense
knowledge through a 5-way multiple-choice QA task. OpenBookQA consists of 5,957 questions
each requiring the task of 4-way multiple choice question answering. The questions are designed to
assess the ability of models to reason with elementary science knowledge.
Our evaluation can be divided into two parts. In the first part, we focus on model performance.
We compare LMExplainer with three sets of baseline models on the CommonsenseQA and Open-
BookQA datasets. The first set of baseline models consists of fine-tuned LM RoBERTa-large (Liu
et al., 2019a), which demonstrates the capabilities of language models without interpretation. The
second set of baseline models includes KG-augmented versions of RoBERTa-large, using Concept-
Net as the source of common sense knowledge and following the approach in (Lin et al., 2019).
The third set of baseline models is the current SOTA commonsense reasoning method on Common-
senseQA, MHGRN (Feng et al., 2020), QA-GNN (Yasunaga et al., 2021), GreaseLM (Zhang et al.,
2022). The LMs we used are from Huggingface1 .
In the second part, we evaluate LMExplainer on explanation ability. To establish a baseline for
comparison, two prior works, namely PathReasoner (Zhan et al., 2022a) and Explanations for Com-
monsenseQA (ECQA) (Aggarwal et al., 2021), were employed as benchmarks. These works are
recognized for providing natural and comprehensible explanations.
We set our GNN module to have 200 dimensions and 5 layers, where a dropout rate of 0.2 was
applied to each layer. We trained the model using the RAdam optimizer on a single NVIDIA A100
GPU. A batch size of 64 was employed during the training process, and the learning rate for the
language model and the GNN module were set to 1e − 5 and 1e − 3, respectively. These settings
were adopted in the first part of the evaluation to investigate the performance of the GNN module.
We employ ConceptNet (Speer et al., 2017) as our external knowledge source for CommonsenseQA
and OpenBookQA. ConceptNet contains a vast amount of information with 799,273 nodes and
2,487,810 edges, which provides a valuable resource for improving the accuracy of QA systems.
We extract the Gk with a hop size of 2, and subsequently prune the obtained graph to retain only the
top 200 nodes.

4.2       R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION

We present our experimental results in Table 1 and Table 2, where the accuracy of our pro-
posed LMExplainer is evaluated on the CommonsenseQA and OpenBookQA datasets. Our em-
pirical findings indicate that LMExplainer leads to consistent improvements in performance com-
pared to existing baseline methods on both datasets. Specifically, the test performance on Common-
senseQA is improved by 4.71% over the prior best LM+KG method, GreaseLM, 5.35% over the
    1
        https://huggingface.co/


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


included KG augmented LMs, and 7.12% over fine-tuned LMs. The test performance achieves com-
parable results to the prior best LM+KG method, GreaseLM, on OpenBookQA. It is worth noting
that GreaseLM is specifically designed to improve accuracy for QA tasks, while our LMExplainer
focuses on providing explanations for the reasoning process. Despite this difference in focus,
our LMExplainer not only offers insight into the underlying reasoning but also demonstrates an
improvement in performance. This finding highlights the potential benefits of incorporating ex-
plainability into the model design, as it may lead to enhanced performance in addition to fostering a
better understanding of the decision-making process.

                  Method                              IHdev-Acc.     IHtest-Acc.
                  Baselines (Feng et al., 2020)
                  MHGRN (2020)                            73.69%          71.08%
                  KagNet (2019)                           73.47%          69.01%
                  GconAttn (2019)                         72.61%          68.59%
                  RGCN (2018)                             72.69%          68.41%
                  RN (2017)                               74.57%          69.08%
                  Baselines (our implementation)
                  GreaseLM (2022)                         76.17%          72.60%
                  QA-GNN (2021)                           74.94%          72.36%
                   LMExplainer (ours)                     77.97%         77.31%

Table 1: Performance comparison of our proposed LMExplainer model against various baselines on
Commonsense QA in-house split. Our model outperforms all the other methods, achieving 77.97%
and 77.31% accuracy on IHdev and IHtest, respectively. As the official test is hidden, here we report
the in-house Dev (IHdev) and Test (IHtest) accuracy, following the data split of (Lin et al., 2019).


                     Method                             Dev-Acc.     Test-Acc.
                     Baselines (Feng et al., 2020)
                     MHGRN (2020)                         68.10%       66.85%
                     GconAttn (2019)                      64.30%       61.90%
                     RGCN (2018)                          64.65%       62.45%
                     RN (2017)                            67.00%       65.20%
                     Baselines (our implementation)
                     GreaseLM (2022)                      71.80%       70.80%
                     QA-GNN (2021)                        63.00%       59.80%
                      LMExplainer (ours)                  69.20%       68.00%

Table 2: Performance comparison of our proposed LMExplainer model against various baselines
on OpenBookQA. Our LMExplainer model exhibits competitive performance in relation to the top-
performing model, GreaseLM. It is worth noting that GreaseLM is specifically tailored to enhance
accuracy for QA tasks, whereas our LMExplainer model emphasizes providing explanations for the
underlying reasoning process. We use the official data splits.


4.3   E XPLANATION R ESULTS

Our explanation results are in Table 3. To further demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach, we
compare it with two SOTA methods, PathReasoner (Zhan et al., 2022b) and ECQA (Aggarwal et al.,
2021). PathReasoner utilizes structured information to explain the reasoning path, while ECQA
first is created by human-annotated explanations and then leverages a generation model to organize
the final explanation. In Table 3, we present the inputs and results of our approach, which include
ranked reason-elements and explanations of the reasoning process. These examples highlight the
ability of LMExplainer in generating comprehensive and interpretable explanations for the LMs.
More examples are shown in Appendix D.4.


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                   Q: What is someone doing if he or she is sitting quietly and his or her eyes are moving?
       Input Questions
                                   A. reading B. meditate C. fall asleep D. bunk E. think
            Label                  A. reading
                                   Results of Our Approach - LM
                                   1. quiet chattering mind, 2. not making sound, 3. mind focuses,
   Ranked Reason-elements
                                   4. glasses for people with poor eyesight, 5. war
                                   Since the person is described as sitting quietly and their eyes are moving,
                                   it is likely that they are engaged in a visual activity.
  Explanation (why-choose)          Based on the keyword “glasses for people with poor eyesight”,
                                   option “A. reading” is the most likely answer,
                                    as reading is a common visual activity that requires focusing one’s eyes on a page
                                   and is often aided by glasses for people with poor eyesight.
                                    The other options , such as “B. meditate” or “C. fall asleep” ,
                                   involve closing one’s eyes or having a still mind,
Explanation (why-not-choose)        so it is unlikely that the person is doing either of those activities if their eyes are moving.
                                   Similarly, “D. bunk” and “E. think” do not seem to be related to the visual activity of
                                   having one’s eyes move while sitting quietly.
                                   Explanation of Others
       PathReasoner
                                   quietly [related to] quiet [at location] a library [used for] reading
     (Zhan et al., 2022a)
           ECQA
                                   While meditating and sleeping, eyes don’t move, eyes are closed.
    (Aggarwal et al., 2021)

Table 3: Explanation examples of LMExplainer, PathReasoner and ECQA. We show the different
types of explanations, including ranked reason-elements, why-choose explanations and why-not-
choose explanations. The explanations for why-choose, present the model reasoning process in a
logical way, while for why-not-choose show the model why does not choose other answers, which
enhances the transparency and interpretability of the reasoning process for humans. We use green
and blue to highlight the logical connectives and reasoning framework, respectively. The complete
results of comparison methods are shown in Appendix (Table 7).
                                                Method         IHdev-Acc.          IHtest-Acc.
                                  RoBERTa w/o itp                 68.63%              64.54%
                              RoBERTa-large w/o itp               73.05%              71.96%
                                RoBERTa-large + itp               77.97%              77.31%

        Table 4: Ablation study on the effect of interpreting component on model accuracy.
In comparison to PathReasoner explanations, which only provide structured reasoning paths that
are non-informative and require manual selection of a specific path, our proposed approach not
only offers a complete reasoning path but also provides a justification for the predicted answer. As
illustrated in Table 3 and Table 7, PathReasoner presents four reasoning paths, including redundant
paths, making it difficult to identify the faithful reasoning path. In contrast, our method provides
a clear and concise natural language explanation for the chosen answer (why-choose explanation),
which greatly enhances the understandability and smoothness of the explanation.
The ECQA consists of human-annotated explanations that provide highly accurate descriptions of
the reasoning process. However, as shown in Table 3 and Table 7, its explanations are simply a com-
bination of positive and negative examples provided by humans. While this approach can generate
high-quality explanations from a human perspective, it fails to illustrate the actual decision-making
process of the model. In contrast, the explanations generated by LMExplainer are not a mere com-
bination of sentences but are inferred and logically derived. LMExplainer provides a more com-
prehensive and accurate depiction of the reasoning process and improves the overall interpretability
and usefulness of the generated explanations. In addition, the why-not-choose explanation explains
why the model does not choose other answers, which gives people a better understanding of the
model’s reasoning process and increases the transparency of the model. These results highlight the
effectiveness of quantifying the influence of tokens on determining the decision-making process and
provide a literal representation of the information flow during the inference process. This is impor-
tant because it allows us to understand the rationale behind the decision-making process of the LM
and identify key factors that contribute to its predictions.


                                                              8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 LM     IHdev-Acc.   IHtest-Acc.                              Method    IHdev-Acc.   IHtest-Acc.
                                                                       RoBERTa only      62.65%       60.27%
          RoBERTa        66.26%        63.01%                    RoBERTa-large only      74.28%       70.19%
RoBERTa-large (final)    77.97%        77.31%      RoBERTa-large + external knowledge    77.97%       77.31%


Table 5: Ablation study on the effect of LM size Table 6: Ablation study on the effect of knowl-
on model accuracy.                               edge component on model accuracy.


4.4   A BLATION S TUDIES

In this section, we examine the impact of different components of LMExplainer on its performance.
We evaluated the effects of the size of the LMs, knowledge components, and interpreting com-
ponents using the CommonsenseQA IHdev and IHtest datasets. Tables 5, 6 and 4 summarize the
ablation study results.
Table 5 shows the impact of the size of LM on LMExplainer. We evaluate the performance of LMs
with two different sizes: 1) RoBERTa-large (with 340 million parameters) and 2) RoBERTa (with
110 million parameters). The results show that using a larger LM leads to significant improvement
in performance, with an increase of 11.71% and 14.30% in model accuracy on the IHdev dataset
and the IHtest dataset, respectively.
Table 6 shows the impact of the knowledge component of LMExplainer. We compare the perfor-
mance of the LM-only model with and without external knowledge from ConceptNet. only means
we only use the LM to predict the answer. + external knowledge means the external knowledge is
leveraged. We observe that incorporating external knowledge significantly improves the accuracy
of the LM prediction, especially on the test set. With external knowledge, the model accuracy on
IHdev and IHtest is increased by at least 3.69% and 7.12%, respectively.
In Table 4, we analyze the impact of the interpreting component on LM performance. w/o itp
indicates that the interpreting component was not incorporated in the prediction, whereas the +
itp indicates its presence. We observe that removing the interpreting component leads to a clear
decrease in accuracy by at least 4.92% and 5.35% on IHdev and IHtest, respectively. Furthermore,
comparing the results of RoBERTa-large only, RoBERTa-large + itp, and final, we find that the
interpreting component has a greater impact on accuracy than the other components.
The ablation highlights the positive contributions of each component of LMExplainer. Specifically,
we find that the interpreting component plays a crucial role in enhancing model accuracy and gen-
eralizability on unseen questions.


5     L IMITATION

In the pursuit of transparency and rigorous discourse, we recognize several limitations in our method.
Our KG relies on ConceptNet. Any limitations or inaccuracies within ConceptNet could impact
the quality and accuracy of our explanations. Another potential constraint is that the explanations
generated by our selected LM could vary if other LMs were used, potentially affecting the content
and style of the explanations.


6     C ONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we propose LMExplainer, a novel model that incorporates an interpretation module
to enhance the performance of LMs while also providing clear and trustworthy explanations of the
model’s reasoning. Our explanation results are presented in a logical and comprehensive manner,
making it easier for humans to understand the model’s reasoning in natural language. Our exper-
imental results demonstrate superior performance compared to prior SOTA works across standard
datasets in the commonsense domain. Our analysis shows that LMExplainer not only improves the
model’s performance but also provides humans with a better understanding of the model.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Shourya Aggarwal, Divyanshu Mandowara, Vishwajeet Agrawal, Dinesh Khandelwal, Parag Singla,
  and Dinesh Garg. Explanations for CommonsenseQA: New Dataset and Models. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the
  11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Pa-
  pers), pp. 3050–3065, Online, August 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.238. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-long.238.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Qianglong Chen, Feng Ji, Xiangji Zeng, Feng-Lin Li, Ji Zhang, Haiqing Chen, and Yin Zhang.
  Kace: Generating knowledge aware contrastive explanations for natural language inference. In
  Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the
  11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers),
  pp. 2516–2527, 2021.
Alexis Conneau and Guillaume Lample. Cross-lingual language model pretraining. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
  the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota, June
  2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1423. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/N19-1423.
Shuoyang Ding and Philipp Koehn. Evaluating saliency methods for neural language models.
  In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 5034–5052, Online, June
  2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.naacl-main.399. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2021.naacl-main.399.
Yanlin Feng, Xinyue Chen, Bill Yuchen Lin, Peifeng Wang, Jun Yan, and Xiang Ren. Scalable multi-
  hop relational reasoning for knowledge-aware question answering. In Proceedings of the 2020
  Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 1295–1309,
  2020.
Shijie Geng, Zuohui Fu, Juntao Tan, Yingqiang Ge, Gerard De Melo, and Yongfeng Zhang. Path
  language modeling over knowledge graphsfor explainable recommendation. In Proceedings of
  the ACM Web Conference 2022, pp. 946–955, 2022.
Riccardo Guidotti, Anna Monreale, Salvatore Ruggieri, Dino Pedreschi, Franco Turini, and Fosca
  Giannotti. Local rule-based explanations of black box decision systems. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1805.10820, 2018.
Jie Huang, Kerui Zhu, Kevin Chen-Chuan Chang, Jinjun Xiong, and Wen-mei Hwu. DEER: De-
   scriptive knowledge graph for explaining entity relationships. In Proceedings of the 2022 Con-
   ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 6686–6698, Abu Dhabi,
   United Arab Emirates, December 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https:
   //aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.448.
Xiaowen Huang, Quan Fang, Shengsheng Qian, Jitao Sang, Yan Li, and Changsheng Xu. Explain-
  able interaction-driven user modeling over knowledge graph for sequential recommendation. In
  proceedings of the 27th ACM international conference on multimedia, pp. 548–556, 2019.
Sarthak Jain and Byron C Wallace. Attention is not explanation. In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT,
  pp. 3543–3556, 2019.
Shaoxiong Ji, Shirui Pan, Erik Cambria, Pekka Marttinen, and S Yu Philip. A survey on knowledge
  graphs: Representation, acquisition, and applications. IEEE transactions on neural networks and
  learning systems, 33(2):494–514, 2021.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sawan Kumar and Partha Talukdar. NILE : Natural language inference with faithful natural language
  explanations. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, pp. 8730–8742, Online, July 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.771. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.771.
Belinda Z Li, Jane Yu, Madian Khabsa, Luke Zettlemoyer, Alon Halevy, and Jacob Andreas. Quan-
  tifying adaptability in pre-trained language models with 500 tasks. In Proceedings of the 2022
  Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
  Human Language Technologies, pp. 4696–4715, 2022.
Bill Yuchen Lin, Xinyue Chen, Jamin Chen, and Xiang Ren. Kagnet: Knowledge-aware graph
  networks for commonsense reasoning. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural
  Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 2829–2839, 2019.
Pengfei Liu, Weizhe Yuan, Jinlan Fu, Zhengbao Jiang, Hiroaki Hayashi, and Graham Neubig. Pre-
  train, prompt, and predict: A systematic survey of prompting methods in natural language pro-
  cessing. ACM Computing Surveys, 55(9):1–35, 2023.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike
  Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining
  approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692, 2019a.
Zhibin Liu, Zheng-Yu Niu, Hua Wu, and Haifeng Wang. Knowledge aware conversation generation
  with explainable reasoning over augmented graphs. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference
  on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 1782–1792, 2019b.
Hui Wen Loh, Chui Ping Ooi, Silvia Seoni, Prabal Datta Barua, Filippo Molinari, and U Rajendra
  Acharya. Application of explainable artificial intelligence for healthcare: A systematic review
  of the last decade (2011–2022). Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine, pp. 107161,
  2022.
Chuizheng Meng, Loc Trinh, Nan Xu, James Enouen, and Yan Liu. Interpretability and fairness
  evaluation of deep learning models on mimic-iv dataset. Scientific Reports, 12(1):7166, 2022.
Todor Mihaylov, Peter Clark, Tushar Khot, and Ashish Sabharwal. Can a suit of armor conduct elec-
  tricity? a new dataset for open book question answering. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference
  on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 2381–2391, 2018.
Fatemehsadat Mireshghallah, Kartik Goyal, and Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick. Mix and match: Learning-
  free controllable text generationusing energy language models. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual
  Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 401–415,
  2022.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. ArXiv, abs/2303.08774, 2023.
Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.02155, 2022.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(1):5485–5551, 2020.
Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. ” why should i trust you?” explaining the
 predictions of any classifier. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference
 on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 1135–1144, 2016.
Daniel Smilkov, Nikhil Thorat, Been Kim, Fernanda B. Viégas, and Martin Wattenberg. Smooth-
  grad: removing noise by adding noise. ArXiv, abs/1706.03825, 2017.

                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Robyn Speer, Joshua Chin, and Catherine Havasi. Conceptnet 5.5: An open multilingual graph of
  general knowledge. In Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  AAAI’17, pp. 4444–4451. AAAI Press, 2017.

Mukund Sundararajan, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi Yan. Axiomatic attribution for deep networks. In
 Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning - Volume 70, ICML’17,
 pp. 3319–3328. JMLR.org, 2017.

Vinitra Swamy, Angelika Romanou, and Martin Jaggi. Interpreting language models through knowl-
  edge graph extraction. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 1st
  Workshop on eXplainable AI Approaches for Debugging and Diagnosis, 2021.

Alon Talmor, Jonathan Herzig, Nicholas Lourie, and Jonathan Berant. CommonsenseQA: A ques-
  tion answering challenge targeting commonsense knowledge. In Proceedings of the 2019 Con-
  ference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
  Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 4149–4158, Minneapolis, Min-
  nesota, June 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1421. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/N19-1421.

James Thorne, Andreas Vlachos, Christos Christodoulopoulos, and Arpit Mittal. Generating token-
  level explanations for natural language inference. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the
  North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 963–969, 2019.

Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.

Petar Veličković, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro Liò, and Yoshua
  Bengio. Graph Attention Networks. International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2018. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=rJXMpikCZ. accepted as poster.

Jesse Vig. A multiscale visualization of attention in the transformer model. In Proceedings of the
  57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations,
  pp. 37–42, Florence, Italy, July 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/
  v1/P19-3007. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P19-3007.

Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du, An-
  drew M Dai, and Quoc V Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations.

Michihiro Yasunaga, Hongyu Ren, Antoine Bosselut, Percy Liang, and Jure Leskovec. Qa-gnn:
 Reasoning with language models and knowledge graphs for question answering. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2104.06378, 2021.

Puxuan Yu, Razieh Rahimi, and James Allan. Towards explainable search results: A listwise expla-
  nation generator. In Proceedings of the 45th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research
  and Development in Information Retrieval, pp. 669–680, 2022.

Xunlin Zhan, Yinya Huang, Xiao Dong, Qingxing Cao, and Xiaodan Liang. Pathreasoner: Explain-
  able reasoning paths for commonsense question answering. Knowledge-Based Systems, 235:
  107612, 2022a. ISSN 0950-7051. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2021.107612. URL
  https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0950705121008741.

Xunlin Zhan, Yinya Huang, Xiao Dong, Qingxing Cao, and Xiaodan Liang. Pathreasoner: Explain-
  able reasoning paths for commonsense question answering. Knowledge-Based Systems, 235:
  107612, 2022b.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xikun Zhang, Antoine Bosselut, Michihiro Yasunaga, Hongyu Ren, Percy Liang, Christopher D
  Manning, and Jure Leskovec. Greaselm: Graph reasoning enhanced language models for question
  answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.08860, 2022.
Kaiyang Zhou, Jingkang Yang, Chen Change Loy, and Ziwei Liu. Learning to prompt for vision-
  language models. International Journal of Computer Vision, 130(9):2337–2348, 2022.
Julia El Zini and Mariette Awad. On the explainability of natural language processing deep models.
  ACM Computing Surveys, 55(5):1–31, 2022.
Alexandra Zytek, Ignacio Arnaldo, Dongyu Liu, Laure Berti-Equille, and Kalyan Veeramachaneni.
  The need for interpretable features: Motivation and taxonomy. ACM SIGKDD Explorations
  Newsletter, 24(1):1–13, 2022.


A.1     OTHER E XPLANATION E XAMPLES
We demonstrate the complete explanation example of PathReasoner and ECQA in Table 7. These
methods exhibit in an unclear and intricate manner. Such explanations make it hard for humans to
understand the decision-making process behind the model.

                   Q: What is someone doing if he or she is sitting quietly and his or her eyes are moving?
Input Questions
                   A. reading B. meditate C. fall asleep D. bunk E. think
      Label        A. reading
                   Explanation of Others
                   quietly [related to] quiet [at location] a library [used for] reading
    Path-          eyes [used for] reading
   Reasoner        eyes [form of] eye [related to] glasses [used for] reading
                   sitting [related to] sit [related to] relaxing [has subevent] reading
                   Positive examples:
                   - When we read, our eyes move.
                   - While reading, a person sits quietly,
                   Negative examples:
                   - While meditating, eyes don’t move, eyes are closed,
                   - While sleeping, eyes are closed and they don’t move,
                   - When a person bunks, he/she doesn’t sit quietly,
    ECQA
                   - Eyes don’t move when you think about something.
                   Explanation:
                   When we read, our eyes move.
                   While reading, a person sits quietly.
                   While meditating and sleeping, eyes don’t move, eyes are closed.
                   When a person bunks, he/she doesn’t sit quietly.
                   Eyes don’t move when you think about something.

              Table 7: The complete explanation examples of PathReasoner and ECQA.


B.2     D ETAILS OF E LEMENT- GRAPH
Due to space constraints in the main text, we provide a comprehensive description of the node and
relations types, alongside the detailed equations for computing their embeddings.
The node-type ui are the one-hot vectors of the node types. The type is according to the node’s origin
form, the input content z, question {q}, answer A, or the node in the KG. The ui is transformed into
an embedding through a linear transformation for subsequent calculations.
The relation type rij is determined using pre-defined templates, which are employed to extract
relations from the knowledge triples in the KG (Feng et al., 2020). The embedding rij for the
relation is computed for subsequent use:
                                  rij = fζ (rij , uij ) = fζ (rij , ui , uj ),                         (6)


                                                      13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where fζ is a two-layer MLP, uij denotes the concatenation of ui and uj .
The node score vscore is subsequently utilized in its embedded form, calculated by:
                                        vscore = fρ (vscore )                                         (7)
where fρ is a two-layer MLP.


C.3    I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

Due to the constraints of space, we present the specific details of our explanation generator here.
For explanation generation, the example instruction we used in the first stage is Q=“Question con-
tent is”, A=“The predicted choice is”, R=“According to the model top reason-elements” + K +
“explain the model reasoning process with ‘since. . . ’ ”, K is the top reason-elements of the model.
In the second stage, P=“According to”, and T=“explain why the model doesn’t choose other options
with ‘The other potential choices’ ”.


D.4     C ASE S TUDY

In this section, we will present more explanation examples generated by LMExplainer, to demon-
strate the effectiveness of our method. These questions are randomly selected from the dataset.
By sharing these examples, we aim to highlight the broad applicability and robust performance
of LMExplainer across diverse contexts. These examples not only illustrate the adaptability of our
approach but also substantiate its validity by demonstrating consistent results.
[Example A]
Input Question: Where could there by tens of thousands of people playing baseball?
A. America B. Canada C. Pitcher’s mitt D. Park E. Sporting goods store
Label: A. America
Ranked Reason-elements: 1. bronx new york, 2. amharic, 3. baseball game, 4. pitcher’s mitt, 5.
thousand and one.
Why-choose explanation:
 Since the reason-elements bronx new york, baseball game, and thousand and one are associ-
ated with American baseball culture and history, and pitcher’s mitt is specifically related to playing
baseball, the model predicted that the answer is America where there could be tens of thousands
of people playing baseball.
Why-not-choose explanation:
 The other potential choices , Canada, park, and sporting goods store , are unlikely because
these locations do not have the same historical significance or cultural association with baseball
as America. Additionally , the word pitcher’s mitt suggests an outdoor area where people can
play baseball, making it even less likely that a sporting goods store would be the correct answer.
[Example B]
Input Question: What would you see if there were different types of flowers near you?
A. Many colors B. Smell good C. Cover fields D. Smell bad E. Continue to grow
Label: A. Many colors
Ranked Reason-elements: 1. plant themselves, 2. flower arrangement, 3. pair of shoes, 4. female
reproductive part of flower, 5. wisconsin product.
Why-choose explanation:
Since the model identified flower arrangement and female reproductive part of the flower as


                                                 14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


top reasons, it suggests that the presence of different types of flowers would likely result in a
variety of colors and arrangements of petals, which aligns with the predicted option of many colors.
Why-not-choose explanation:
The other potential choices , such as smell good and smell bad , are excluded because the
model did not identify any relevant keywords related to scent. Similarly , cover fields and con-
tinue to grow are not directly related to the presence of different types of flowers, which is the focus
of the question.
[Example C]
Input Question: Why does someone engage in chatting with friends when they want to workout?
A. Fun B. Agreement C. Cell phone D. Answers E. Inspiration
Label: E. Inspiration
Ranked Reason-elements: 1. assemble cleaning materials, 2. gain, 3. feeling of comfort, 4.
chatoyance, 5. walking.
Why-choose explanation:
Since the words gain and feeling of comfort            suggest a desire to improve oneself during a
workout, and assemble cleaning materials and walking imply a pre-workout routine, the model
predicts that the reason for engaging in chatting with friends during a workout is inspiration, as it
can provide motivation and support to achieve fitness goals.
Why-not-choose explanation:
The other potential choices , such as fun, agree- ment , and cell phone , are unlikely reasons
for engaging in chatting during a workout because they do not offer a clear connection to exer-
cise. Additionally , they do not address the underlying motivation for the workout or the desire to
improve oneself. Similarly , the word answers does not align with the context of working out and
could be interpreted in various ways, making it an improbable option.


                                                  15
