Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E MERGENT C ORPUS P RE - TRAINING B ENEFITS V ISION
L ANGUAGE M ODELING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Vision Language Pre-trained Models (VL-PTMs) have achieved state-of-the-art
         results across various tasks, but their effectiveness heavily relies on large-scale
         multimodal datasets. While VL-PTMs excel in scenarios with abundant data, they
         struggle to achieve sample efficiency in tasks with limited data resources. In this
         work, we explore the use of Emergent Communication (EC) for knowledge transfer
         in VL-PTMs. In particular, we pre-train a state-of-the-art Vision Language (VL)
         model on a corpus of EC tokens, generated through a referential game involving
         two artificial agents. Through experiments on three diverse cross-modal matching
         and reasoning tasks, we demonstrate significant performance improvements. For
         instance, EC pretraining enhances Visual Referring Expression (VRE) accuracy
         by 108.6% while improving Visual Entailment (VE) performance by 69.6%. We
         further demonstrate that a vision-language model, exclusively pre-trained on EC
         tokens from scratch utilizing a sequence-to-sequence learning objective, can be
         effectively leveraged for fine-tuning numerous other vision-language downstream
         tasks, outperforming baseline settings without any pretraining and in some cases
         significantly narrowing the performance gap with models pre-trained on natural
         language. These results highlight the transferability and generalization capabilities
         of EC pretraining across different VL tasks and the potential of leveraging the
         multimodal grounding of EC tokens to enhance VL understanding in resource-
         constrained settings, especially in settings with limited natural language data.
         We discuss implications and propose avenues for future research to explore the
         connections between EC and VL for multimodal understanding and effective
         human-machine communication.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Over the years, significant advancements have been made in Vision Language Pre-trained Models
(VL-PTMs). The prevailing approach has been to build larger models, incorporating more parameters
in order to enhance their generalizability Du et al. (2022). Alternative efforts have been directed
toward devising improved architectures for the fusion of text and image representations, such as fusion
encoders, dual encoders, or a combination thereof Radford et al. (2021); Li et al. (2020a). Despite
these remarkable advancements, the challenge of achieving robust generalization in low-resource
scenarios persists for VL-PTMs. A pivotal factor contributing to this limitation is the scarcity of
parallel data for numerous real-world cross-modal applications and tasks, including but not limited to
image-text retrieval, phrase grounding, visual question answering, and video localization Xu et al.
(2023); Li et al. (2023); Liu et al. (2023a).
Self-supervised Learning (SSL) has emerged as a leading strategy to tackle challenges related
to limited resources and label scarcity in vision-language learning. By employing contrastive
learning and pretext tasks, SSL has facilitated substantial progress, exemplified by models such as
CLIP Radford et al. (2021) and VisualBERT Li et al. (2019) that can effectively learn cross-modal
representations. Despite these achievements, SSL methods encounter several challenges that can limit
practical utility, e.g., task design dependency, computational complexity, sensitivity to the choice
of hyper-parameters, and catastrophic forgetting Purushwalkam et al. (2022); Tian et al. (2020);
Ericsson et al. (2021). The study of Emergent Communication (EC) is a promising direction as an
alternative paradigm that can address these challenges.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Emergent communication in multi-agent environments investigates the interactive and functional
language ability of intelligent agents, for example, how deep agents collaboratively invent a shared
language for task completion. This involves experimental validation on environments in which agents
are trained to make sequences of decisions. Typically, agents are assigned a task to achieve and
are also equipped with a shared reward function. In most studies, agents must learn to maximize
the expected cumulative reward, which serves as the shared supervision signal Lazaridou et al.
(2017; 2018); Havrylov & Titov (2017). Effective communication plays a pivotal role in facilitating
collaborative task completion. A common approach to modeling EC in literature is to allow agents
(usually two) to interact by playing a referential game Evtimova et al. (2018); Lazaridou et al. (2018);
Li et al. (2020b); Yao et al. (2022). In this game, one agent, referred to as the Speaker Agent, is shown
an input image and must generate a message, in the form of a discrete set of tokens that describes the
image. The generated message is passed to another agent, known as the Listener Agent, who must
select the correct input image from a set of distractors.
In the context of vision-language pretraining, EC offers several benefits. EC provides a practical
alternative to natural language, particularly beneficial in resource-constrained settings. Recent works
show that EC shares several common properties with natural language, such as compositionality,
learning, structure, and symbolic representation Yao et al. (2022); Li et al. (2020b). These similarities
motivates us to explore EC pretraining. If emergent communication proves effective for VLM-PTMs,
it could be a valuable tool for training models when large labeled parallel vision-language datasets are
scarce or expensive to obtain. The emergent messages encapsulate both visual and linguistic stimuli,
providing a rich learning signal for vision-language modeling, enhancing the model’s proficiency in
understanding and generating meaningful associations between visual and linguistic elements.
Drawing on past successes demonstrating the benefits of emergent communication in language
modeling Li et al. (2020b), in this paper, we extend the applicability of emergent language to
vision-language learning, emphasizing its broader utility and effectiveness in multimodal contexts.
Specifically, we explore the transferability of knowledge gained through EC pretraining across
multiple vision-language downstream tasks. We present a series of experiments aimed at pretraining
VLMs on a corpus of EC tokens and subsequently fine-tuning them for various downstream tasks,
including cross-modal matching (e.g., Visual Referring Expression) and cross-modal reasoning (e.g.,
Visual Question Answering and Visual Entailment). Investigating the impact of EC on vision-language
learning can improve our understanding on how models autonomously develop communication
strategies, potentially providing insights into the inner workings of VLMs.
Our objective is to investigate the extent to which incorporating emergent language modeling confers
transferable benefits to various downstream VL tasks. Through a comprehensive series of experiments,
we observe significant improvements in downstream task performance. Specifically, EC pretraining
improves VRE accuracy by 108.6% compared to the baseline, with the model accuracy doubling from
29.81% to 62.17% on the validation set after pretraining on EC, showcasing the model’s enhanced
understanding of the visual context. For Visual Entailment, a task requiring complex reasoning, EC
pretraining achieves a significant accuracy gain of 69.6%, highlighting its ability to capture nuanced
semantic relationships between visual content and textual hypotheses. These findings open up new
possibilities for leveraging EC to improve performance in other cross-modal tasks. Our results
demonstrate the potential of EC corpus pretraining in VL applications.
The contributions of our work can be summarized as follows: (1) We introduce a learning framework
(EC-VL) that leverages the interactive and functional language abilities of communicating agents
to explore the benefits of emergent language in vision language model pretraining. We evaluate
the effectiveness of EC pretraining on various VL downstream tasks, including Visual Referring
Expression (VRE), Visual Question Answering (VQA), and Visual Entailment (VE). By considering
a diverse range of tasks, we demonstrate the transferability and generalization capabilities of EC pre-
training across different reasoning scenarios. (2) We provide empirical evidence of the transferability
of benefits of EC pretraining in VL applications. Our results reveal significant performance gains
across all evaluated downstream tasks, highlighting how incorporating emergent language modeling
in pretraining substantially enhances the model’s understanding and reasoning capabilities in various
VL tasks. These findings open up new possibilities for leveraging EC to improve performance in other
cross-modal tasks. (3) We provide insights into the nature of emergent language and its potential
applications in VL-PTMs. We discuss the implications of our findings and propose potential exten-
sions for future research to delve into the intricate connections between EC and VL for multimodal
understanding and for effective human-machine communication.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           (a) Visual Referring Expression       (b) VQA                                              (c) Visual Entailment
                                Pre-training                          Pre-training                                  VRE Pre-training
                                                 ³LV WKLV SHUVRQ «´


                                      OFA                                      OFA    ³          «´                          OFA


                Speaker                                   Speaker                                         Speaker
              508, 3915, 2211 ...                    3735 7331 3081 ...                                508, 3915, 2211 ...


                                    Finetuning                         Finetuning                                        Finetuning

                                                 ³KRZ PDQ\ KDWV «´                                       ³WZR HPSOR\HHV «´
                                       OFA

                                                                                OFA   ³  «´                                  OFA          ³PD\EH´
          ³ZRPDQ ZLWK UHG MDFNHW´                                                                                                     (neutral entailment)


Figure 1: Method overview: a) VRE pretraining uses EC tokens for learning instead of natural
language. VRE fine-tuning trains with natural language input. b) VQA pretraining uses EC text as
a target answer while fine-tuning is performed on natural language answers. c) Visual Entailment
adopts the VRE pre-trained model for fine-tuning in order to explore EC pretraining transfer.


2   R ELATED W ORK

Emergent Communication. Recently, there has been a growing interest in investigating the
emergence of language within deep agent networks for task completion Lazaridou et al. (2017; 2018);
Lazaridou & Baroni (2020); Mordatch & Abbeel (2018); Raviv et al. (2019a); Das et al. (2019).
Pioneering works simulate communication while training agents Lazaridou et al. (2017); Evtimova
et al. (2018). Building upon these foundations, Mordatch & Abbeel (2018); Raviv et al. (2019b)
further explored the compositionality aspect of the emerged language. Several researchers have also
attempted to interpret the structure and linguistic properties of the emergent language. For instance,
Chaabouni et al. (2019) discovered that networks develop an anti-efficient encoding scheme, where
longer messages are associated with the most frequent inputs, contrary to human language where
the most frequent words are usually represented by shorter strings. Additionally, Patel et al. (2021)
observed the emergence of egocentric grounded messages when agents were initialized in complex
environments. In our work, instead of analyzing or explaining the emerging language, we focus
on harnessing the inductive bias provided by the emergent language to enhance cross-modal vision
and language learning. To this end, we explore the benefits of Emergent Communication (EC) for
Vision Language pre-training and, interestingly, we gain valuable insights that contribute to a better
understanding of EC language dynamics.


Corpus Transfer of Synthetic or Emergent Communication Language. While significant
progress has been made in analyzing the properties of emergent communication language Mor-
datch & Abbeel (2018); Resnick et al. (2020); Lazaridou & Baroni (2020); Chaabouni et al. (2019),
a different line of research has explored the potential transfer benefits of synthetic and emergent
language in improving learning and generalization in language models Yao et al. (2022); Li et al.
(2020b); Papadimitriou & Jurafsky (2020). For instance, Papadimitriou & Jurafsky (2020) inves-
tigated the structural awareness of language models, measuring how much the language structure
acts as an inductive bias to enhance learning when transferring from one language or structure to
another. They trained models on data with varying degrees of language-like structure, such as music,
Java code, and nested symbols, and evaluated their performance on natural language to examine the
presence of an inductive bias. Similarly, Yao et al. (2022) linked emergent languages and natural
languages by investigating whether modeling an emergent language provides transferable benefits for
downstream natural language tasks, including language modeling and image captioning. Their results
demonstrated that pre-training on emergent communication text can achieve comparable performance
to models pre-trained on natural language, particularly in low-resource settings. Furthermore, Li
et al. (2020b) investigated the potential of an emergent communication protocol pre-trained without
any human language data to benefit downstream NLP applications like machine translation. Their
findings across various language pairs and few-shot setups indicate that parameter initializations
informed by EC pre-training, along with adapter modules and annealed regularization, yield higher
accuracy and improve sample efficiency compared to baselines without EC pertaining. We enrich this
body of work by investigating the benefits of EC pertaining to Vision Language learning. We argue
that by leveraging the Emergent Corpus text, generated through a referential game grounded in both


                                                                              3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


vision and language, we can maximize its utility in cross-modal settings. We experimentally show
that EC corpus transfer can enhance vision language tasks.

Pre-training for Vision Language Transfer Learning. In the field of cross-modal machine
learning, the predominant approach has been to pre-train VLMs on multimodal data and subsequently
fine-tune them for various downstream tasks Wang et al. (2022a); Gan et al. (2022); Du et al. (2022).
Tasks involving reasoning and grounding, such as Visual Question Answering Antol et al. (2015),
Phrase grounding Yu et al. (2016), as well as Image Captioning Lin et al. (2014), have greatly
benefited from these pre-trained models, leading to significant performance improvements Zellers
et al. (2019); Cho et al. (2021). Several successful architectures have been proposed to model visual
language interactions Li et al. (2020a; 2019). For instance, Fusion Encoders Li et al. (2019); Su et al.
(2020) employ self-attention or cross-attention operations on text embeddings and image features,
while Dual Encoders Radford et al. (2021); Wang et al. (2022b) utilize separate encoders for each
modality, making them highly efficient for tasks like image-text retrieval Du et al. (2022); Lu et al.
(2019). Different pre-training objectives also exist for various vision language downstream tasks. One
common approach is Cross-Modal Masked Language Modeling (MLM) Liu et al. (2023b); Kim et al.
(2021). In cross-modal MLM, the Vision Language pre-trained model leverages unmasked tokens
and image features to predict masked tokens. Another approach is Cross-Modal Masked Region
Prediction (MRP), where Regions of Interest (RoIs) are masked and predicted based on other image
features Chen et al. (2020). Recent works have explored pre-training using image-text matching
objectives, akin to next sentence prediction (NSP) tasks in NLP Huang et al. (2021), or Cross-Modal
Contrastive Learning (CMCL) that aims to learn universal vision and language representations within
the same semantic space Li et al. (2021). CMCL achieves this by encouraging matched image-text
pairs to have similar embeddings while pushing non-matched embeddings further apart. While
numerous studies have focused on scaling up models to billions of parameters, designing better VL
model architectures, and developing optimal pre-training tasks, in this work we address fundamental
questions on the potential of EC as a powerful paradigm for pre-training vision language tasks.


3    BACKGROUND

Lewis Referential Game. The Lewis referential game is played by two agents, a speaker denoted
as S, and a listener denoted as L. The speaker observes a random image from its environment and then
sends a descriptive message about the image to the listener. The listener uses this message to guess
and reconstruct the image from a set of distractor images. The game’s success is evaluated by how
well the listener agent guesses the input image. This is a standard game setup for studying emergent
language among artificial agents and follows previous works Lazaridou et al. (2018); Li et al. (2020b);
Lazaridou & Baroni (2020); Yao et al. (2022). The speaker and listener must communicate and
cooperate iteratively to maximize their joint reward.

Speaker’s Message. At each training step, an input image feature Ii 2 Rd is randomly selected
from the entire set of feature representations for N images, i.e., D = {Ii }N
                                                                            i=1 , where d denotes the
dimensionality of the image feature vectors. Similarly, a set of K confounding images (i.e., the
distractors) Ci = {Iij }Kj=1,j6=i is selected from D. The speaker takes the input image feature Ii
and generates a message Mi = hm1 , m2 , mi , . . . , mT i, mi 2 V , a sequence of discrete symbols
that describes the image, where T is the sequence length limit and V is the message’s vocabulary
size. The generation process ends when either of the two conditions is satisfied: either the special
end-of-sentence symbol [EOS] is generated, or the maximum message length Tmax is reached.
Initially, at t = 0, m0 = [CLS] and h0S = Ii . At each time step t > 0, the generation of the i-th
speaker message token mti can be described by

                               htS = GRUS mti 1 , htS 1 ,                                           (1)
                               mti = Gumbel-Softmax       MLPS (htS )   ,                           (2)
where the Gumbel-Sofmax trick Jang et al. (2017) is employed to draw samples from categorical
distributions of emergent tokens in an end-to-end differentiable way. Here, htS stands for the hidden
state at time step t, while MLPS denotes the multilayer perception speaker S utilizes to project each
hidden state into vectors with dimensionality equal to the vocabulary size of the emergent language.


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Listener’s Inference. The listener agent tries to guess the correct Image Ii from the set of K
confounding images Ci , after receiving the generated speaker message Mi . To do so, the listener
utilizes a GRU layer to decode the speaker’s generated message, i.e.,
                                       h0L = GRUL (m0 , 0) ,                                        (3)
                                       htL = GRUL        mti , htL 1   ,                            (4)
where htL represents the listener’s hidden state at time step t.

Speaker-Listener Optimization. The listener scores each candidate in the image set, which
consists of all distractor images and the correct reference image. Given a message M and an image
I 2 {Ii [ Ci }, the score is defined as
                                                                               2
                                                        |M|
                                score (M, I) = hL              MLPL (I)                             (5)
                                                                           2

The likelihood of a selected image Ij is:
                                                  0                                1
                                                    B       escore(M,Ik )       C
                            p (Ij |Mi , Ij , Ci ) = @      P                    A,                  (6)
                                                                  escore(M,Ik )
                                                        Ik 2Ii [Ci

where Softmax sampling across scores is used to select an image from the candidate set. The speaker
and listener agent’s parameters are jointly optimized by maximizing the expected log-likelihood
                                               h                   i
                               L = EM EIj log p (Ij |M, Ii , Ci )                               (7)

After the training of the referential game is complete, the speaker agent model S can be utilized to
generate a corpus of emergent language based on the input images. In this work, we are particularly
interested in investigating whether the emergent language corpus can be useful as pre-training for
cross-modal VL tasks and better understand the emergent language properties that could help in
designing more robust and generalizable VL models. We hypothesize that EC tokens, while global
in scope, may encapsulate latent information pertaining to specific regions within the image. To
evaluate EC corpus transfer on cross-modal matching and reasoning downstream tasks, we generate
EC texts for images in Visual Referring Expression (VRE), Visual Question Answering (VQA), and
Visual Entailment (VE) benchmarks. In the VRE task, the agent is presented with an image along
with a referring expression or caption that identifies a specific object or region within the image, and
the agent is required to accurately localize the bounding box corresponding to the referred expression.
In VQA, a model is required to reason about an image by understanding its content and subsequently
generate articulate responses in natural language to posed questions. Both tasks require the agent
to comprehend both modalities effectively and establish a coherent understanding of their mutual
interactions for successful task completion. In VE, the agent needs to determine whether a textual
hypothesis (e.g., a statement, a question, or a sentence) is true, false, or undetermined based on the
visual content depicted in an associated image. For each task, we experiment with pre-training by
substituting natural language with emergent text and then fine-tuning on a distinct set of instances
with their original natural language annotations.

4     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
4.1   V ISION L ANGUAGUE M ODEL

We experiment with a unified vision-language (VL) model that can accommodate various VL tasks.
Specifically, we employ OFA Wang et al. (2022a), a Transformer architecture that is suitable for both
generation and classification tasks. OFA is pre-trained on multimodal VL datasets, including visual
grounding and visual question answering, as well as several unimodal datasets, including image
infilling, object detection, and text infilling. These tasks allow the model to develop informative
cross-modal representations for relevant input modalities. To better accommodate unified transformer
computations, OFA represents images and objects as a sequence of discrete tokens, using a unified
vocabulary to represent vision, language, and other modalities. Despite being a sequence-to-sequence


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


model, OFA is also suitable for classification tasks, such as visual question answering (VQA). During
VQA training, a search strategy is used to constrain the generated tokens to a candidate set, which
enhances the model’s performance Wang et al. (2022a). For the visual grounding task, OFA takes
advantage of its generative capabilities by predicting bounding box values directly, without relying
on a proposal system. By using a unified approach, OFA can efficiently address various VL tasks
with high performance, making it a promising solution for real-world applications. Therefore, we
adopt OFA to effectively experiment on various VL tasks.
We evaluate OFA directly on the VRE, VQA, and VE downstream tasks as a baseline without
additional pre-training or fine-tuning. Pre-training and fine-tuning OFA on a downstream task dataset
generally lead to performance improvements; our primary objective is to determine the minimum
achievable accuracy without any additional pre-training. The baselines provide a lower bound for
OFA performance. To this end, we assess the performance of the OFA base model on our VRE, VQA,
and VE benchmark datasets. Our central goal is to investigate the impact of pre-training a model
on the EC corpus and quantify the extent to which it enhances performance on Vision Language
tasks. We utilize the officially released OFA base model weights and checkpoints for evaluating the
RefCOCO+, VQAv2, and SNLI-VE validation and test sets.

4.2   DATASETS

Visual Referring Expression (VRE). For the Visual Referring Expression (VRE) task, we leverage
the widely adopted RefCOCO datasets Yu et al. (2016) as the standard benchmark. RefCOCO
comprises three distinct referring expression datasets (RefCOCO, RefCOCO+, and RefCOCOg)
derived from images in the COCO dataset Lin et al. (2014). Each dataset consists of curated referring
expressions that describe unique objects or bounding boxes within the images. These expressions
were collected by soliciting annotations from human raters who were tasked with identifying objects
delineated by bounding boxes in the COCO dataset Kazemzadeh et al. (2014); Yu et al. (2016).
RefCOCO+ expressions are strictly appearance-based descriptions (i.e., they do not have location-
based captions). For example, “person to the right” is not a valid description for RefCOCO+. Another
example is using “the man in the yellow polka-dotted shirt” instead of “the second man from the
left”. An appearance-based visual grounding dataset is interesting from a computer vision-based
perspective since it allows the caption or referred expression to be independent of an observer’s view.
In detail, the RefCOCO dataset encompasses 142, 209 referring expressions corresponding to 50, 000
objects found in 19, 994 images. RefCOCO+ comprises 141, 564 expressions related to 49, 856
objects spanning across 19, 992 images. Each dataset contains three validation subsets, namely val,
testA, and testB. The testA subset corresponds to images featuring people, while the testB subset
encompasses images without people. These subsets enable a fine-grained evaluation and analysis of
model performance across varying visual contexts. To ensure consistency and comparability with
the OFA model Wang et al. (2022a), we adopt their preprocessed version of the RefCOCO datasets.
Specifically, each referring expression within the RefCOCO datasets is split into multiple samples,
such that each bounding box corresponds to a unique descriptive text.

Visual Question Answering (VQA). We conduct experiments on the VQAv2 dataset Goyal et al.
(2017). VQAv2 comprises a collection of approximately 1.1M samples from 200, 000 images
accompanied by a 13M natural language answers Goyal et al. (2017). As per OFA, instances for
which multiple potential answers exist for a given question-image pair were split into individual
samples for each potential answer Wang et al. (2022a). This OFA-adapted version of the VQAv2
dataset includes training, validation, and test sets, with ⇠ 1.8M, 10, 402, and 447, 793 samples,
respectively. To further tailor this dataset for EC pre-training experiments, we divide the training set
into two parts. The first half is converted into the EC corpus format, wherein each sample’s image
was processed through the speaker agent to generate a list of emergent tokens that describe the image.
These emergent tokens substitute the sample’s original natural language answer within the VQA
dataset. Meanwhile, the second half of the training set remains unchanged with the original natural
language annotations and is used for VQA fine-tuning.

Visual Entailment (VE). In VE, an image I serves as a premise along with a hypothesis text Htext .
The objective is for the model to determine whether the hypothesis can be inferred from the image
(i.e., if the image entails the hypothesis) Xie et al. (2019). The model’s output is classified as an
entailment (if there is sufficient evidence in I to conclude that Htext is true), a contradiction (if there is


                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


enough evidence in I to conclude that Htext is false), or neutral (if there is insufficient evidence in I to
make a conclusion about Htext ). VE shares similarities with VQA as both tasks require the model to
reason and make logical deductions based on an image. However, VE is more complicated than VQA,
in the sense that choosing whether a text entails an image requires complex fine-grained reasoning
beyond answering a question. To evaluate the performance of EC pre-training on VE, we conduct
experiments on the SNLI-VE dataset Xie et al. (2019; 2018). This dataset comprises 529, 527 training
samples, 17, 858 validation samples, and 17, 901 test samples generated from 29, 783 distinct images.
To assess the impact of EC pre-training under varying training sizes, we further partition the training
set into full-size, 50, 000, and 10, 000 samples. Experimental results for these subsets compare the
effectiveness of EC pre-training in enhancing VE performance under different training conditions.

4.3     EC P RE - TRAINING

Visual Referring Expression (VRE). We pre-train the OFA base model for VRE on the RefCOCO
train set. We use the EC-generated text from the referential game speaker agent as captions for
pre-training. To obtain the EC text, we employ a ResNet-18 model He et al. (2016) and extract
512-dimensional image features from each image in the RefCOCO training set. These image features
are then passed to a speaker agent that generates a set of Emergent Communication (EC) tokens
describing the image. Finally, we replace the original natural language RefCOCO caption that
describes a bounding box with the EC-generated tokens. As the EC tokens encompass information
about the image, we hypothesize that they also contain some information about the specific bounding
box, thus offering potential pre-training benefits. The resulting RefCOCO dataset, post-processed
with EC tokens as captions, serves as the basis for pre-training the OFA base VRE model.

Visual Question Answering (VQA). In addition to the grounding task, we explore EC pre-training
for the VQA reasoning task. Reasoning tasks not only require a connection between visual and
linguistic information but also logical deductions. VQA requires interpreting visual input within the
context of a question problem posed in natural language to produce a language-based answer. The
VQAv2 dataset Goyal et al. (2017) provides English language annotations for each question-answer
pair, enabling models to learn directly from the structure and vocabulary imposed by English. Here,
we investigate the impact of pre-training the OFA model on EC text concerning the model’s ability
to acquire the necessary prerequisites for reasoning tasks, even without precise natural language
information. We employ a ResNet-18 model to extract 512-dimensional image features from each
image in the VQAv2 training set. These image features are then fed into the speaker to generate EC
tokens containing sufficient information to describe the provided image. We perform pre-training on
the VQA task. Here, the EC text should contain sufficient information to describe the provided image.
The pre-training process trains the model to generate EC answers, which could prime the model to
associate certain characteristics of the input image with certain outputs —an essential aspect of VQA.

4.3.1    NL F INE - TUNING
Visual Referring Expression (VRE). We fine-tune the best-performing EC-pretrained model
checkpoint on RefCOCO+. By using different visual grounding datasets in pre-training and fine-
tuning stages (RefCOCO for pre-training and RefCOCO+ for fine-tuning), we ensure that information
does not overlap between the two phases. Subsequently, we evaluate the performance of the finetuned
model on all RefCOCO+ test sets, including val, testA, and testB. For NL fine-tuning, we fine-tune
the OFA base model on the VRE task, employing natural language captions from the RefCOCO+
dataset. We consider this as an upper-bound model for comparison against the EC pretraining
experiment. Since the OFA model has already been trained on a diverse and extensive range of
multimodal datasets, including the RefCOCO visual grounding dataset, additional pre-training on
RefCOCO would not yield significant benefits. Following fine-tuning, we evaluate the finetuned
model performance on all RefCOCO+ validation and test sets.

Visual Question Answering (VQA). We fine-tune the best-performing EC-pre-trained checkpoint
model on the remaining unaltered VQAv2 dataset with natural language question-answer pairs and
evaluate on the VQAv2 validation and test sets. Similarly to VRE, for direct NL fine-tuning, we
fine-tune the OFA base model on the natural language split of the VQAv2 dataset and consider this
as an upper bound for comparison against EC pretraining. Subsequently, we evaluate the fine-tuned
model on the VQAv2 validation and test-dev sets.


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: VRE and VQA accuracy. VRE results include three RefCOCO evaluation sets: testA,
testB, and val, while VQA results are reported on the VQAv2 validation and test-dev sets. The three
columns in each table represent our baseline and pre-training approaches: base, +EC Pretraining,
and +NL Pretraining, which correspond to directly evaluating OFA model without fine-tuning, EC
pre-training followed by NL finetuning and NL Pretraining followed by NL fine-tuning, respectively.
       (a) Visual Referring Expression (VRE)
                                                           (b) Visual Question Answering (VQA)
                  Base     +EC      +NL
                                                                       Base     +EC      +NL
          val     29.81    62.17    81.91
                                                              val      66.30    56.52    74.65
         testA    31.49    67.15    86.60
                                                           test-dev    70.01    49.28    73.40
         testB    27.53    51.16    73.49


Visual Entailment (VE). To assess the potential of emergent communication (EC) models for
transferring knowledge to new vision language tasks, we employ the EC pre-trained model obtained
from VRE as pre-training for the VE task. We fine-tune the best EC pre-trained model checkpoint
on the SNLI-VE training set and evaluate on the SNLI-VE test and dev validation sets. To further
understand the impact of EC under varying sampling conditions, we conduct fine-tuning on randomly
sampled sets with different sizes, e.g., 10, 000 and 50, 000 samples. For the NL experiment, we
fine-tune the OFA base model on SNLI-VE. To assess the impact of training set sample size on model
performance, we similarly perform fine-tuning with different training set sample sizes and evaluate
our models on the SNLI-VE validation and test sets.

5    E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
Visual Referring Expression (VRE). Table 1a presents results for the VRE task. Evaluation includes
the baseline (Base), pre-training using EC captions (+EC), and pretraining using NL captions
(+NL), respectively. Both EC-pretrained and NL-pretrained OFA models were finetuned on the
RefCOCO+ natural language dataset. Pre-training on EC captions significantly improves the VRE
task’s performance compared to the baseline model. This highlights the valuable transfer benefits
and shared knowledge that can be extracted from Emergent communication tokens when utilized for
pre-training in vision-language tasks. As expected, NL (Natural Language) pretraining significantly
outperforms both the baseline and EC pretraining methods due to the inherent structural and grounding
advantages of natural language. However, it is noteworthy that pretraining the VRE model on the EC
corpus achieves a substantial two-thirds of the performance achieved through pretraining with natural
language. This underscores the potential utility of EC tokens in vision-language pretraining, especially
in settings where natural language data is scarce. The EC referential game and the generation of EC
tokens by the speaker agent can be performed on unlabeled images in the wild, effectively producing
descriptive captions for these images. Consequently, EC tokens contain valuable semantic information
about the images, which can prove advantageous for vision-language pretraining tasks. These findings
emphasize the potential of leveraging EC pre-training for vision-language tasks. We also provide
qualitative examples of the VRE task. Figure 2 presents examples from the RefCOCO dataset, where
each image is associated with the corresponding emergent and natural language referring expression.
Additional examples and discussion can be found in the supplementary.
Visual Question Answering (VQA). Table 1b presents results for the VQA task. During EC pre-
training, target answers are replaced with EC text, offering an opportunity to learn additional visual
and structural information without requiring full comprehension of the context provided by the
natural language question. Results show a decrease in performance when utilizing EC pretraining for
the VQA task compared to the OFA pretrained checkpoint (base), indicating that further usage of
emergent text after natural language pretraining has already been performed may lead to a degradation
in the already learned representations. In contrast, experiments with models pretrained from scratch
(Appendix C) exhibit the opposite effect. In this case, EC pretraining improved downstream VQA
performance compared to no pretraining, suggesting that when no natural language pretraining data
is available, EC pretraining can still be beneficial for improving VQA performance.
Visual Entailment (VE). In Figure 3, we present experimental results for fine-tuning the EC-VRE
pre-trained model on visual entailment. Our results demonstrate that pre-training a vision language
model on EC tokens leads to a significant increase in accuracy performance for the VE task across


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(a) White uniform left.        (b) Right elephant.              (c) Top left banana piece.
[2358 3708 3638 2557 3563 3731 [1215 318 3702 1583 608 3672 787 [1692 3465 828 2906 2108 3307
1270 1357 2251 1037 829 3958 3647 1451 1508 2777 380 1733 1509 3767 101 1010 2694 3134
3352 629 0]                    2522 0]                          1508 3823 0]
Figure 2: Qualitative examples on the VRE task. RefCOCO images and their corresponding emergent
and natural language referring expressions.


            (a) SNLI-VE validation set                            (b) SNLI-VE test set
Figure 3: Visual Entailment (VE) accuracy. Ablation with varying training set sizes and different
pre-training/fine-tuning methods: Base, +EC Pretraining, and +NL Pretraining, corresponding
to training from scratch with no pre-training, EC pre-training followed by natural language (NL)
fine-tuning, and NL pre-training followed by NL fine-tuning, respectively.

various training sizes and validation sets when compared with the baseline model. These results
provide compelling evidence of the utility of EC tokens for transferring knowledge between VL tasks.
When comparing EC pre-training with the natural language fine-tuning of OFA, it is expected that the
latter would achieve better performance. However, it is surprising to observe that EC pre-training can
yield comparable performance in certain settings. For instance, when fine-tuned on the full training
data, EC achieves an accuracy of 85.01% on the test set, whereas NL achieves 88.95%. The relatively
small performance gap between EC-VRE pre-training and natural language fine-tuning highlights
the transferability benefits of EC pre-training and opens up future directions in utilizing emergent
language for complex vision language tasks and combining the strengths of emergent language with
the structure and complexities of natural language for better and more efficient VL modeling.


6   C ONCLUSION

Whereas several previous VLM works focus on building better-performing models by improving
image and text encoding mechanisms, designing performant architectures, and devising effective
pre-training tasks, our work introduces a paradigm shift by considering improving vision language
learning through Emergent Communication (EC) pre-training. We explore the potential benefits of
EC pre-training for vision language (VL) downstream tasks, specifically visual referring expression,
visual question answering, and visual entailment. We observe substantial improvements in learning
and generalization on certain tasks after fine-tuning with a VL model that was pre-trained on VL
datasets with EC tokens, generated from a speaker agent trained during an EC referential game. Our
findings highlight that EC is promising in acting as an inductive bias for Vision Language learning
and can yield substantial transfer benefits for low-resource tasks and data-constrained settings.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Stanislaw Antol, Aishwarya Agrawal, Jiasen Lu, Margaret Mitchell, Dhruv Batra, C Lawrence
  Zitnick, and Devi Parikh. VQA: Visual Question Answering. In CVPR, 2015.
Rahma Chaabouni, Eugene Kharitonov, Emmanuel Dupoux, and Marco Baroni. Anti-efficient
  encoding in emergent communication. In NeurIPs, 2019.
Yen-Chun Chen, Linjie Li, Licheng Yu, Ahmed El Kholy, Faisal Ahmed, Zhe Gan, Yu Cheng, and
  Jingjing Liu. Uniter: Universal image-text representation learning. In ECCV, 2020.
Jaemin Cho, Jie Lei, Hao Tan, and Mohit Bansal. Unifying vision-and-language tasks via text
  generation. In ICLR, 2021.
Abhishek Das, Théophile Gervet, Joshua Romoff, Dhruv Batra, Devi Parikh, Mike Rabbat, and Joelle
  Pineau. Tarmac: Targeted multi-agent communication. In ICLR, 2019.
Yifan Du, Zikang Liu, Junyi Li, and Wayne Xin Zhao. A survey of vision-language pre-trained
  models. In IJCAI Survey Track, 2022.
Linus Ericsson, Henry Gouk, and Timothy M Hospedales. How well do self-supervised models
  transfer? In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 5414–5423, 2021.
Katrina Evtimova, Andrew Drozdov, Douwe Kiela, and Kyunghyun Cho. Emergent communication
  in a multi-modal, multi-step referential game. In ICLR, 2018.
Zhe Gan, Linjie Li, Chunyuan Li, Lijuan Wang, Zicheng Liu, and Jianfeng Gao. Vision-Language
  Pre-Training: Basics, Recent Advances, and Future Trends. Foundations and Trends in Computer
  Graphics and Vision, 14(3-4):163–352, 2022.
Yash Goyal, Tejas Khot, Douglas Summers-Stay, Dhruv Batra, and Devi Parikh. Making the V in
  VQA matter: Elevating the role of image understanding in visual question answering. In CVPR,
  2017.
Serhii Havrylov and Ivan Titov. Emergence of language with multi-agent games: Learning to
  communicate with sequences of symbols. In NeurIPs, 2017.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In CVPR, 2016.
Zhicheng Huang, Zhaoyang Zeng, Yupan Huang, Bei Liu, Dongmei Fu, and Jianlong Fu. Seeing out
  of the box: End-to-end pre-training for vision-language representation learning. In CVPR, 2021.
Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. Categorical Reparameterization with Gumbel-Softmax. In
  ICLR, 2017.
Sahar Kazemzadeh, Vicente Ordonez, Mark Matten, and Tamara Berg. Referitgame: Referring to
  objects in photographs of natural scenes. In EMNLP, 2014.
Wonjae Kim, Bokyung Son, and Ildoo Kim. Vilt: Vision-and-language transformer without convolu-
 tion or region supervision. In ICLR, 2021.
Angeliki Lazaridou and Marco Baroni. Emergent multi-agent communication in the deep learning
  era. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.02419, 2020.
Angeliki Lazaridou, Alexander Peysakhovich, and Marco Baroni. Multi-Agent Cooperation and the
  Emergence of (Natural) Language. In ICLR, 2017.
Angeliki Lazaridou, Karl Moritz Hermann, Karl Tuyls, and Stephen Clark. Emergence of linguistic
  communication from referential games with symbolic and pixel input. In ICLR, 2018.
Gen Li, Nan Duan, Yuejian Fang, Ming Gong, and Daxin Jiang. Unicoder-vl: A universal encoder
  for vision and language by cross-modal pre-training. In AAAI, 2020a.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Junnan Li, Ramprasaath Selvaraju, Akhilesh Gotmare, Shafiq Joty, Caiming Xiong, and Steven
  Chu Hong Hoi. Align before fuse: Vision and language representation learning with momentum
  distillation. In NeurIPs, 2021.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image pre-
  training with frozen image encoders and large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.12597,
  2023.
Liunian Harold Li, Mark Yatskar, Da Yin, Cho-Jui Hsieh, and Kai-Wei Chang. Visualbert: A simple
  and performant baseline for vision and language. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.03557, 2019.
Yaoyiran Li, Edoardo Maria Ponti, Ivan Vulić, and Anna Korhonen. Emergent Communication
  Pretraining for Few-Shot Machine Translation. In COLING, 2020b.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In ECCV, 2014.
Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2304.08485, 2023a.
Yang Liu, Yao Zhang, Yixin Wang, Feng Hou, Jin Yuan, Jiang Tian, Yang Zhang, Zhongchao Shi,
  Jianping Fan, and Zhiqiang He. A survey of visual transformers. IEEE Transactions on Neural
  Networks and Learning Systems, 2023b.
Jiasen Lu, Dhruv Batra, Devi Parikh, and Stefan Lee. Vilbert: Pretraining task-agnostic visiolinguistic
   representations for vision-and-language tasks. In NeurIPs, 2019.
Igor Mordatch and Pieter Abbeel. Emergence of grounded compositional language in multi-agent
  populations. In AAAI, 2018.
Isabel Papadimitriou and Dan Jurafsky. Learning Music Helps You Read: Using Transfer to Study
   Linguistic Structure in Language Models. In EMNLP, 2020.
Shivansh Patel, Saim Wani, Unnat Jain, Alexander Schwing, Svetlana Lazebnik, Manolis Savva,
  and Angel X. Chang. Interpretation of Emergent Communication in Heterogeneous Collaborative
  Embodied Agents. In ICCV, 2021.
Senthil Purushwalkam, Pedro Morgado, and Abhinav Gupta. The challenges of continuous self-
  supervised learning. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 702–721. Springer, 2022.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In ICML, 2021.
Limor Raviv, Antje Meyer, and Shiri Lev-Ari. Larger communities create more systematic languages.
  Proceedings of the Royal Society B, 286(1907):20191262, 2019a.
Limor Raviv, Antje Meyer, and Shiri Lev-Ari. Compositional structure can emerge without genera-
  tional transmission. Cognition, 182:151–164, 2019b.
Cinjon Resnick, Abhinav Gupta, Jakob Foerster, Andrew M Dai, and Kyunghyun Cho. Capacity,
  bandwidth, and compositionality in emergent language learning. In AAMAS, 2020.
Weijie Su, Xizhou Zhu, Yue Cao, Bin Li, Lewei Lu, Furu Wei, and Jifeng Dai. VL-BERT: Pre-training
 of Generic Visual-Linguistic Representations. In ICLR, 2020.
Yonglong Tian, Chen Sun, Ben Poole, Dilip Krishnan, Cordelia Schmid, and Phillip Isola. What
  makes for good views for contrastive learning? Advances in neural information processing systems,
  33:6827–6839, 2020.
Peng Wang, An Yang, Rui Men, Junyang Lin, Shuai Bai, Zhikang Li, Jianxin Ma, Chang Zhou,
  Jingren Zhou, and Hongxia Yang. Ofa: Unifying architectures, tasks, and modalities through a
  simple sequence-to-sequence learning framework. In ICLR, 2022a.


                                                  11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Zekun Wang, Wenhui Wang, Haichao Zhu, Ming Liu, Bing Qin, and Furu Wei. Distilled dual-encoder
  model for vision-language understanding. In EMNLP, 2022b.
Ning Xie, Farley Lai, Derek Doran, and Asim Kadav. Visual Entailment Task for Visually-Grounded
  Language Learning. In NeurIPS Visually Grounded Interaction and Language (ViGIL) Workshop,
  2018.
Ning Xie, Farley Lai, Derek Doran, and Asim Kadav. Visual Entailment: A Novel Task for Fine-
  grained Image Understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.06706, 2019.
Peng Xu, Xiatian Zhu, and David A Clifton. Multimodal learning with transformers: A survey. IEEE
  Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2023.
Shunyu Yao, Mo Yu, Yang Zhang, Karthik R Narasimhan, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Chuang Gan.
  Linking Emergent and Natural Languages via Corpus Transfer. In ICLR, 2022.
Licheng Yu, Patrick Poirson, Shan Yang, Alexander C Berg, and Tamara L Berg. Modeling context
  in referring expressions. In ECCV, 2016.
Rowan Zellers, Yonatan Bisk, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. From recognition to cognition: Visual
  commonsense reasoning. In CVPR, 2019.


                                              12
