Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S TRATEGIC C LASSIFICATION WITH U NFORESEEABLE
O UTCOMES
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Machine learning systems are often used to make decisions about individuals,
         where individuals may best respond and behave strategically to receive favorable
         outcomes, e.g., they may genuinely improve the true labels or manipulate observ-
         able features directly to game the system without changing labels. Although both
         behaviors have been studied (often as two separate problems) in the literature,
         most works assume individuals can (i) perfectly foresee the outcomes of their
         behaviors when they best respond; (ii) change their features arbitrarily as long as
         it’s affordable, and the costs they need to pay are deterministic functions of feature
         changes. In this paper, we consider a different setting and focus on imitative strate-
         gic behaviors with unforeseeable outcomes, i.e., individuals manipulate/improve by
         imitating the features of those with positive labels, but the induced feature changes
         are unforeseeable. We first propose a novel probabilistic model to capture both
         behaviors and establish a Stackelberg game between individuals and the decision-
         maker. Under this model, we examine how the decision-maker’s ability to anticipate
         individual behavior affects its objective function and the individual’s best response.
         We show that the objective difference between the two can be decomposed into
         three interpretable terms, with each representing the decision-maker’s preference
         for a certain behavior. By exploring the roles of each term, we further illustrate
         how a decision-maker with adjusted preferences can simultaneously disincentivize
         manipulation, incentivize improvement, and promote fairness.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Individuals subject to algorithmic decisions often adapt their behaviors strategically to the decision
rule to receive a desirable outcome. As machine learning is increasingly used to make decisions
about humans, there has been a growing interest to develop learning methods that explicitly con-
sider the strategic behavior of human agents. A line of research known as strategic classification
studies this problem, in which individuals can modify their features at costs to receive favorable
predictions. Depending on whether such feature changes are to improve the actual labels genuinely
(i.e., improvement) or to game the algorithms maliciously (i.e., manipulation), existing works have
largely focused on learning classifiers robust against manipulation (Hardt et al., 2016a) or designing
incentive mechanisms to encourage improvement (Kleinberg and Raghavan, 2020; Bechavod et al.,
2022). A few studies (Miller et al., 2020; Shavit et al., 2020; Horowitz and Rosenfeld, 2023) also
consider the presence of both manipulation and improvement, where they exploit the causal structures
of features and use structural causal models to capture the impacts of feature changes on labels.
To model the interplay between individuals and decision-maker, most existing works adopt (or extend
based on) a Stackelberg game proposed by Hardt et al. (2016a), i.e., the decision-maker publishes
its policy, following which individuals best respond to determine the modified feature. However,
these models (implicitly) rely on the following two assumptions that could make them unsuitable
for certain applications: (i) individuals can perfectly foresee the outcomes of their behaviors when
they best respond; (ii) individuals can change their features arbitrarily at costs, which are modeled as
deterministic functions of the feature.
In other words, existing studies assume individuals know their exact feature values before and after
strategic behavior. Thus, the cost can be computed precisely based on the feature changes (using
functions such as ℓp -norm distance). However, these may not hold in many important applications.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Consider an example of college admission, where the students’ exam scores are treated as features in
admission decisions. To get admitted, students may increase their scores by either cheating on exams
(manipulation) or working hard (improvement). Here (i) individuals do not know the exact values
of their original features (unrealized scores) and the modified features (actual score received in an
exam) when they best respond, but they have a good idea of what those score distributions would be
like from their past experience; (ii) the cost of manipulation/improvement is not a function of feature
change (e.g., students may cheat by hiring an imposter to take the exam and the cost of such behavior
is more or less fixed). As the original feature was never realized, we cannot compute the feature
change precisely and measure the cost based on it. Therefore, the existing models do not fit.
Motivated by the above (more examples are in App. B.2), this paper studies strategic classification
with unforeseeable outcomes. We first propose a novel Stackelberg game to model the interactions
between individuals and the decision-maker. Compared to most existing models (Jagadeesan et al.,
2021; Levanon and Rosenfeld, 2022), ours is a probabilistic framework that model the outcomes and
costs of strategic behavior as random variables. Indeed, this framework is inspired by the models
proposed in Zhang et al. (2022); Liu et al. (2020), which only considers either manipulation (Zhang
et al., 2022) or improvement (Liu et al., 2020); our model significantly extends their works by
considering both behaviors. Specifically, we focus on imitative strategic behavior where individuals
manipulate/improve by imitating the features of those with positive labels, due to the following:
• It is inspired by imitative learning behavior in social learning, whereby new behaviors are acquired
  by copying social models’ action behavior. It has been well-supported by literature in psychology
  and social science (Bandura, 1962; 1978). Recent works (Heidari et al., 2019; Raab and Liu, 2021)
  in ML also model individuals’ behaviors as imitating/replicating the profiles of their social models
  to study the impacts of fairness interventions.
• Decision-makers can detect easy-to-manipulate features (Bechavod et al., 2021) and discard them
  when making decisions, so individuals can barely manipulate their features by themselves without
  changing labels. A better option for them is to hire imposters or steal others’ profiles. Such
  imitation-based manipulative behavior is very common in real world (e.g., cheating, identity theft).
Additionally, our model considers practical scenarios by permitting manipulation to be detected and
improvement to be failed at certain probabilities, as evidenced in auditing (Estornell et al., 2021) and
social learning (Bandura, 1962). App. A provides more related work and differences with existing
models are discussed in App. B.1.
Under this model, we first study the impacts of the decision maker’s ability to anticipate individual
behavior. Similar to Zhang et al. (2022), we consider two types of decision-makers: non-strategic
and strategic. We say a decision-maker (and its policy) is strategic if it has the ability to anticipate
strategic behavior and accounts for this in determining the decision policies, while a non-strategic
decision-maker ignores strategic behavior in determining its policies. Importantly, we find that the
difference between the decision-maker’s learning objectives under two settings can be decomposed
into three interpretable terms, with each term representing the decision-maker’s preference for certain
behavior. By exploring the roles of each term on the decision policy and the resulting individual’s best
response, we further show that a strategic decision-maker with adjusted preferences (i.e., changing
the weight of each term in the learning objective) can disincentivize manipulation while incentivizing
improvement behavior.
We also consider settings where the strategic individuals come from different social groups and explore
the impacts of adjusting preferences on algorithmic fairness. We show that the optimal policy under
adjusted preferences may result in fairer outcomes than non-strategic policy and original strategic
policy without adjustment. Moreover, such fairness promotion can be attained simultaneously with
the goal of disincentivizing manipulation. Our contributions are summarized as follows:
1. We propose a probabilistic model to capture both improvement and manipulation; and establish
   a novel Stackelberg game to model the interplay between individuals and decision-maker. The
   individual’s best response and decision-maker’s (non-)strategic policies are characterized (Sec. 2).
2. We show the objective difference between non-strategic and strategic policies can be decomposed
   into three terms, each representing the decision-maker’s preference for certain behavior (Sec. 3).
3. We study how adjusting the decision-maker’s preferences can affect the optimal policy and its
   fairness property, as well as the resulting individual’s best response (Sec. 4).
4. We conduct experiments on both synthetic and real data to validate the theoretical findings (Sec. 5).


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2       P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
Consider a group of individuals subject to some ML decisions. Each individual has an observable
feature X P R and a hidden label Y P t0, 1u indicating its qualification state ("0" being unqualified
and "1" being qualified).1 Let α :“ PrpY “ 1q be the population’s qualification rate, and PX|Y px|1q,
PX|Y px|0q be the feature distributions of qualified and unqualified individuals, respectively. A
decision-maker makes decisions D P t0, 1u ("0" being reject and "1" being accept) about individuals
based on a threshold policy with acceptance threshold θ P R: πpxq “ PD|X p1|xq “ 1px ě θq. To
receive positive decisions, individuals with information of policy π may behave strategically by either
manipulating their features or improving the actual qualifications.2 Formally, let M P t0, 1u denote
individual’s action, with M “ 1 being manipulation and M “ 0 being improvement.
Outcomes of strategic behavior. Both manipulation and improvement result in the shifts of feature
distribution. Specifically, for individuals who choose to manipulate, we assume they manipulate by
"stealing" the features of those qualified (Zhang et al., 2022), e.g., students cheat on exams by hiring
qualified imposters. Moreover, we assume the decision-maker can identify the manipulation behavior
with probability ϵ P r0, 1s (Estornell et al., 2021). Individuals, once getting caught manipulating,
will be rejected directly. For those who decide to improve, they work hard to imitate the features of
those qualified (Bandura, 1962; Raab and Liu, 2021; Heidari et al., 2019). With probability q P r0, 1s,
they improve the label successfully (overall α increases) and the features conform the distribution
PX|Y px|1q; with probability 1 ´ q, they slightly improve the features but fail to change the labels,
and the improved features conform a new distribution P I pxq. Throughout the paper, we make the
following assumption on feature distributions.
                                                I
Assumption
`               2.1. ˘PX|Y px|1q,
                            ` I PX|Y px|0q, P˘ pxq are continuous; both pairs of distributions
                 I
  PX|Y px|1q, P pxq and P pxq, PX|Y px|0q satisfy the strict monotone likelihood ratio property,
         I            PX|Y px|1q
      P pxq
i.e. PX|Y px|0q and    P I pxq
                                 are increasing in x P R.
                                                                                                                  New population
                                                                                                                   resulting from
                                                                                                                 individuals taking
Assumption 2.1 is relatively mild and has been widely                                                             different actions

used (Tsirtsis et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020a). It can be                                        je
                                                                                                         ct
                                                                                                                                                 Feature distribution
                                                                                                  re               Feature distribution
satisfied by a wide range of distributions (e.g., exponential,                      m
                                                                                        it
                                                                                             or
                                                                                                                    and labels change
                                                                                                                                                 changes while labels
                                                                                                                                                      remain 0
                                                                                 Ad
Gaussian) and the real data (e.g., FICO data used in Sec. 5).                                          Take no action
                                                                                                                          Yes          No          No

It implies that among qualified (resp. unqualified) individ-          Decision maker                                       Succeed
                                                                                                                                             Being
                                                                                                                                            detected
                                                                                                                                                     Yes
                                                                                                                                                            Being
                                                                                                                                                           rejected

uals and those who improve but fail to change their qual-                                                                  Improve       Manipulate
                                                                                 Pu
ifications, an individual is more likely to be qualified (resp.                    bl
                                                                                      is
                                                                                        h
                                                                                             th                Qualified        Unqualified
                                                                                                  re
to be those who successfully improve) as feature value                                               s ho
                                                                                                         ld

increases. Since PX|Y px|1q is always the best attainable
                                                                                                                         Original
outcome, only unqualified individuals have incentives to                                                                population

take action (as manipulation and improvement only bring
additional cost but no benefit to qualified individuals).
                                                                            Figure 1: Strategic interaction
2.1     I NDIVIDUAL’ S BEST RESPONSE .

An individual incurs a random cost CM ě 0 when manipulating the features (Zhang et al., 2022),
while incurring a random cost CI ě 0 when improving the qualifications (Liu et al., 2020). The
realizations of these random costs are known to individuals when determining their action M ; while
the decision-maker only knows the cost distributions. Thus, the best response that the decision-maker
expects from individuals is the probability of manipulation/improvement. Figure 1 illustrates the
strategic interaction between them.
Formally, given a policy πpxq “ 1px ě θq with threshold θ, an individual chooses to manipulate only
if the expected utility attained under manipulation UM pθq outweighs the utility under improvement
UI pθq. Suppose an individual benefits w “ 1 from the acceptance, and 0 from the rejection. Given
    1
      Similar to prior work (Zhang et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2019), we present our model in one-dimensional feature
space. Note that our model and results are applicable to high dimensional space, in which individuals imitate
and change all features as a whole based on the joint conditional distribution PX|Y regardless of the dimension
of X. The costs can be regarded as the sum of an individual’s effort to change features in all dimensions.
    2
      We assume individuals have budgets to either manipulate or improve. The generalization of considering the
actions of "manipulate", "improve", and "do nothing" is discussed in App. B.3.


                                                        3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


that each individual only knows his/her label y P t0, 1u and the conditional feature distributions PX|Y
but not the exact values of the feature x, the expected utilities UM pθq and UI pθq can be computed as
the expected benefit minus the cost of action, as given below.
                 UM pθq    “ FX|Y pθ|0q ´ FX|Y pθ|1q ´ ϵp1 ´ FX|Y pθ|1qq ´ CM
                  UI pθq   “ FX|Y pθ|0q ´ q ¨ FX|Y pθ|1q ´ p1 ´ qq ¨ F I pθq ´ CI
where FX|Y px|1q, FX|Y px|0q, F I pxq are cumulative density function (CDF) of PX|Y px|1q,
PX|Y px|0q, P I pxq, respectively. Given the threshold θ, the decision-maker can anticipate the
probability that an unqualified individual chooses to manipulate as PM pθq “ Pr pUM pθq ą UI pθqq,
which can further be written as follows (derivations and more explanation details in App. D.1):
                    ´          `                    ˘    `               ˘             ¯
     PM pθq “ Pr p1 ´ qq ¨ F I pθq ´ FX|Y pθ|1q ´ ϵ 1 ´ FX|Y pθ|1q ě CM ´ CI                    (1)
The above formulation captures the imitative strategic behavior with unforeseeable outcomes (e.g.,
college admission example in Sec. 1): individuals best respond based on feature distributions but not
the realizations, and the imitation costs (e.g., hiring an imposter) for individuals from the same group
follow the same distribution (Liu et al., 2020), as opposed to being a function of feature changes.
equation 1 above can further be written based on CDF of CM ´ CI , i.e., the difference between
manipulation and improvement costs. We make the following assumption on its PDF.
Assumption 2.2. The PDF PCM ´CI pxq is continuous with PCM ´CI pxq ą 0 for x P p´ϵ, 1 ´ qq.

Assumption 2.2 is mild only to ensure the manipulation is possible under all thresholds θ. Under the
Assumption, we can study the impact of acceptance threshold θ on manipulation probability PM pθq.
Theorem 2.3 (Manipulation Probability). Under Assumption 2.2, PM pθq is continuous and satisfies
the following: (i) If q ` ϵ ě 1, then PM pθq strictly increases. (ii) If q ` ϵ ă 1, then PM pθq first
increases and then decreases, thereby existing a unique maximizer θmax . Moreover, the maximizer
θmax increases in q and ϵ.

Thm. 2.3 shows that an individual’s best response highly depends on the success rate of improvement
q and the identification rate of manipulation ϵ. When q ` ϵ ě 1 (i.e., improvement can succeed
or/and manipulation is detected with high probability), individuals are more likely to manipulate
as θ increases. This is because although individuals are more likely to benefit from improvement
than manipulation, as θ increases to the maximum (i.e., when the decision-maker barely admits
anyone), the relative benefit will finally diminish to 0. Thus, more individuals tend to manipulate
under larger θ, making PM pθq strictly increasing and reaching the maximum. When q ` ϵ ă 1, more
individuals are incentivized to improve as the threshold gets farther away from θmax . This is because
the manipulation in this case incurs a higher benefit than improvement at θmax . As the threshold
increases/decreases from θmax to the minimum/maximum (i.e., the decision-maker either admits
almost everyone or no one), the benefit difference between manipulation and improvement decreases
to 0 or ´ϵ. Thus, PM pθq decreases as θ increases/decreases from θmax .

2.2   D ECISION - MAKER ’ S OPTIMAL POLICY

Suppose the decision-maker receives benefit u (resp. penalty ´u) when accepting a qualified (resp.
unqualified) individual, then the decision-maker aims to find an optimal policy that maximizes its
expected utility ErRpD, Y qs, where utility is Rp1, 1q “ u, Rp1, 0q “ ´u, Rp0, 1q “ Rp0, 0q “ 0.
As mentioned in Sec. 1, we consider strategic and non-strategic decision makers. Because the
former can anticipate individual’s strategic behavior while the latter cannot, their learning objectives
ErRpD, Y qs are different. As a result, their respective optimal policies are also different.
Non-strategic optimal policy. Without accounting for strategic behavior, the non-strategic decision-
maker’s learning objective U
                           p pπq under policy π is given by:
                            ż
                   U pπq “
                    p          tuαPX|Y px|1q ´ up1 ´ αqPX|Y px|0quπpxq dx                        (2)
                               X
Under Assumption 2.1, it has been shown in Zhang et al. (2020a) that the optimal non-strategic policy
                                                                                 ˚
               p pπq is a threshold policy with threshold θp˚ satisfying PX|Y pθp |1q “ 1´α .
that maximizes U
                                                                          PX|Y pθp˚ |0q    α



                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Strategic optimal policy. Given cost and feature distributions, a strategic decision-maker can
anticipate an individual’s best response (equation 1) and incorporate it in determining its optimal
policy. Under a threshold policy πpxq “ 1px ě θq, the objective U pπq can be written as a function
of θ, i.e.,
                 ´                          ¯ `              ˘
    U pθq   “   u α ` p1 ´ αqp1 ´ PM pθqqq ¨ 1 ´ FX|Y pθ|1q
                         ´                                                                      ¯
                ´up1 ´ αq p1 ´ ϵq ¨ PM pθq ¨ 1 ´ FX|Y pθ|1q ` p1 ´ PM pθqq ¨ p1 ´ qqp1 ´ F I pθq (3)
                                            `              ˘


The policy that maximizes the above objective function U pθq is the strategic optimal policy. We
denote the corresponding optimal threshold as θ˚ . Compared to non-strategic policy, U pθq also
depends on q, ϵ, PM pθq and is rather complicated. Nonetheless, we will show in Sec. 3 that U pθq can
be justified and decomposed into several interpretable terms.


3    D ECOMPOSITION OF THE O BJECTIVE D IFFERENCE

In Sec. 2.2, we derived the learning objective functions of both strategic and non-strategic decision-
makers (expected utilities U and Up ). Next, we explore how the individual’s choice of improvement or
manipulation affects decision-maker’s utility. Define Φpθq “ U pθq ´ U p pθq as the objective difference
between strategic and non-strategic decision-makers, we have:
                                              ´                        ¯
                         Φpθq “ up1 ´ αq ¨ ϕ1 pθq ´ ϕ2 pθq ´ ϕ3 pθq                                   (4)

where
                              `          ˘     `                               ˘
                     ϕ1 pθq “ 1 ´ PM pθq ¨ q ¨ 1 ´ FX|Y pθ|0q ` 1 ´ FX|Y pθ|1q
                     ϕ2 pθq “ 1 ´ PM pθq ¨ p1 ´ qq ¨ FX|Y pθ|0q ´ F I pθq
                              `          ˘          `                     ˘
                                    `       `              ˘ `               ˘˘
                     ϕ3 pθq “ PM pθq p1 ´ ϵq 1 ´ FX|Y pθ|1q ´ 1 ´ FX|Y pθ|0q

As shown in equation 4, the objective difference Φ can be decomposed into three terms ϕ1 , ϕ2 , ϕ3 .
It turns out that each term is interpretable and indicates the impact of a certain type of individual
behavior on the decision-maker’s utility. We discuss these in detail as follows.
1. Benefit from the successful improvement ϕ1 : additional benefit the decision-maker gains due to
   the successful improvement of individuals (as the successful improvement causes label change).
2. Loss from the failed improvement ϕ2 : additional loss the decision-maker suffers due to the
   individuals’ failure to improve; this occurs because individuals who fail to improve only experience
   feature distribution shifts from PX|Y px|0q to P I pxq but labels remain.
3. Loss from the manipulation ϕ3 : additional loss the decision-maker suffers due to the successful
   manipulation of individuals; this occurs because individuals who manipulate successfully only
   change PX|Y px|0q to PX|Y px|1q but the labels remain unqualified.
Note that in Zhang et al. (2022), the objective difference Φpθq has only one term corresponding to the
additional loss caused by strategic manipulation. Because our model further considers improvement
behavior, the impact of an individual’s strategic behavior on the decision-maker’s utility gets more
complicated. We have illustrated above that in addition to the loss from manipulation ϕ3 , the
improvement behavior also affects decision-maker’s utility. Importantly, such an effect can be either
positive (if the improvement is successful) or negative (if the improvement fails).
The decomposition of the objective difference Φpθq highlights the connections between three types
of policies: 1) non-strategic policy without considering individual’s behavior; 2) strategic policy
studied in Zhang et al. (2022) that only considers manipulation, 3) strategic policy studied in this
paper that considers both manipulation and improvement. Specifically, by removing ϕ1 , ϕ2 , ϕ3 (resp.
ϕ1 , ϕ2 ) from the objective function U pθq, the strategic policy studied in this paper would reduce to the
non-strategic policy (resp. strategic policy studied in Zhang et al. (2022)). Based on this observation,
we regard ϕ1 , ϕ2 , ϕ3 each as the decision-maker’s preference to a certain type of individual behavior,
and define a general strategic decision-maker with adjusted preferences.


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.1   S TRATEGIC DECISION - MAKER WITH ADJUSTED PREFERENCES

We consider general strategic decision-makers who find the optimal decision policy by maximizing
U
p pθq ` Φpθ, k1 , k2 , k3 q with
                     Φpθ, k1 , k2 , k3 q “ k1 ¨ ϕ1 pθq ´ k2 ¨ ϕ2 pθq ´ k3 ¨ ϕ3 pθq                     (5)
where k1 , k2 , k3 ě 0 are weight parameters; different combinations of weights correspond to different
preferences of the decision-maker. We give some examples below:
1. Original strategic decision-maker: the one with k1 “ k2 “ k3 “ up1 ´ αq whose learning
   objective function U follows equation 3; it considers both improvement and manipulation.
2. Improvement-encouraging decision-maker: the one with k1 ą 0 and k2 “ k3 “ 0; it only
   considers strategic improvement and only values the improvement benefit while ignoring the loss
   caused by the failure of improvement.
3. Manipulation-proof decision-maker: the one with k3 ą 0 and k1 “ k2 “ 0; it is only concerned
   with strategic manipulation, and the goal is to prevent manipulation.
4. Improvement-proof decision-maker: the one with k2 ą 0 and k1 “ k3 “ 0; it only considers
   improvement but the goal is to avoid loss caused by the failed improvement.

The above examples show that a decision-maker, by changing the weights k1 , k2 , k3 could find a
policy that encourages certain types of individual behavior (as compared to the original policy θ˚ ).
Although the decision-maker can impact an individual’s behavior by adjusting its preferences via
k1 , k2 , k3 , we emphasize that the actual utility it receives from the strategic individuals is always
determined by U pθq given in equation 3. Indeed, we can regard the framework with adjusted weights
(equation 5) as a regularization method. We discuss this in more detail in App. B.4.

4     I MPACTS OF A DJUSTING P REFERENCES
Next, we investigate the impacts of adjusting preferences. We aim to understand how a decision-
maker by adjusting preferences (i.e., changing k1 , k2 , k3 ) could affect the optimal policy (Sec. 4.1)
and its fairness property (Sec. 4.3), as well as the resulting individual’s best response (Sec. 4.2).

4.1   P REFERENCES SHIFT THE OPTIMAL THRESHOLD

We will start with the original strategic decision-maker (with k1 “ k2 “ k3 “ up1 ´ αq) whose
objective function follows equation 3, and then investigate how adjusting preferences could affect the
decision-maker’s optimal policy.
Complex nature of original strategic decision-maker. Unlike the non-strategic optimal policy,
the analytical solution of strategic optimal policy that maximizes equation 3 is not easy to find.
In fact, the utility function U pθq of the original strategic decision-maker is highly complex, and
the optimal strategic threshold θ˚ may change significantly as α, FX|Y , F I , CM , CI , ϵ, q vary. In
App. C.2, we demonstrate the complexity of U pθq, which may change drastically as α, ϵ, q vary.
Although we cannot find the strategic optimal threshold precisely, we may still explore the impacts of
decision-maker’s anticipation of strategic behavior on its policy (by comparing the strategic threshold
θ˚ with the non-strategic θp˚ ), as stated in Thm. 4.1 below.
Theorem 4.1 (Comparison of strategic and non-strategic policy). If minθ PM pθq ď 0.5, then there
exists qp P p0, 1q such that @q ě qp, the strategic optimal θ˚ is always lower than the non-strategic θp˚ .

Thm. 4.1 identifies a condition under which the strategic policy over-accepts individuals compared to
the non-strategic one. Specifically, minθ PM pθq ď 0.5 ensures that there exist policies under which
the majority of individuals prefer improvement over manipulation. Intuitively, under this condition,
strategic decision-maker by lowering the threshold (from θp˚ ) may encourage more individuals to
improve. Because q is sufficiently large, more improvement brings more benefit to the decision-maker.
Optimal threshold under adjusted preferences. Despite the intricate nature of U pθq, the optimal
strategic threshold may be shifted by adjusting the decision-maker’s preferences, i.e. changing
the weights k1 , k2 , k3 assigned to ϕ1 , ϕ2 , ϕ3 in equation 5. Next, we examine how the optimal


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


threshold can be affected compared to the original strategic threshold by adjusting the decision-
maker’s preferences. Denote θ˚ pki q as the strategic optimal threshold attained by adjusting weight
ki , i P t1, 2, 3u of the original objective function U pθq. The results are summarized in Table 1.
Specifically, the threshold gets lower as k1 increase (Prop. 4.2). Adjusting k2 or k3 may result in
the optimal threshold moving toward both directions, but we can identify sufficient conditions when
adjusting k2 or k3 pushes the optimal threshold to move toward one direction (Prop. 4.3 and 4.4).
Proposition 4.2. Increasing k1 results in a lower optimal threshold θ˚ pk1 q ă θ˚ . Moreover, when
k1 is sufficiently large, θ˚ pk1 q ă θp˚ .
Proposition 4.3. When α ď 0.5 (the majority of the population is unqualified), increasing k2 results
in a higher optimal threshold θ˚ pk2 q ą θ˚ . Moreover, when k2 is sufficiently large, θ˚ pk2 q ą θp˚ .
Proposition 4.4. For any feature distribution PX|Y , there exists an ϵ̄ P p0, 1q such that whenever
ϵ ě ϵ̄, increasing k3 results in a lower optimal threshold θ˚ pk3 q ă θ˚ .
So far we have shown how the optimal threshold can Table 1: The impact of adjusted preferences
be shifted as the decision maker’s preferences change. on θ˚ pki q compared to original strategic θ˚ .
Next, we explore the impacts of threshold shifts on in-
                                                        Adjusted weight       Preference        Threshold shift
dividuals’ behaviors and show how a decision-maker
                                                          Increase k1   Encourage improvement    θ˚ pk1 q ă θ˚
with adjusted preferences can (dis)incentivize manip-     Increase k2   Discourage improvement   θ˚ pk2 q ž θ˚
ulation and influence fairness.                           Increase k3   Discourage manipulation  θ˚ pk3 q ž θ˚


4.2    P REFERENCES AS ( DIS ) INCENTIVES FOR MANIPULATION
                                                    0.55                           0.60
In Thm. 2.3, we explored the impacts of thresh-     0.50
                                                               P curveM
                                                                          *        0.55
                                                               P (θ ) M                      increase k
old θ on individuals’ best responses PM pθq.        0.45                           0.50
                                                                                        θ (k )        *
                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                              2

                                                    0.40 increase k       1        0.45
Combined with our knowledge of the relation-                        θ (k )    *
                                                                                  1
                                                                                   0.40
                                                         PM


                                                                                                 PM
                                                    0.35
                                                    0.30                           0.35
ship between adjusted preferences and policy        0.25                           0.30
                                                                                                            P curve
                                                                                                            P (θ )
                                                                                                                  M
                                                                                                                      *
                                                                                                                  M
(Sec. 4.1), we can further analyze how adjust-      0.20                           0.25                     P (θ )M
                                                                                                                      *̂
                                                    0.15                           0.20
ing preferences affect individuals’ responses.           −4 −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4          −4 −2         0   2 4      6
                                                                          θ                             θ
Next, we illustrate how a decision-maker may
disincentivize manipulation (or equivalently, Figure 2: Illustration of scenario 1 (left) and scenario
incentivize improvement) by adjusting its pref- 2 (right) in Thm. 4.5:      blue curves are PM pθq and red
erences.                                         arrows show how θ˚ changes when adjusting k1 , k2 .
Theorem 4.5 (Preferences serve as (dis)incentives). Compared to the original strategic policy θ˚ ,
decision-makers by adjusting preferences can disincentivize manipulation (i.e., PM pθq decreases)
under certain scenarios. Specifically,
1. When either of the following is satisfied, and the decision-maker increases k1 :
                                                                      PX|Y pθ˚ |1q    1´q
                        (i). q ` ϵ ě 1;                       (ii).                ď       .
                                                                       P I pθ˚ q     1´q´ϵ
2. When both of the following are satisfied, and the decision-maker increases k2 :
                                                    PX|Y pθ˚ |1q    1´q
         (i). q ` ϵ ă 1 and α ă 0.5;        (ii).                ą       and PM pθp˚ q ą FCM ´CI p0q.
                                                     P I pθ˚ q     1´q´ϵ

Moreover, when k1 (for scenario 1) or k2 (for scenario 2) are sufficiently large, adjusting preferences
also disincentivize the manipulation compared to the non-strategic policy θp˚ .
Thm. 4.5 identifies conditions under which a decision-maker can disincentivize manipulation directly
by adjusting its preferences. The condition q ` ϵ ž 1 determines whether the best response PM pθq is
                                                                                  P
                                                                                1´q   pθ ˚ |1q
strictly increasing or single-peaked (Thm. 2.3); the condition X|YP I pθ ˚ q
                                                                             ž 1´q´ϵ  implies that θ˚ is
lower/higher than θmax in Thm. 2.3. In Fig. 2, we illustrate Thm. 4.5 where the left (resp. right) plot
corresponds to scenario 1 (resp. scenario 2). Because increasing k1 (resp. k2 ) results in a lower (resp.
higher) threshold than θ˚ , the resulting manipulation probability PM is lower for both scenarios. The
detailed experimental setup and more illustrations are in App. C.

4.3    P REFERENCES SHAPE ALGORITHMIC FAIRNESS
The threshold shifts under adjusted preferences further allow us to compare these policies against a
certain fairness measure. In this section, we consider strategic individuals from two social groups


                                                          7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ga , Gb distinguished by some protected attribute S P ta, bu (e.g., race, gender). Similar to Zhang
et al. (2020a; 2022), we assume the protected attributes are observable and the decision-maker uses
group-dependent threshold policy πs pxq “ 1px ě θs q to make decisions about Gs , s P ta, bu. The
optimal threshold for each group can be found by maximizing the utility associated with that group:
maxθs ErRpD, Y q|S “ ss.
Fairness measure. We consider a class of group fairness notions that can be represented in the
following form (Zhang et al., 2020b; Zhang and Liu, 2021):
                               EX„PaC rπa pXqs “ EX„PbC rπb pXqs
where PsC is some probability distribution over X associated with fairness metric C. For instance,
under equal opportunity (EqOpt) fairness (Hardt et al., 2016b), PsEqOpt pxq “ PX|Y S px|1, sq; under
demographic parity (DP) fairness (Barocas et al., 2019), PsDP pxq “ PX|S px|sq .
                                                                                   ˇ
For threshold policy with thresholds pθa , θb q, we measure the unfairness as ˇEX„PaC r1px ě θa qs ´
                    ˇ
EX„PbC r1px ě θb qsˇ. Define the advantaged group as the group with larger EX„PsC r1pX ě θps˚ qs
under non-strategic optimal policy θps˚ , i.e., the group with the larger true positive rate (resp. positive
rate) under EqOpt (resp. DP) fairness, and the other group as disadvantaged group.
Mitigate unfairness with adjusted preferences. Next, we compare the unfairness of different
policies and illustrate that decision-makers with adjusted preferences may result in fairer outcomes,
as compared to both the original strategic and the non-strategic policy.
Theorem 4.6 (Promote fairness while disincentivizing manipulation). Without loss of generality,
let Ga be the advantaged group and Gb disadvantaged. A strategic decision-maker can always
simultaneously disincentivize manipulation and promote fairness in any of the following scenarios:
1. When condition 1.(i) or 1.(ii) in Thm. 4.5 holds for both groups, and the decision-maker adjusts
   the preferences by increasing k1 for both groups.
2. When condition 2.(i) and 2.(ii) in Thm. 4.5 hold for both groups and the decision-maker adjusts
   the preferences by increasing k2 for both groups.
3. When condition 1.(i) or 1.(ii) holds for Ga , condition 2.(i) and 2.(ii) hold for Gb , and the decision-
   maker adjusts preferences by increasing k1 for Ga and k2 for Gb .

Thm. 4.6 identifies all scenarios under which a decision-maker can simultaneously promote fairness
and disincentivize manipulation by simply adjusting k1 , k2 . Otherwise, it is not guaranteed that both
objectives can be achieved at the same time, as stated in Corollary 4.7.
Corollary 4.7. If none of the three scenarios in Thm. 4.6 holds, adjusting preferences is not guaran-
teed to promote fairness and disincentivize manipulation simultaneously.

The results above assume the decision-maker knows q, ϵ precisely. In practice, these parameters
may need to be estimated empirically. In App. B.5, we further provide an estimation procedure and
present more experimental results when these parameters are noisy.

5    E XPERIMENTS
We conduct experiments on both synthetic Gaussian data and FICO score data (Hardt et al., 2016b).
FICO data (Hardt et al., 2016b). FICO scores are widely used                              0.6

in the US to predict people’s credit worthiness. We use the prepro-
                                                                               PM(θ * )


                                                                                          0.4P θ
cessed dataset containing the CDF of scores FX|S px|sq, qualification                        P θ
                                                                                                                         M( c)
                                                                                                                         M ( aa )

likelihoods PY |XS p1|x, sq, and qualification rates αs for four racial                   0.2P θ                              *
                                                                                                                         M( c )
                                                                                             P θ                              *
                                                                                                                         M ( aa )
groups (Caucasian, African American, Hispanic, Asian). All scores                         0.0
                                                                                                0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8       1.0
are normalized to r0, 1s. Similar to Zhang et al. (2022), we use                         θ
these to estimate the conditional feature distributions PX|Y S px|y, sq Figure 3: PM pθq of Caucasian
using beta distribution Betapays , bys q. The results are shown in and African`
                                                                                     American.
                                                                                                  ˘
Fig. 9. We assume the improved feature distribution P I pxq „ Beta 1s 2 0s , b1s `b
                                                                                a  `a
                                                                                            2
                                                                                               0s
                                                                                                    and
CM ´ CI „ N p0, 0.25q for all groups, under which Assumption 2.2 and 2.1 are satisfied (see
Fig. 8). We also considered other feature/cost distributions and observed similar results. Note that for


                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                                                 `                       ˘
each group s, the decision-maker finds its own optimal threshold θs˚ or θs˚ pki q or θps˚ by maximizing
the utility associated with that group, i.e., maxθs ErRpD, Y q|S “ ss.
We first examine the impact of the decision-maker’s anticipation of strategic behavior on policies. In
Fig. 23 (App. C.1), the strategic θs˚ and non-strategic optimal threshold θps˚ are compared for each
group under different q and ϵ. The results are consistent with Thm. 4.1, i.e., under certain conditions,
θs˚ is lower than θps˚ when q is sufficiently large.
                                                                                Caucasian                         African American
We also examine the individual best responses.
                                                      0.6                                                   P (θ (k ))         *
Fig. 3 shows the manipulation probability PM pθq                                         0.4                              M
                                                                                                            strategic utility
                                                                                                                                    1

                                                                                                            F    (θ|1, s) X|Y, S

as a function of threshold θ for Caucasians 0.4                                                             non-strategic utility


                                                               alue


                                                                                                   alue
                                                                                                            P (θ )             *̂
                                                                                                                          M

(blue) and African Americans (orange) when                                               0.2
                                                      0.2
q “ 0.3, ϵ “ 0.5. For both groups, there exists
a unique θmax that maximizes the manipulation 0.0                                        0.0
probability. These are consistent with Thm. 2.3.          1.0           1.5          2.0     1.0           1.5                2.0
                                                             k1 normalized by u(1 − α)          k1 normalized by u(1 − α)
We also indicate the manipulation probabilities
under original strategic optimal thresholds θs˚ ; it Figure 4: Impact of adjusted preferences (FICO)
shows that African American has a higher ma-
nipulation probability than Caucasians. Similar results for Asian and Hispanic are shown in Fig. 12.
Note that the scenario considered in Fig. 3 satisfies the condition 1.(ii) in Thm. 4.5, because the
original strategic θs˚ ă θmax for both groups. We further conduct experiments in this setting to
evaluate the impacts of adjusted preferences. We first adopt EqOpt as the fairness metric, under
which EX„P    ˇ sC r1pX ě θqs “ FX|Y S pθ|1, sqˇ and the unfairness measure of group Ga , Gb can be
                            p
reduced to FX|Y S pθ|1, aq ´ FX|Y S pθ|1, bqˇ. Experiments for other fairness metrics are in App.
              ˇ
C.1. The results are shown in Fig. 4, where dashed red and dashed blue curves are manipulation
probabilities under non-strategic θp˚ and strategic θ˚ pk1 q, respectively. Solid red and solid blue curves
are the actual utilities U pθp˚ q and U pθ˚ pk1 qq received by the decision-maker. The difference between
two dotted green curves measures the unfairness between Caucasians and African Americans. All
weights are normalized such that k1 “ 1 corresponds to the original strategic policy, and k1 ą 1
indicates the policies with adjusted preferences. Results show that when condition 1(ii) in Thm. 4.5
is satisfied, increasing k1 can simultaneously disincentivize manipulation (PM decreases with k1 )
and improve fairness. These validate Thm. 4.5 and 4.6.
Table 2 compares the non-strategic θp˚ , orig-           Table 2: Comparison between three types of optimal
inal strategic θ˚ , and adjusted strategic               thresholds (FICO data). For utility and PM , the left
θ˚ pk1 q when k1,c “ k1,aa “ 1.5. It shows               value in parenthesis is for Caucasians and the right is
that decision-makers by adjusting prefer-                for African Americans.
ences can significantly mitigate unfairness                    Threshold           Utility            PM           Unfairness (EqOpt)
and disincentivize manipulation, with only                  Non-strategic       p0.698, 0.171q   p0.331, 0.513q          0.136
slight decreases in utilities. Results for                 Original strategic   p0.704, 0.203q   p0.211, 0.278q          0.055
                                                           Adjusted strategic   p0.701, 0.189q   p0.140, 0.155q          0.028
Asians and Hispanics are in Table 5.
Gaussian Data. We also validate our theorems on synthetic data with Gaussian distributed PX|Y S
in App. C.2. Specifically, we examined the impacts of adjusting preferences on decision policies,
individual’s best response, and algorithmic fairness. As shown in Fig. 21, 22 and Table 6, 7, 8,
these results are consistent with theorems, i.e., adjusting preferences can effectively disincentivize
manipulation and improve fairness. Notably, we considered all three scenarios in Thm. 4.5 when
condition 1.(i) or 1.(ii) or 2 is satisfied. For each scenario, we illustrate the individual’s best response
PM in Fig. 21 and show that manipulation can be disincentivized by adjusting preferences, i.e.,
increasing k1 under condition 1.(i) or 1.(ii), or increasing k2 under condition 2.

6     S OCIETAL I MPACTS & L IMITATIONS
This paper proposes a novel probabilistic framework and formulates a Stackelburg game to tackle
imitative strategic behavior with unforeseeable outcomes. The theoretical results depend on some
(mild) assumptions and are subject to change when ϵ, q, CM , CI change. Although we provide
a practical estimation procedure to estimate the model parameters, it still remains a challenge to
estimate model parameters accurately due to the expensive nature of doing controlled experiments.
This may bring uncertainties in applying our framework accurately in real applications.


                                                               9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Moritz Hardt, Nimrod Megiddo, Christos Papadimitriou, and Mary Wootters. Strategic classification.
 In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science,
 page 111–122, 2016a.

Jon Kleinberg and Manish Raghavan. How do classifiers induce agents to invest effort strategically?
  page 1–23, 2020.

Yahav Bechavod, Chara Podimata, Steven Wu, and Juba Ziani. Information discrepancy in strategic
  learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 1691–1715, 2022.

John Miller, Smitha Milli, and Moritz Hardt. Strategic classification is causal modeling in disguise.
  In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.

Yonadav Shavit, Benjamin L. Edelman, and Brian Axelrod. Causal strategic linear regression. In
  Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML’20, 2020.

Guy Horowitz and Nir Rosenfeld. Causal strategic classification: A tale of two shifts, 2023.

Meena Jagadeesan, Celestine Mendler-Dünner, and Moritz Hardt. Alternative microfoundations for
 strategic classification. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning,
 pages 4687–4697, 2021.

Sagi Levanon and Nir Rosenfeld. Generalized strategic classification and the case of aligned
  incentives. In International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2022, 17-23 July 2022,
  Baltimore, Maryland, USA, pages 12593–12618, 2022.

Xueru Zhang, Mohammad Mahdi Khalili, Kun Jin, Parinaz Naghizadeh, and Mingyan Liu. Fairness
  interventions as (Dis)Incentives for strategic manipulation. In Proceedings of the 39th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pages 26239–26264, 2022.

Lydia T Liu, Ashia Wilson, Nika Haghtalab, Adam Tauman Kalai, Christian Borgs, and Jennifer
  Chayes. The disparate equilibria of algorithmic decision making when individuals invest rationally.
  In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pages
  381–391, 2020.

Albert Bandura. Social learning through imitation. 1962.

Albert Bandura. Social learning theory of aggression. Journal of communication, pages 12–29, 1978.

Hoda Heidari, Vedant Nanda, and Krishna Gummadi. On the long-term impact of algorithmic decision
  policies: Effort unfairness and feature segregation through social learning. In 36th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pages 2692–2701, 2019.

Reilly Raab and Yang Liu. Unintended selection: Persistent qualification rate disparities and
  interventions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 26053–26065, 2021.

Yahav Bechavod, Katrina Ligett, Steven Wu, and Juba Ziani. Gaming helps! learning from strategic
  interactions in natural dynamics. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
  Statistics, pages 1234–1242, 2021.

Andrew Estornell, Sanmay Das, and Yevgeniy Vorobeychik. Incentivizing truthfulness through
  audits in strategic classification. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  number 6, pages 5347–5354, 2021.

Lydia T. Liu, Sarah Dean, Esther Rolf, Max Simchowitz, and Moritz Hardt. Delayed impact of fair
  machine learning. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, IJCAI-19, pages 6196–6200, 2019.

Stratis Tsirtsis, Behzad Tabibian, Moein Khajehnejad, Adish Singla, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Manuel
   Gomez-Rodriguez. Optimal decision making under strategic behavior, 2019.


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Xueru Zhang, Ruibo Tu, Yang Liu, Mingyan Liu, Hedvig Kjellstrom, Kun Zhang, and Cheng
  Zhang. How do fair decisions fare in long-term qualification? In Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, pages 18457–18469, 2020a.
Xueru Zhang, Mohammad Mahdi Khalili, and Mingyan Liu. Long-term impacts of fair machine
  learning. ergonomics in design, 28(3):7–11, 2020b.
Xueru Zhang and Mingyan Liu. Fairness in learning-based sequential decision algorithms: A survey.
  In Handbook of Reinforcement Learning and Control, pages 525–555. 2021.
Moritz Hardt, Eric Price, Eric Price, and Nati Srebro. Equality of opportunity in supervised learning.
 In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2016b.
Solon Barocas, Moritz Hardt, and Arvind Narayanan. Fairness and Machine Learning: Limitations
  and Opportunities. 2019.
Jie Lu, Anjin Liu, Fan Dong, Feng Gu, Joao Gama, and Guangquan Zhang. Learning under concept
   drift: A review. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 31(12):2346–2363,
   2018.
Micah D Carroll, Anca Dragan, Stuart Russell, and Dylan Hadfield-Menell. Estimating and penalizing
 induced preference shifts in recommender systems. In International Conference on Machine
 Learning, pages 2686–2708. PMLR, 2022.
Amir-Hossein Karimi, Gilles Barthe, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Isabel Valera. A survey of algorithmic
 recourse: contrastive explanations and consequential recommendations. ACM Computing Surveys,
 55(5):1–29, 2022.
Omer Ben-Porat and Moshe Tennenholtz. Best response regression. In Advances in Neural Informa-
 tion Processing Systems, 2017.
Jinshuo Dong, Aaron Roth, Zachary Schutzman, Bo Waggoner, and Zhiwei Steven Wu. Strategic clas-
   sification from revealed preferences. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM Conference on Economics
   and Computation, page 55–70, 2018.
Mark Braverman and Sumegha Garg. The role of randomness and noise in strategic classification.
 CoRR, abs/2005.08377, 2020.
Zachary Izzo, Lexing Ying, and James Zou. How to learn when data reacts to your model: Performa-
  tive gradient descent. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pages 4641–4650, 2021.
Saba Ahmadi, Hedyeh Beyhaghi, Avrim Blum, and Keziah Naggita. The strategic perceptron. In
  Proceedings of the 22nd ACM Conference on Economics and Computation, pages 6–25, 2021.
Wei Tang, Chien-Ju Ho, and Yang Liu. Linear models are robust optimal under strategic behavior. In
 Proceedings of The 24th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume
 130 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 2584–2592, 13–15 Apr 2021.
Itay Eilat, Ben Finkelshtein, Chaim Baskin, and Nir Rosenfeld. Strategic classification with graph
   neural networks, 2022.
Lydia T. Liu, Nikhil Garg, and Christian Borgs. Strategic ranking. In Proceedings of The 25th
  International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pages 2489–2518, 2022.
Tosca Lechner and Ruth Urner.        Learning losses for strategic classification.    arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2203.13421, 2022.
Yiling Chen, Yang Liu, and Chara Podimata. Learning strategy-aware linear classifiers. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:15265–15276, 2020a.
Juan Perdomo, Tijana Zrnic, Celestine Mendler-Dünner, and Moritz Hardt. Performative prediction.
  In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 7599–7609,
  2020.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Moritz Hardt, Meena Jagadeesan, and Celestine Mendler-Dünner. Performative power. In Advances
 in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Nir Rosenfeld, Anna Hilgard, Sai Srivatsa Ravindranath, and David C Parkes. From predictions to
  decisions: Using lookahead regularization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  pages 4115–4126, 2020.
Yatong Chen, Jialu Wang, and Yang Liu. Strategic recourse in linear classification. CoRR,
  abs/2011.00355, 2020b.
Nika Haghtalab, Nicole Immorlica, Brendan Lucier, and Jack Z Wang. Maximizing welfare with
  incentive-aware evaluation mechanisms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.01956, 2020.
Tal Alon, Magdalen Dobson, Ariel Procaccia, Inbal Talgam-Cohen, and Jamie Tucker-Foltz. Multia-
  gent evaluation mechanisms. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 34:
  1774–1781, 2020.
Kun Jin, Xueru Zhang, Mohammad Mahdi Khalili, Parinaz Naghizadeh, and Mingyan Liu. Incentive
  mechanisms for strategic classification and regression problems. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM
  Conference on Economics and Computation, page 760–790, 2022.
Flavia Barsotti, Ruya Gokhan Kocer, and Fernando P. Santos. Transparency, detection and imitation
  in strategic classification. In Proceedings of the Thirty-First International Joint Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-22, pages 67–73, 2022.
Saba Ahmadi, Hedyeh Beyhaghi, Avrim Blum, and Keziah Naggita. On classification of strategic
  agents who can both game and improve. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.00124, 2022a.
Saba Ahmadi, Hedyeh Beyhaghi, Avrim Blum, and Keziah Naggita. Setting fair incentives to
  maximize improvement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.00134, 2022b.
Keegan Harris, Dung Daniel T Ngo, Logan Stapleton, Hoda Heidari, and Steven Wu. Strategic
  instrumental variable regression: Recovering causal relationships from strategic responses. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 8502–8522, 2022.
Tom Yan, Shantanu Gupta, and Zachary Lipton. Discovering optimal scoring mechanisms in causal
  strategic prediction, 2023.
Michael Feldman, Sorelle A Friedler, John Moeller, Carlos Scheidegger, and Suresh Venkatasubra-
 manian. Certifying and removing disparate impact. In proceedings of the 21th ACM SIGKDD
 international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, pages 259–268, 2015.
Vivek Gupta, Pegah Nokhiz, Chitradeep Dutta Roy, and Suresh Venkatasubramanian. Equalizing
  recourse across groups, 2019.


                                                12
