Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


MAP’ S NOT DEAD YET: U NCOVERING TRUE LAN -
GUAGE MODEL MODES BY CONDITIONING AWAY DE -
GENERACY

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                               A BSTRACT

         It has been widely observed that exact or approximate MAP (mode-seeking) de-
         coding from natural language generation (NLG) models consistently leads to
         degenerate outputs (Holtzman et al., 2019; Stahlberg & Byrne, 2019). This has
         generally been attributed to either a fundamental inadequacy of modes in models
         or weaknesses in language modeling. Contrastingly in this work, we emphasize
         that degenerate modes can even occur in the absence of any model error, due to
         contamination of the training data. Specifically, we show that mixing even a tiny
         amount of low-entropy noise with a population text distribution can cause the data
         distribution’s mode to become degenerate, implying that any models trained on it
         will be as well. As the unconditional mode of NLG models will often be degenerate,
         we therefore propose to apply MAP decoding to the model’s distribution condi-
         tional on avoiding specific degeneracies. Using exact-search, we empirically verify
         that the length-conditional modes of machine translation models and language
         models are indeed more fluent and topical than their unconditional modes. For
         the first time, we also share many examples of exact modal sequences from these
         models, and from several variants of the LLaMA-7B model. Notably, the modes of
         the LLaMA models are still degenerate, showing that improvements in modeling
         have not fixed this issue. Because of the cost of exact mode finding algorithms, we
         develop an approximate mode finding approach, ACBS, which finds sequences that
         are both high-likelihood and high-quality. We apply this approach to LLaMA-7B,
         a model which was not trained for instruction following, and find that we are able
         to elicit reasonable outputs without any finetuning.


1    I NTRODUCTION

While it might intuitively be appealing to search for the highest-likelihood response (i.e., the mode)
from a language model, such (approximate-)MAP (maximum a posteriori) decoding approaches
generally lead to degenerate outputs, such as excessive repetition of phrases, empty outputs etc. (Holtz-
man et al., 2019; Stahlberg & Byrne, 2019; Riley & Chiang, 2022; Wiher et al., 2022). As a result,
sampling-based approaches dominate the natural language generation landscape reinforcing the belief
that mode-seeking is undesirable for decoding from neural language models. The surprising degener-
ate behavior of MAP decoding has been attributed to various factors, most notably the small fraction
of a model’s distribution which the mode represents (Eikema & Aziz, 2020) and many possibilities
relating to biases of the learned models (Murray & Chiang, 2018; Shi et al., 2020; Wang & Sennrich,
2020). In this work, we emphasize that these degenerate modes can occur even when a model is
perfectly trained. This can be the case when the training data is contaminated with low-entropy
distractors – noisy samples coming from a distribution with much lower entropy than the distribution
of desirable outputs.1 In Section 2, we point out that the higher the variability of the valid outputs,
the smaller the contamination rate needs to be to result in a degenerate mode.
When this is the case, those sequences which a well-trained probabilistic model assigns a high-
score to should also be high-quality, provided they don’t come from the set of distractors. To
   1
     For example, regurgitating the input in machine translation (MT) or instruction-following is a low-entropy
behavior, since there will only be one such output.


                                                      1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


investigate this possibility, we propose attribute-conditional search, i.e., search for the argmax of
Pmodel (y|x, A(y) = a), where A(y) = a is an additional constraint on the output which avoids the
degenerate behavior. This is different from search methods which heuristically try to satisfy some
criteria, as the scoring function is the model’s own conditional likelihood, not any external criteria.
If the modes of LMs are fundamentally degenerate, then this conditioning approach would just
uncover a different bad behavior underneath, such as excessive repetition. Surprisingly, we find that
this is not the case for both an MT model and a story generation model. Both models have degenerate
empty outputs as their unconditional mode for a large fraction of inputs (this was previously reported
for MT, but not for open-ended generation). However, we find that length-conditional modes (i.e.,
the highest scoring output of a given length) are almost universally high quality.
In order to assess whether the problem of degenerate modal sequences has remained a problem for
larger models, we also apply exact MAP inference to LLaMA-7B (Touvron et al., 2023a) on an
instruction following task. Tree search for exact MAP on models of this size requires a novel caching
heuristic to strike a balance between memory and runtime. We find that the modes suffer not just
from emptiness, but also from several other issues such as repetition of the prompt. This supports the
claim that modal degeneracy may be coming from the data itself, as improvements in models have
not fixed it.
While the exact MAP experiments support our hypothesis, MAP (conditional or unconditional) is
too expensive for practical applications. To bridge this gap, we propose attribute-conditional beam
search (ACBS), an approximate version of conditional search. Applying it to the same models as we
used for exact search, we find that we can perform length-conditional generation to find outputs which
are both higher scoring and more fluent than those found by beam search, for a given length. To
investigate more practical applications, we also apply a modified version of ACBS to LLaMA-7B on
an instruction following task. Surprisingly, we find that it significantly increases the response quality,
despite the model not having been finetuned for the task. This result is promising, since it means that
improved inference algorithms may let us extract value from models which were previously thought
to be too weak or general to be usable for these tasks.

2     C AUSES OF OUTPUT DEGENERACY

It has been repeatedly observed that the relationship between the likelihood assigned to a text by a
neural generative model and its quality as assessed by human readers is non-monotonic. Two of the
most notable such results are Stahlberg & Byrne (2019)’s finding that MT models often prefer the
empty sequence to any other output and Holtzman et al. (2019)’s demonstration that GPT-2 (Radford
et al., 2019) produces degenerate outputs under beam search. As we stated in Section 1, many
explanations have been offered for this phenomenon. We wish to emphasize a point that has been
under-discussed in the NLP community: It is consistent that a model can emit high-quality samples
with high probability, while still having a degenerate mode, even in the absence of model error. We
will specifically call this the bad mode problem. In this section, we will explain how low-entropy
distractors can lead to this phenomenon, and the implications for how we design decoding algorithm.

2.1   MAP’ S NEMESIS IS LOW- ENTROPY NOISE

MAP inference aims to find the single highest scoring output from a model’s output distribution
Pmodel , possibly conditional on a prefix or input x: y ∗ = argmax Pmodel (y | x). As an example,
                                                                        x
consider a uniform distribution over some set of high-quality texts. For instance, they might be
20 possible translations of a “<subject><verb><object>” sentence. Or they might be 2100
possible abstracts one could write for a given scientific paper. By training sufficiently large models
sufficiently well, we could approximate these distributions arbitrarily closely. If one instead trains on
a noisy dataset, problems arise. Imagine that each training example is replaced by a uniform sample
from a set of 10 bad outputs with a probability of ϵ. For the translation example above, as long as
ϵ/(1 − ϵ) < 1/2 (i.e., ϵ < 1/3), a perfectly trained model would still have a correct translation as
its modal output. This set of outputs is a low-entropy distractor.2 On the other hand, to prevent
    2
      “Low-entropy” because compared to the valid inputs, this distribution shows much less variability. “Distrac-
tor”, because models will end up preferring them to valid outputs!


                                                        2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


one of these 10 bad sequences from being modal for the scientific abstract distribution, we need
ϵ/(1 − ϵ) < 10/2100 , meaning that the noise rate must be vanishingly small. If one in a billion
sequences is replaced with a bad output, MAP on a perfectly trained model should give us one of the
bad outputs. No matter how well the model is trained, its mode will still be bad. Sampling from the
model, on the other hand, would not be overly sensitive to this noise.
Ott et al. (2018) showed that adding instances where the reference is a copy of the source to an NMT
training set leads to models showing more search degeneracies. They also showed that when the
model had a higher uncertainty, degenerate outputs were more common. This is a particular example
of a low-entropy distractor, and how it interacts with the entropy of the model.

2.2       S AMPLING ’ S NEMESIS IS HIGH - ENTROPY NOISE

Above, MAP inference crumbled once the distribution was mixed with a small amount of a particular
kind of noise, while sampling remains robust. However, one can also find situations where just the
opposite happens. Consider a uniform distribution over the set of all high-quality 100-word stories.
To add noise, introduce a spelling error into each word independently with probability 1/10.
Samples from models perfectly trained on this distribution would have 10 spelling errors on average,
and the probability that an output contains no spelling errors is 10−100 . Nevertheless, the modal
output would be error free. In the chain rule factorization of the distribution, it is more likely that
each word is spelled correctly than incorrectly, so exact MAP would yield a noise free text.

2.3       F IXING SAMPLING VS . FIXING MAP

The two examples above demonstrate that sampled and modal outputs are vulnerable and resilient to
different kinds of noise. This seems to be supported by actual practice in NLG, as the most common
sampling methods aim to reduce the entropy of the output distribution. Top-k and top-p sampling
remove the tail of the token distribution, while low-temperature sampling emphasizes high-probability
tokens while reducing the probability of low-probability tokens further.
On the other hand, there are not currently methods for protecting search-based methods from the bad
mode problem. Normalizing the sequence probability by the number of tokens is a heuristic method
for addressing short low-quality outputs (Jean et al., 2015), but length is just one such problem.3
Our proposed method for attacking the bad mode problem is attribute-conditional search.
                                                                                        ∗
Rather than searching for the global mode, we search for the conditional mode: ycond         =
argmax Pmodel (y | x, A(y) = a), which is the mode of the distribution conditional on the value
      x
of some attribute A(y). For the particular case of outputs being empty or truncated, we might set
A(y) = |y|, and search for the highest scoring output of a given length. Our experiments in Section 3
show that this is sufficient for an MT and story generation model to have high-quality exact modes.
That is, the single highest scoring sequence of sufficiently high length is usually not degenerate.4

3         E XACT U NCONDITIONAL MODES : A N EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION

We study the nature of unconditional modes (highest-scoring outputs) of various kinds of autoregres-
sive models, aiming to characterize the degenerate behaviors observed in modes across context types,
model scales, and fine-tuning schemes. Specifically, we use the depth-first search (DFS) method
introduced by Stahlberg & Byrne (2019) to find exact modes for the following diverse set of models:
(a) a Chinese-English encoder-decoder machine translation model (Tiedemann & Thottingal, 2020),
(b) a 345M-parameter GPT-2 model finetuned on the ROC stories dataset (Mostafazadeh et al., 2016),
(c) a 7B-parameter general purpose base LLaMA model (Touvron et al., 2023a), and (d) finetuned
LLaMA models for chat and instruction following, namely Alpaca and Guanaco (Taori et al., 2023;
Dettmers et al., 2023). While exact decoding in exponentially large search spaces in LMs appears
   3
     For instance, consider the degenerate behavior of repeating the input in MT, with probability one in a billion.
The length will be similar to the length of valid outputs, so length normalization will not fix the issue. Once
outputs get sufficiently long, the repetition behavior will dominate high-quality translations.
   4
     Note that there may be issues with the mode even in the absence of noise. See for example Holtzman et al.
(2021).


                                                         3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


intractable, Stahlberg & Byrne (2019) demonstrated that aggressive pruning makes it possible to find
the exact modal output of a model. Since the LLaMA models are over 20 times larger than the MT
and story generation models, we devise a modified caching strategy to reduce the memory footprint
of DFS, which is explained in Section B. To our knowledge, this work is the first to investigate the
exact modes from models of this size.

3.1   E XPERIMENT S ETUP

For MT dataset, we use the 2,002 source sentences from the WMT’17 Zh-En newsdev dataset (Bojar
et al., 2017) as inputs. The details of story completion experiments can be found in Appendix A.2. For
LLaMA-based experiments, we sampled 1000 instructions from the databricks-dolly-15k
dataset, filtered to be less than 256 tokens long, and to be in the instruction/response format rather
than the instruction/context/response format. For Alpaca and Guanaco, we use the prompt format
used during finetuning, but LLaMA isn’t trained for instruction following so we use the Alpaca
format for it as well (See Appendix D for the exact text). Because Guanaco was trained on multi-turn
conversations, it tries to generate more messages instead of the EOS token. To fix that we treat
“\n###” as an alternative EOS marker, forcing it to only generate one message.

3.2   Q UANTITATIVE ANALYSIS

For machine translation, we replicate the finding in Stahlberg & Byrne (2019) that modal MT outputs
are often empty. We find that the mode of the MarianMT Zh-En model is the empty sequence for
57.7% of the 2002 source sentences.5 For story completion experiments (see Appendix A.2 for
details), 28.7% of inputs led to an empty mode. Interestingly, we observe that just like the smaller
models described above, all three of the bigger LLaMA model variants often have an empty modal
output as well. The basic LLaMA model predicted an empty mode for a majority (70.7%) of prompts.
Alpaca and Guanaco predicted empty modes for 16% and 7.7% of the prompts – much lower than
the non finetuned LLaMA model, which isn’t surprising, since Alpaca and Guanaco were trained on
data where the LM always gives a full response to the user.
Figure 1a shows the relationship between the length of the input sentence and empty outputs. Just
like Stahlberg & Byrne (2019), we find that longer source sequences are more likely to have an
empty modal output (Figure 1a). However, in figure 2, we also find that the probability of the empty
sequence declines as the source length increases. Figure 1b shows the same pattern happens with
LLaMA as in the earlier experiments: Inputs with longer reference lengths have empty modes more
often. For these models, the probability of an empty output declines or is relatively unchanged
with length. This finding is consistent with the explanation given in Section 2: The main cause of
the empty mode problem is that the entropy of valid outputs increases with input length, but the
probability of the empty output does not decline fast enough to offset this effect.

3.3   Q UALITATIVE ANALYSIS

In general , when these models’ modes are non-empty, they are often high-quality. For MT and story
completion, the empty mode seemed to be the only kind of degeneracy. But with much larger LLaMA
based models, we see other kinds of degenerate modal outputs as well. Tables 13, 14, and 15 show
the model modes for the prompts that have non-empty modes. Some of the degeneracies we observed
are: a) For 46 of 1,000 prompts searched, Alpaca’s mode is “<nooutput>”, b) Guanaco’s mode is
often a substring of the prompt, and c) LLaMA’s mode often repeats the prompt. These modal outputs
show that for these LMs, there are multiple types of degenerate outputs. Finally, we observe that
most of the prompts for which LLaMA has a non-empty mode are factoid requests that have a single
answer. For Alpaca and Guanaco, the prompts that have empty modes are generally asking much
more open ended questions, which don’t have a single clear answer.
The common theme in these findings is that the degenerate modal behavior is related to the entropy
of the set of valid outputs. The more open-ended the correct response, the more likely it is for the
low-entropy distractor outputs and empty outputs to have a high logprob compared to the desired
output sequences as discussed in Section 2.
   5
     Stahlberg & Byrne (2019) found that 51.8% of inputs on the WMT news-test-2015 En-De dataset had
an empty mode under their model.


                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                 Model
                                                                            80    LLaMA
                                                                                  Alpaca
                                                                                  Guanaco


                                                            % modes empty
                                                                            60

                                                                            40

                                                                            20

                                                                            0
                                                                                   20       40        60       80
                                                                                     Reference length percentile

                                                            (b) LLaMA: Percent of 1000 prompts from
(a) MarianMT: Percent of sources in WMT’17 Zh-
                                                            databricks-dolly-15k assigned empty
En newsdev-2017 with empty modal outputs.
                                                            modal outputs

    Figure 1: Rate of empty (exact) modal outputs for MarianMT Zh-En and LLaMA-7B variants.


4     E XACT CONDITIONAL MODES : CASE STUDY ON L ENGTH

In the previous section, we observed that many different kinds of models suffer from degenerate
modes and this problem does not seem to be abated by scale or finetuning. One of the most common
manifestations of degeneracy is the mode being an empty zero-length string. Therefore, in this
section, we target the potential effects of erroneously empty or truncated responses in the training
data by finding modes of the conditional distribution  of the models when conditioned on the length
variable: y ∗ = argmax Pmodel y |y| = L for a given target length, L, in addition to the usual

                     y
conditioning on a source sentence or prefix. We adapt the DFS algorithm from the previous section to
constrain it to the target length to find the length-conditional modes for the MT and story generation
models described above. Computing length-conditional modes is much more expensive than finding
the global mode, since the search space can’t be pruned as aggressively. As such, we restrict our
attention to conditioning on output lengths of 12 tokens or less.
The experiment results in Stahlberg & Byrne (2019) hint that such conditioning might ameliorate
this issue for machine translation. They put a minimum-length constraint on their DFS algorithm
and show good results on machine translation. Below, we present a qualitative analysis of modes
conditioned on different target lengths for the MT and story generation systems.

Characteristics of length-conditional modes Our main finding is that these conditional modes are
indeed high-quality, provided the length constraint is long enough. Having fixed the empty string
issue, they do not seem to uncover new degenerate behaviors. A common pattern in the length

Table 1: Global and length-conditional modal translations of “泰国旅游景区炸弹爆炸致四人死亡”
by the MarianMT Zh-En translation model. The reference translation is “Thailand Bomb Blasts At
Tourist Hotspots Kill Four” (14 tokens).

 Length constraint       Log-probability   Text
 Global mode             -7.91             </s>
 4                       -9.22             Four people died</s>
 6                       -9.77             Four people were killed.</s>
 8                       -10.37            In Thailand, four people died.</s>
 10                      -10.63            A bomb blast in Thailand killed four people.</s>
 12                      -9.60             The bombing of the Thai tourist zone killed four people.</s>

conditional modes is that the shortest modes will not be complete sentences, but those of sufficient
length will be grammatical (although often necessarily leaving out some details due to necessity).
Table 1 shows an example of this behavior for MT. The unconditional mode is empty, but the length
conditional modes are grammatical, and more detail is added as the length is increased. Table 8


                                                      5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 2: BLEU and BLEURT scores of modal outputs of the MarianMT Zh-En model on a length-
restricted subset of the WMT’17 Zh-En dev. set. L is the length the mode was conditional on.

                                                         Conditioning
                      Metric
                                     Global     L=6        L = 8 L = 10          L = 12
                      BLEU               0.5       0.3        1.4         3.3         5.8
                      BLEURT            27.7      27.7       36.3        42.3        47.9


shows exact modes for 20 more randomly selected inputs. Appendix A.2 discusses analogous results
for our finetuned GPT-2 model. These results consistently demonstrate that exact length-conditional
modes tend to be fluent, provided the length constraint is long enough. We are primarily interested in
this qualitative finding, but Table 2 also shows BLEU and BLEURT (Sellam et al., 2020) scores of
these translations, further showing that the longer modes are preferable.6

5     A PPROXIMATE MODE SEARCH WITH ATTRIBUTE -C ONDITIONAL B EAM
      S EARCH

While the exact search experiments with length conditioning show promising results for ameliorating
empty-string degenerate behavior, DFS-related approaches are too expensive to be practical in NLG
applications, especially so for the conditioning variables that force high amounts of backtracking.
Therefore, in this section we investigate how we can approximate the search for conditional modes.
Since beam search is the most commonly used approximate search method for NLG, we develop
a conditional version of it, which we will refer to as Attribute-Conditional Beam Search (ACBS).
We demonstrate that using ACBS while conditioning on length usually leads to higher-likelihood
and more grammatical outputs of a desired length than merely constraining standard beam search
to output a certain length. To test it to a setting of more practical interest, we also apply ACBS to
the LLaMA-7B model, demonstrating that we can find relatively high quality instruction-following
outputs without finetuning or modifying the LLaMA model in any way.

5.1   ATTRIBUTE -C ONDITIONAL BEAM SEARCH

Our method to find conditional modes uses stepwise prefix classifiers for constraint satisfaction
in the continued string from the input prefix. Standard beam search approximates search for a
model’s unconditional mode by incrementally building a complete output, via maintaining and
extending a list of high-scoring partial hypotheses at each step. The step-wise score (S(x1:t ))
                                                                           t
                                                                           P
of a partial hypothesis of length t is its model log-likelihood S(x1:t ) =   log (Pmodel (xi |x<i )).
                                                                                     i=1
Instead, we want to find the mode under the conditonal distribution Pmodel (x|A(x) = a) for some
attribute a. Therefore, we condition the partial hypotheses on a as well and maintain the modified
                        t
score: S ′ (x1:t , a) =
                        P
                          log (Pmodel (xi |x<i , A(x) = a)). We have no way of directly computing
                        i=1
these summands directly, so we apply Bayes’ rule. This leads to a telescoping  sum, simplyfing to:
S ′ (x1:t , a) = − log Pmodel (A(x) = a) + S(x1:t ) + log Pmodel A(x) = a x1:t . The first term is
constant across hypotheses, so we discard it, leading to:

                        Scond (x1:t , a) = S(x1:t ) + log Pmodel A(x) = a x1:t
Thus, the ACBS score is just the ordinary beam search score with an additional term added. This
additional term quantifies the probability of a complete sequence, x, having the desired attribute given
prefix x1:t under the language model. Unfortunately, computing it is intractable since that requires
marginalizing over all sequences which have x1:t as their first t tokens. To avoid
                                                                                   this, we instead train
a classifier to estimate it, referring to its prediction as Pclf A(x) = a x1:t . Importantly, we need to
predict the probability that a model output has the attribute, so this classifier should be trained on
on model outputs, not natural language. The fact that the approximation telescopes is extremely
beneficial, since we do not need to worry about our classifier accumulating error between timesteps.
    6
      These scores are still quite low because we only search up to 12 tokens, but used inputs with references up
to 20 tokens in length.


                                                         6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Related work on controllable generation. Yang & Klein (2021) use the same factorization of
conditional probability for sampling, but beam search requires more attention to normalization, so we
take advantage of the telescoping described above. Krause et al. (2020) also do conditional sampling,
but they train a full language model for each class rather than just training a classifier. Some other
search methods augment the beam search score, most notably He et al. (2017) and Lu et al. (2021).
The critical difference is that our goal is to find conditional modes, so the only thing we are interested
in is maximizing likelihood, while other guided search methods try to maximize a heuristic score.

5.2     E XPERIMENTS : L ENGTH - CONDITIONAL GENERATION WITH ACBS

Motivated by the high quality of the exact length-conditional models in Sec. 3, we aim to test the
efficacy of our approximate conditional mode finding algorithm on length conditioning. We find that
ACBS is able to produce qualitatively better outputs of a given length with higher likelihood than
those found by constraining beam search to end at the target length.
Models and data: We use the same models that we found length-conditional exact modes in
Section 3: MarianMT Zh-En for MT, and the ROC Stories GPT-2 model for LM. We train our
classifiers using sequences sampled from these models. For the GPT-2 model we generate texts
from scratch, for MarianMT we sample translations from the model conditional on sources from the
news-commentary-v12-zh-en training data (Bojar et al., 2017).
Classifier details: Because the number of possible output lengths is very high, we train a classifier
to predict the length remaining rather than the absolute length of a sequence. We also reduce the
number of categories in the classification problem by bucketing the lengths into coarser groups as
the length increases. Specifically, lengths 0-16 each have a unique class, lengths 17-32 are split into
4 groups, lengths 32-64 are split into two groups, then all lengths 65 and higher are assigned to a
single group (24 classes in total). For both models, we train classifiers that take the decoder/LM’s
hidden states and a candidate next token as input.The classifier is a shallow transformer, with specific
architectural details and hyperparameters given in section G.

5.2.1    R ESULTS

In our experiments, we compare ACBS to length-truncated beam search. Both are constrained to
output the EOS token at the target length, and never produce the EOS token prior to that point.
Table 3a compares ACBS and truncated beam search as search methods, when controlling the
output length for MT (See Appendix E for results with GPT-2). Overall, ACBS outperforms
unconditional beam search in terms of finding high-likelihood sequences satisfying the length
constraint. Unsurprisingly, there is less of a gap between beam search and ACBS with a beam size of
20.7 Thus our approach is more effective at finding conditional modes than length-constrained beam
search which has been a time tested technique for generating modal outputs for NLG.
Tables 3c and 3b compare the methods using two metrics of similarity to a reference, BLEU
and BLEURT, and an estimate of fluency, perplexity under the Llama2-7B model (Touvron et al.,
2023b). ACBS finds higher likelihood translations than ordinary beam search, but does not lead to
a degradation in quality as is generally the case for unconditionally high-likelihood outputs. The
sequences found by ACBS improve on all three metrics in the majority of cases. In particular, the
BLEURT score of the ACBS outputs is higher in all 10 combinations of generation length/beam size
that were tested. BLEU sometimes prefers ordinary beam search to ACBS by a small margin, likely
because the beam search outputs are often truncated (see the next subsection), which BLEU does not
penalize harshly. At a beam size of 20, ACBS passes beam search up in terms of BLEU score, due to
the degradation of unconditionally high-likelihood outputs in MT which was discussed in the prequel.
These results suggest that conditional search methods may allow us to find find outputs which are
simultaneously high-likelihood and high-quality.
A consistent pattern in the outputs is that ACBS finds grammatical outputs of the requested length,
while unconditional beam search does not. Table 4 shows several examples of this pattern.8 While
   7
    In the infinite beam size limit, both methods will find the exact conditional mode of length L.
   8
    To avoid cherry-picking, many more randomly selected outputs are shown in Tables 17 and 18, that also
consistently show the same pattern.


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: Comparison of ACBS and truncated beam search for MarianMT Zh-En on the WMT’17
Zh-En dev. set. Results were computed for various Beam sizes, B, and length ratios (i.e. the ratio
between the length of output we search for, and the reference translation length). The values total
less than 100 because the two methods may output the same sequence.

(a) Fraction of the team each method finds a
higher likelihood output than the other. Val-           (b) Llama2-7B perplexity when applied outputs ABCS
ues total less than 100 because both methods            finds sequences which Llama2-7B finds to be higher
may find the same output.                               likelihood (without conditioning on the source).

  Length         Winrates                                    Length        Llama2-7B Perplexity
            ACBS          Trunc. BS                                       ACBS           Trunc. BS
  Ratio                                                      Ratio
        B = 5 B = 20 B = 5 B = 20                                     B = 5 B = 20 B = 5 B = 20
  0.8      56.9     57.8           35.5      29.1            0.8      33.78    31.82        33.69    32.06
  0.9      58.5     55.0           32.1      27.2            0.9      29.45    27.99        29.87    28.23
  1.0      62.5     50.3           26.4      29.3            1.0      25.53    24.19        26.77    24.86
  1.1      66.5     54.0           24.0      27.5            1.1      23.27    22.01        25.38    23.28
  1.2      69.7     60.9           23.9      25.6            1.2      21.80    20.51        23.80    21.98

                                (c) BLEU and BLEURT scores of translations

                       Length                 BLEU/BLEURT
                                         ACBS           Trunc. BS
                       Ratio
                                      B = 5 B = 20    B = 5 B = 20
                       0.8         14.2/57.4        14.5/59.0      14.2/51.4    14.4/52.2
                       0.9         16.4/61.5        16.6/62.7      16.1/56.2    16.4/57.1
                       1.0         17.3/63.9        17.8/64.9      17.4/59.9    17.6/61.8
                       1.1         16.0/64.1        16.6/65.2      16.2/60.2    16.5/62.6
                       1.2         14.7/63.4        14.8/64.2      14.9/59.3    15.1/61.7


Table 4: Selected decoding outputs from MarianMT Zh-En to compare ACBS and length-truncated
beam search (beam size 5) with target lengths: 11, 12, 14, 15, 16.

  Input                                                             安德拉达表示:“下雨无助于改善情况。”
  Reference (14 tokens)                                             ”The rain doesn’t help,” Andrada said.
  Truncated Beam Search                       Log-likelihood        ACBS
  Andrada said: “It’s                         -15.81/-13.29         “It does not help improve the situation.”
  Andrada said: “It’s not                     -15.59/-16.70         Andrada said: “It does not.
  Andrada said, “It’s not going to            -18.48/-11.63         Andrada said: “It does not help improve.”
  Andrada said, “It’s not going to help       -17.97/-11.38         Andrada said: “It does not help to improve.”
  Andrada said: “It’s raining that doesn’t    -19.35/-10.24         Andrada said: “It does not help improve the
                                                                    situation.”


ACBS finds grammatical translations of each length (other than the second), unconditional beam
search finds no grammatical sequences. The reason that unconditional beam search fails is that it
can’t plan ahead for the predetermined future placement of the EOS token.


5.3     E XPERIMENTS : LL A MA-7B INSTRUCTION FOLLOWING WITH NO FINETUNING

We saw in Section 3, the 7B parameter LLaMA Touvron et al. (2023a) and its derivatives suffer from
many more problems other than brevity. For example, aside from the mode being empty, LLaMA-7B
outputs also displayed degenerate behavior like repeating the prompt, and generating LATEXfragments.
So, in this case we need a more expressive conditioning attribute which prevents several different
types of degenerate modes from occurring. Unlike length, we can’t easily compute whether an output


                                                         8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


is degenerate or not, so we use a reward model from Open Assistant9 to score outputs. The scores are
binarized to yield a quality judgement, which is used as the attribute for ACBS.
We make several concessions due to resource constraints: 1) We use beam search outputs instead
of samples for classifier training (more representative data, worse calibration) 2) We use a 4-bit
quantized version of LLaMA. We also use a novel classifier architecture to better take advantage of
the information in the pretrained model (details in Appendix G.4).
For training the guiding classifier, we use 14K instructions from the Alpaca dataset (Taori
et al., 2023), and generate compltions using the “beam search” prompt format shown in Ap-
pendix D. We assigned any example that was nonempty and scored higher than 2.15 to the pos-
itive class, leading to 82.4% of outputs receiving a negative label. At test time we eavluate on
databricks-dolly-15k (Conover et al., 2023), using the 248 instructions which yield prompts
shorter than 100 tokens. We use a beam size of 5 for all experiments.

5.3.1       R ESULTS AND DISCUSSION


Table 5: Decoding algorithm preference rates on a subset of databricks-dolly-15k dataset

                                                     Preferred output (%)
                                                  ACBS Tie Beam search
                               Reward Model         64.9     17.0        18.1
                               Human (n = 1)        58.1     29.0        12.9
                               GPT-4                56.9     16.9        26.2

We compare our ACBS approach with the reward based classifier against decoding with regular beam
search. Our approach results in significant improvements over the degenerate behaviors shown by
ordinary beam search. Table 5 compares ACBS and beam search using the reward model and blinded
pairwise human and GPT-4 evaluations (see Appendix H). When examples for which beam search
yields an empty output are excluded, ACBS still finds a higher reward output 59.9% of the time,
while beam search only finds a better output 19% of the time. We find that ACBS allows us to get
higher-quality outputs from LLaMA-7B than beam search does (Many more samples are shown in
Appendix I). On the prompt: ‘Translate the phrase ”My eyes are clear” into any 5 languages.’, beam
search produces an empty output, while ACBS produces 5 correct translations:
             The phrase ”My eyes are clear” can be translated into the following languages:\n* French:
             Mes yeux sont clairs\n* German: Meine Augen sind klar\n* Italian: I miei occhi sono
             chiari\n* Portuguese: Meus olhos são claros\n* Spanish: Mis ojos son claros

Despite using an binarized reward model not trained for use with this model, we still see qualitative
benefits from such a conditioning variable. These results are still suggestive of the idea that models
may have much better capabilities than pure sampling or unconditional beam search would suggest.
In particular, we used only 14,000 binary labels for training the classifier, which is far fewer bits of
signal than are used for a method such as instruction finetuning.


6       C ONCLUSION

In this work we pointed out that low-entropy distractors can lead to degenerate NLG model modes,
even in the absence of model error. We investigated the exact modes of several autoregressive models,
finding several kinds of degenerate behavior, both replicating and extending prior work. Motivated by
this, we explored two kinds of conditional search: exact length-conditional search, and ACBS. These
methods showed that these models do support outputs which are simultaneously high-likelihood
and high-quality, a fact which is surprising in light of most of the work on this topic. We hope this
exposition inspires the community to explore improvements to MAP-based methods, rather than
abandoning them entirely in favor of sampling and reward-maximization methods.

    9
        https://huggingface.co/OpenAssistant/reward-model-deberta-v3-large-v2


                                                        9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


7    R EPRODUCIBILITY

The data used for our experiments is explicitly stated in Sections 3 and Section 5. The ACBS
algorithm is stated in full detail in Algorithm 1. We will put the DFS code for JAX transformers
on GitHub and provide links to it, as well as the code for applying ACBS to LLaMA. We will also
publish the weights for the classifiers, so that they can directly be used for text generation. The details
of the classifier architectures and hyperparameters for training and decoding are in Appendices G and
G.4. The pretrained models are all from prior work, and are publicly available.

8    E THICS S TATEMENT

Our work proposes methods for improving the quality of text decoded from NLG models. In particular,
we demonstrate how to extract useful behavior from a language model which was pretrained on a
large corpus, but has not been finetuned with RLHF to prevent it from generating toxic outputs. This
may be a concern for users interesting in applying these methods.

R EFERENCES

Ondřej Bojar, Yvette Graham, and Amir Kamran. Results of the WMT17 metrics shared task. In Pro-
  ceedings of the Second Conference on Machine Translation, pp. 489–513, Copenhagen, Denmark,
  September 2017. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/W17-4755. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/W17-4755.
Mike Conover, Matt Hayes, Ankit Mathur, Jianwei Xie, Jun Wan, Sam Shah, Ali Ghodsi, Patrick
 Wendell, Matei Zaharia, and Reynold Xin. Free dolly: Introducing the world’s first truly open
 instruction-tuned llm, 2023. URL https://www.databricks.com/blog/2023/04/
 12/dolly-first-open-commercially-viable-instruction-tuned-llm.
Tim Dettmers, Artidoro Pagnoni, Ari Holtzman, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Qlora: Efficient finetuning
  of quantized llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14314, 2023.
Bryan Eikema and Wilker Aziz. Is map decoding all you need? the inadequacy of the mode in
  neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Computational
  Linguistics, pp. 4506–4520, 2020.
Di He, Hanqing Lu, Yingce Xia, Tao Qin, Liwei Wang, and Tie-Yan Liu. Decoding with value
  networks for neural machine translation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30,
  2017.
Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. The curious case of neural text
  degeneration. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09751, 2019.
Ari Holtzman, Peter West, Vered Shwartz, Yejin Choi, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Surface form competi-
  tion: Why the highest probability answer isn’t always right. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference
  on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 7038–7051, 2021.
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.
Sébastien Jean, Orhan Firat, Kyunghyun Cho, Roland Memisevic, and Yoshua Bengio. Montreal
   neural machine translation systems for wmt’15. In Proceedings of the tenth workshop on statistical
   machine translation, pp. 134–140, 2015.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Ben Krause, Akhilesh Deepak Gotmare, Bryan McCann, Nitish Shirish Keskar, Shafiq R. Joty,
  Richard Socher, and Nazneen Fatema Rajani. GeDi: Generative discriminator guided sequence
  generation. CoRR, abs/2009.06367, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.06367.


                                                    10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ximing Lu, Sean Welleck, Peter West, Liwei Jiang, Jungo Kasai, Daniel Khashabi, Ronan Le Bras,
  Lianhui Qin, Youngjae Yu, Rowan Zellers, et al. Neurologic a* esque decoding: Constrained text
  generation with lookahead heuristics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.08726, 2021.
Nasrin Mostafazadeh, Nathanael Chambers, Xiaodong He, Devi Parikh, Dhruv Batra, Lucy Vander-
  wende, Pushmeet Kohli, and James Allen. A corpus and cloze evaluation for deeper understanding
  of commonsense stories. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference of the North American Chapter
  of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 839–849,
  2016.
Kenton Murray and David Chiang. Correcting length bias in neural machine translation. In Proceed-
  ings of the Third Conference on Machine Translation: Research Papers, pp. 212–223, Brussels,
  Belgium, October 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/W18-6322.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/W18-6322.
Myle Ott, Michael Auli, David Grangier, and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. Analyzing uncertainty in
 neural machine translation. In Jennifer Dy and Andreas Krause (eds.), Proceedings of the 35th
 International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
 Research, pp. 3956–3965. PMLR, 10–15 Jul 2018. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
 press/v80/ott18a.html.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Dario Amodei, Daniela Amodei, Jack Clark, Miles Brundage, and
  Ilya Sutskever. Better language models and their implications. OpenAI Blog https://openai.
  com/blog/better-language-models, 2019.
Darcey Riley and David Chiang. A continuum of generation tasks for investigating length bias
  and degenerate repetition. In Proceedings of the Fifth BlackboxNLP Workshop on Analyzing and
  Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP, pp. 426–440, 2022.
Thibault Sellam, Dipanjan Das, and Ankur P Parikh. Bleurt: Learning robust metrics for text
  generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.04696, 2020.
Xing Shi, Yijun Xiao, and Kevin Knight. Why neural machine translation prefers empty outputs.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.13454, 2020.
Felix Stahlberg and Bill Byrne. On nmt search errors and model errors: Cat got your tongue? In
  Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and
  the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp.
  3356–3362, 2019.
Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
  Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Stanford alpaca: An instruction-following llama model.
  https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca, 2023.
Jörg Tiedemann and Santhosh Thottingal. OPUS-MT — Building open translation services for the
   World. In Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Conferenec of the European Association for Machine
   Translation (EAMT), Lisbon, Portugal, 2020.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023a.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin R. Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei,
  Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Daniel M. Bikel, Lukas
  Blecher, Cristian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes,
 Jeremy Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony S.
  Hartshorn, Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa,
  Isabel M. Kloumann, A. V. Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril,
 Jenya Lee, Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar
  Mishra, Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan
  Saladi, Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, R. Subramanian, Xia Tan, Binh Tang,
  Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zhengxu Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen


                                              11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic,
    Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models.
    ArXiv, abs/2307.09288, 2023b. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
    259950998.

Chaojun Wang and Rico Sennrich. On exposure bias, hallucination and domain shift in neural machine
  translation. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, pp. 3544–3552, Online, July 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
  10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.326. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.
  326.

Gian Wiher, Clara Meister, and Ryan Cotterell. On decoding strategies for neural text generators.
  Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 10:997–1012, 2022.

Kevin Yang and Dan Klein. Fudge: Controlled text generation with future discriminators. In Proceed-
  ings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 3511–3535, 2021.


A     E XACT MODES : A DDITIONAL RESULTS

A.1    P ROBABILITY VS R ATE OF EMPTY MODES


     Figure 2: Geometric mean of the model’s probability of the empty sequence given the input.

Figure 1a showed that longer source sentences led to a higher fraction of modal outputs being empty,
replicating the result of Stahlberg & Byrne (2019). However, the probability the model assigns to the
empty output declines as source length increases. In order to prevent low-entropy distractors such as
the empty output from becoming modal, the model must assign them a probability which declines
faster than the decline of the probability of the highest-likelihood non-noise output.

A.2    GPT-2 FINETUNED ON ROC S TORIES

This section discusses the results of experiments which are the same as those in Section 3, but applied
to language modeling instead of MT. We use a GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) (345M parameters)


                                                  12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                         (b) Geometric mean of the model’s probability of the
(a) Percent of stories that have the empty se-
                                                         empty sequence given the first four sentences of the
quence as their modal continuation.
                                                         story.

Figure 3: Finetuned GPT-2-345M predictions of empty outputs on the ROC Stories validation set
(1571 Stories). Stories are grouped into 5 equally sized bins by reference continuation length.


model, finetuned on the ROC Stories (Mostafazadeh et al., 2016) sentence cloze task.10 The inputs
we used for search were the first four sentences of stories from the ROC stories dev set, so that the
model should produce a single additional sentence.

A.2.1     R ESULTS : U NCONDITIONAL MODES
The empty sequence was the mode for 28.71% of the 1571 “Winter 2018” validation set stories.
Figure 3 shows that, unlike the NMT case, there’s not a clear correlation between length and the
probability of the mode being empty. This is probably just due to the fact that the output lengths
don’t vary much.
The probability of the empty sequence averages to around 4 or 5 in ten thousand, which is quite a bit
higher than in our MT experiments. Since the ROC stories data is much cleaner than MT training data,
this definitely represents model error. The reason for it is likely just that finetuning didn’t completely
overwrite the base GPT-2 models’ distribution of when EOT should be emitted.

A.2.2     R ESULTS : L ENGTH - CONDITIONAL MODES

Table 6: Modal continuations of several lengths for prefix: “Sarah always had a fascination with the
night sky. Noticing her passion, Sarah’s father bought her a new telescope. She was ecstatic. She
went outside every night to diligently view the night sky.” The reference continuation is “Sarah loved
her new telescope.”

 Length Constraint         Log-probability       Text
 (tokens)
 Global mode               -7.79                 <|endoftext|>
 5                         -9.14                 Sarah loved astronomy!<|endoftext|>
 6                         -7.97                 Sarah never looked back.<|endoftext|>
 7                         -8.59                 Sarah loved her new telescope.<|endoftext|>
 8                         -9.38                 Now, Sarah is an astronomer.<|endoftext|>
 9                         -8.68                 Sarah    was     happy    with   her  new   tele-
                                                 scope.<|endoftext|>
 10                        -8.77                 Sarah was very happy with her new tele-
                                                 scope.<|endoftext|>
 12                        -8.91                 Sarah was amazed by the beauty of the night
                                                 sky.<|endoftext|>

  10
     The reason for finetuning is in order to ensure that a typical output has a well-defined ending, and be short
enough for us to tractably search for.


                                                        13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 7: Modal continuations of several lengths from a GPT2-345M model finetuned on the ROC
stories corpus. The input was: “Kaylee always wanted a puppy. On her birthday her parents took her
to a farm. There were lots of beagle puppies there. Her parents told her she could pick a puppy for
her birthday.” The reference continuation is “Kaylee was thrilled!”

 Length Constraint       Log-probability    Text
 (tokens)
 Global mode             -6.55              Kaylee picked a beagle puppy.<|endoftext|>
 5                       -9.00              Kaylee cried.<|endoftext|>
 6                       -7.66              Kaylee said yes.<|endoftext|>
 7                       -6.73              Kaylee was so happy.<|endoftext|>
 8                       -7.25              Kaylee picked a black lab.<|endoftext|>
 9                       -6.55              Kaylee picked a beagle puppy.<|endoftext|>
 10                      -7.01              Kaylee      picked     a    black   and  white
                                            puppy.<|endoftext|>
 12                      -7.98              Kaylee picked a black and white beagle
                                            puppy.<|endoftext|>


Just like with the MT model, the GPT-2 model’s length-conditional modes are high-quality, even
when its global mode is not. Table 6 shows one example of this behavior. The mode is empty,
but the length conditional modes are all plausible completions of the story, and don’t display any
degeneracies such as repeating earlier text from the story.
An interesting feature of these constrained modes is that the content can be correlated with the length
in clear ways. Table 7 shows an example where the mode of length 5 is significantly different from
all the other modes. It may be impossible to produce a 5 token output that has the right content, but
the model “prefers” to output something grammatical, so we see different content. This is different
from the short NMT modes, which were often truncated when the constraint was too short to express
the content of the source sentence.
In order to show that these patterns aren’t just cherry-picked, randomly sampled examples of modal
outputs are shown in Table 9. All 30 of the conditional modes are grammatical, relevant to the context,
and don’t show any evidence of degenerate behavior. This is further evidence that conditional MAP
inference may be a promising direction of investigation.



B     O PTIMIZING MEMORY USAGE FOR DFS ON TRANSFORMERS


In this section we’ll briefly describe a method for reducing the memory usage necessary for running
DFS on transformer NLG models. Generating from a transformer requires caching the key and value
vectors for previous timesteps, in order to avoid a large amount of recomputation for each token.
Running DFS to depth k, and storing a KV-cache of length k at each nodes, leads to storage that is
quadratic in k, even though only k nodes are active at a time.
For the MT and GPT-2 models we experiment with, the maximum search depth and hidden state
dimension are both small enough that we can do this with no issue. The LLaMA-based models
however, are over an order of magnitude larger, and also frequently lead to searching subtrees that are
hundreds of tokens deep. As such, we need some way to avoid actually storing a full KV-cache at
each node.
Empirically, the DFS search order for these models often involves some path through the search tree
being greedily expanded, without any branching. That is, many search nodes will only have one child
which gets explored. For these nodes, storing the KV-cache for later is a waste of memory since it
will never be re-used. We don’t know up-front which nodes will and won’t be re-used, but we can
still save some memory without losing too much performance by taking a heuristic approach.


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To reduce storage while still avoiding running the model on a prefix more than once, each search
node initially only stores the hidden state for the token that it used as input.11 Once a node’s second
child is about to be expanded, the full KV-cache is reconstituted from the keys and values stored at
that node and in its ancestors. Specifically, the node uses back pointers to go back up the search tree
until some node that has a full KV-cache is found. This way, a greedy search path out to depth k will
only require O(k) memory instead of O(k 2 ).
In summary, when search node at depth k is evaluated, a k × d key/value cache12 h1:k is produced It
is then processed as follows:

         1. The search node saves the vector hk
         2. The full cache h1:k is passed to the first child node, which uses it for a forward pass then
            frees it
         3. If a second child node will be expanded, the search node recomputes the full cache h1:k
            using its cached vector and those cached in its ancestors. This time the cache is saved for
            use in the third, fourth, etc. child instead of being freed after the second child uses it.

This heuristic isn’t optimal by any means, but it lets us avoid running out of memory when the search
state gets hundreds of nodes deep. Some potentially better methods include using a LRU cache that
limits the number of full caches in memory, or using the next-token probabilities at each node to
make a smarter decision about whether a full or partial cache should be kept.

C        G LOBAL AND C ONDITIONAL M ODES

This appendix contains the modal outputs for various NLG models which are discussed in the main
text.
Table 8: NonUnconditional modes and length-conditional modes of the MarianMT Zh-En model, for
randomly sampled inputs. Sources A-J were randomly selected from the sequences with reference
lengths between 5 and 15 tokens, and K-T were sampled from he sources with reference lengths
between 25 and 35 tokens for which the model did predict that the mode was empty.

         Type                     log P (y|x)    Text
         Source A                      -         需要带上大量的水。
         Reference (11 tokens)         -         Take lots of water.
         Mode                        -6.17       Needs a lot of water.
         Mode (length 8)             -6.36       A lot of water is needed.
         Mode (length 10)            -6.26       A lot of water needs to be brought.
         Mode (length 12)            -8.55       There is a need to bring a lot of water.
         Source B                      -         幸运的是，他们安全通过了。
         Reference (13 tokens)         -         Fortunately they worked.
         Mode                        -2.65       Fortunately, they passed safely.
         Mode (length 8)             -4.49       Fortunately, they have passed safely.
         Mode (length 10)            -7.83       Fortunately, they’re safe to pass.
         Mode (length 12)            -9.92       Fortunately, it’s safe for them to pass.
         Source C                      -         实际应该是2014年而非2013年。
         Reference (8 tokens)          -         It was 2014, not 2013.
         Mode                        -5.04       Rather than 2013.
         Mode (length 8)             -5.70       It should be 2014 instead of 2013.
         Mode (length 10)            -7.60       It was supposed to be 2014 instead of 2013.
         Mode (length 12)            -9.83       In real terms, it should be 2014 instead of 2013.


    11
      Our implementation of DFS is just recursive, so when we say that a search node stores something, we mean
that it’s stored in the Python interpreter’s stack frame for that call to the DFS function.
   12
      The KV-cache is actually a list of a key and value cache for each layer, so the size-d dimension should be
seen as a concatenation of all these different values.


                                                      15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Source D                     -       把父母放心交给我。
    Reference (11 tokens)        -       Leave your parents to me.
    Mode                       -5.35     Give me your parents.
    Mode (length 8)            -7.46     Put your parents in my hands.
    Mode (length 10)           -8.44     Leave it to me to trust my parents.
    Mode (length 12)          -10.59     Leave it to me to be assured of my parents.
    Source E                     -       有8名遇难者的遗体一直没有找到。
    Reference (14 tokens)        -       Eight bodies have never been found.
    Mode                       -4.97     The remains of eight victims were never found.
    Mode (length 8)            -8.33     The remains of eight victims remained.
    Mode (length 10)           -4.97     The remains of eight victims were never found.
    Mode (length 12)           -5.13     The remains of eight of the victims were never
                                         found.
    Source F                     -       不过，有些人则没那么乐观。
    Reference (13 tokens)        -       But some are not that optimistic.
    Mode                       -3.52     Some, however, are less optimistic.
    Mode (length 8)            -4.01     However, some are less optimistic.
    Mode (length 10)           -4.65     Some people, however, are less optimistic.
    Mode (length 12)           -7.86     There are, however, some who are less optimistic.
    Source G                     -       现在我就是你们的家人。
    Reference (14 tokens)        -       I am a member of your family now.
    Mode                       -2.52     Now I’m your family.
    Mode (length 8)            -2.52     Now I’m your family.
    Mode (length 10)           -7.67     Well, now I’m your family.
    Mode (length 12)          -10.73     # Now I’m your family. #
    Source H                     -       我们九点在码头集合。
    Reference (13 tokens)        -       We meet on the quay at nine.
    Mode                       -5.31     We meet at 9.
    Mode (length 8)            -8.16     We’ll meet up at 9.
    Mode (length 10)           -6.00     We meet at the docks at 9:00.
    Mode (length 12)           -6.83     We’ll meet at the docks at 9:00.
    Source I                     -       我忍不住会想到谁出现在了赛场上。
    Reference (13 tokens)        -       I couldn’t help who was here.
    Mode                       -7.62     I can’t help but wonder who showed up.
    Mode (length 8)           -11.26     I can’t help it.
    Mode (length 10)          -10.22     I cannot help but wonder who showed up.
    Mode (length 12)           -7.62     I can’t help but wonder who showed up.
    Source J                     -       我不想沉默。
    Reference (10 tokens)        -       I don’t want silence.
    Mode                       -2.69     I don’t want to be silent.
    Mode (length 8)            -6.59     I don’t want silence.
    Mode (length 10)           -2.69     I don’t want to be silent.
    Mode (length 12)           -9.01     No, I don’t want to be silent.
    Source K                     -       企业集团就网络安全法向中国提诉求
    Reference (26 tokens)        -       Business Groups Appeal to China Over Cyberse-
                                         curity Law
    Mode                       -7.89     <empty>
    Mode (length 8)            -9.58     Group claims to China on cyber security
    Mode (length 10)           -9.91     Corporate groups complain to China about cyber
                                         security laws
    Mode (length 12)          -11.95     Corporate groups complain to China about cyber-
                                         security laws.
    Source L                     -       当我们前往解决池水变绿的问题时，对最佳
                                         化学物质进行过讨论。



                                             16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Reference (32 tokens)        -       When we went to fix the green, there was a discus-
                                         sion about the best chemicals.
    Mode                       -7.85     <empty>
    Mode (length 8)           -11.47     The best chemical substances were discussed.
    Mode (length 10)          -13.97     The best chemical substances were discussed when
                                         we.
    Mode (length 12)          -13.43     Best chemicals were discussed when we turned the
                                         pool green.
    Source M                     -       爱尔兰超级足球联赛：费恩哈普0-5不敌德利
                                         城
    Reference (27 tokens)        -       League of Ireland Premier Division: Finn Harps
                                         0-5 Derry City
    Mode                       -7.60     <empty>
    Mode (length 8)           -12.10     Irish Super Football League: Finn Harper
    Mode (length 10)          -10.34     Irish Super Football League: Finn Harper 0-5
    Mode (length 12)          -12.27     Irish SuperSoccer: Finn Harper 0-5.
    Source N                     -       不出所料的是，在他们总共34粒稀松的进球
                                         中，有十几粒进球出自定位球。
    Reference (33 tokens)        -       Predictably, a dozen of their sparse total of 34 came
                                         from set pieces.
    Mode                       -8.85     <empty>
    Mode (length 8)           -13.04     Not surprisingly, of their total 34
    Mode (length 10)          -13.62     Not surprisingly, out of a total of 34
    Mode (length 12)          -14.83     Unsurprisingly, a dozen of their 34
    Source O                     -       赢 得 联 赛 冠 军 的 赔 率 （ 通 过Oddschecker统
                                         计）为1,000-1
    Reference (26 tokens)        -       Odds to win the league (via Oddschecker) 1,000-1
    Mode                       -6.45     <empty>
    Mode (length 8)           -13.34     (ddschecker)
    Mode (length 10)          -14.43     (by Oddschecker)
    Mode (length 12)          -13.87     The odds of winning the League championship are
                                         1,000-1.
    Source P                     -       基尔马诺克武士刀“血洗”案兄弟俩被判入狱
    Reference (30 tokens)        -       Brothers jailed for samurai sword ’bloodbath’ in
                                         Kilmarnock
    Mode                       -7.80     <empty>
    Mode (length 8)           -11.26     Two brothers were sentenced to prison.
    Mode (length 10)          -14.28     The two brothers in the Kilmanok.
    Mode (length 12)          -14.88     In this case, two brothers were sentenced to prison.
    Source Q                     -       夺冠反应：西蒙·曼努埃尔的历史时刻看起来
                                         如何
    Reference (28 tokens)        -       Golden Reaction: What Simone Manuel’s Historic
                                         Moment Looked Like
    Mode                       -7.45     <empty>
    Mode (length 8)           -10.90     What does Simon Manuel look like?
    Mode (length 10)           -8.61     How does Simon Manuel’s history look?
    Mode (length 12)           -9.72     Champ: How does Simon Manuel’s history look?
    Source R                     -       泰国领导人认为针对旅游景区的袭击与宪法
                                         更替有关
    Reference (30 tokens)        -       Thai Leader Links Attacks on Tourist Sites to Con-
                                         stitution Change
    Mode                       -8.50     <empty>
    Mode (length 8)           -12.75     Thai leaders believe that attacks on tourist
    Mode (length 10)          -14.45     Thai leaders believe that the attack on the tourist


                                             17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Mode (length 12)          -12.33     Thai leaders consider attacks on tourist sites related
                                         to constitutional change
    Source S                     -       塔塔钢铁的消息来源警告称，该公司仍可能
                                         卖掉塔尔伯特港工厂。
    Reference (30 tokens)        -       Tata Steel sources have warned it could still sell
                                         Port Talbot.
    Mode                       -7.28     <empty>
    Mode (length 8)           -14.00     plant in the port of Talbot.
    Mode (length 10)          -15.72     Chargé d’affaires a.i.
    Mode (length 12)          -14.97     Tata steel sources warned that it could still sell the
    Source T                     -       后场球员、中场球员和前场球员，我们都必
                                         须加强。
    Reference (33 tokens)        -       The back players, midfield players and front play-
                                         ers, we have to strengthen.
    Mode                       -8.78     <empty>
    Mode (length 8)           -12.67     All of us must be strengthened.
    Mode (length 10)          -12.83     We must strengthen rear, middle and front.
    Mode (length 12)          -11.13     We must all strengthen rear, middle and front play-
                                         ers.


                                             18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 9: Unconditional and length-conditional modes of our ROC Stories finetuned GPT2-345M
model

  Type                    log P (x≥t |x<t )   Text
  Story A                         -           Janice usually wears jeans to work every day. How-
                                              ever, now she has been promoted to manager. She
                                              decides she needs to dress a little more formally.
                                              Janice buys a few pairs of khakis for work.
  Reference (9 tokens)           -            She also bought plenty of blouses.
  Mode                         -6.44          <empty>
  Mode (length 8)              -8.31          She feels more confident at work.
  Mode (length 10)             -7.45          Janice is happy with her new look.
  Mode (length 12)             -8.89          She is glad she no longer has to wear jeans.
  Story B                         -           Francine noticed that all of her friends wore high
                                              heeled shoes. Although she loved how heels
                                              looked, she hated how they felt. One day she de-
                                              cided to wear a pair of flats to meet her friends.
                                              All of her friends complimented how great they
                                              looked.
  Reference (12 tokens)           -           Francine was glad that she wore comfortable
                                              shoes!
  Mode                         -5.60          Francine never wore heels again.
  Mode (length 8)              -5.60          Francine never wore heels again.
  Mode (length 10)             -7.54          Francine decided to wear heels more often.
  Mode (length 12)             -7.46          Francine decided to wear heels again in the future.
  Story C                         -           Tuesdays are laundry days at my apartment. We
                                              have been too busy the last couple of Tuesdays.
                                              Now we have almost no clean clothes left. I’m
                                              dressed foolishly and still smell bad.
  Reference (8 tokens)            -           I will do laundry right now.
  Mode                          -7.71         I don’t know what to do.
  Mode (length 8)               -9.35         I need to buy new clothes.
  Mode (length 10)             -10.38         I don’t know what to do now.
  Mode (length 12)              -9.62         I don’t know what I’m going to do.
  Story D                         -           Jill convinced her boyfriend Joe to go look for
                                              Geocache with her. He didn’t think it sounded like
                                              fun but decided to humor her. They searched the
                                              location where the Geocache was supposed to be.
                                              After over an hour of searching they were unable
                                              to find it.
  Reference (10 tokens)           -           Jill hoped they would find it soon.
  Mode                          -7.47         <empty>
  Mode (length 8)               -8.89         Jill was very disappointed in Joe.
  Mode (length 10)             -10.50         Jill was disappointed but Joe didn’t care.
  Mode (length 12)             -10.73         Jill and Joe never went to Geocache again.
  Story E                         -           My wife had MLK day off. She slept in, and did
                                              not get up until 10 AM. We had a leisurely break-
                                              fast. She watched Little House on the Prairie while
                                              I surfed the net.
  Reference (12 tokens)           -           Then we had a relaxing evening covering on the
                                              couch.
  Mode                          -5.63         <empty>
  Mode (length 8)               -8.35         It was the best day ever.
  Mode (length 10)              -9.13         It was the best day of her life.
  Mode (length 12)             -10.41         It was one of the best days of my life.


                                               19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Story F                        -         Abby and Tammy were the best of friends. They
                                           both loved to do things together that were fun
                                           and creative. They decided to make friendship
                                           bracelets together and give to others. Abby made
                                           five and Tammy made seven more.
  Reference (11 tokens)          -         They decided to keep the bracelets for themselves.
  Mode                         -7.61       <empty>
  Mode (length 8)              -9.11       They were the best of friends.
  Mode (length 10)             -8.59       Abby and Tammy were the best of friends.
  Mode (length 12)            -10.34       They are now the best bracelets in the world!
  Story G                        -         Last Friday was Tad Dunkin’s first race in nascar.
                                           He had been waiting for this his whole life. He
                                           was doing surprisingly well for a first timer. Then
                                           he lost control and hit a wall.
  Reference (7 tokens)           -         Tad was seriously injured.
  Mode                         -7.12       He was disqualified.
  Mode (length 8)              -7.96       Tad never wanted to race again.
  Mode (length 10)             -7.88       Tad had to be rushed to the hospital.
  Mode (length 12)             -9.33       He had to be airlifted to the hospital.
  Story H                        -         Hannah was an amazing artist. She always had a
                                           natural gift. She decided to enter in an art com-
                                           petition. Thankfully she was able to win the top
                                           prize.
  Reference (7 tokens)           -         Her parents were very proud.
  Mode                         -4.69       She was so happy.
  Mode (length 8)              -5.62       She was very proud of herself.
  Mode (length 10)             -8.34       She went on to become a famous artist.
  Mode (length 12)            -10.53       She couldn’t wait to share it with her friends.
  Story I                        -         Joe was pals with Tim. They always played to-
                                           gether at recess. One day Joe said he was going to
                                           move away. Tim was sad.
  Reference (8 tokens)           -         Joe and Tim stayed friends online.
  Mode                         -3.73       They never spoke again.
  Mode (length 8)              -5.55       They never saw each other again.
  Mode (length 10)             -8.65       He never talked to Joe again after that.
  Mode (length 12)            -10.08       They didn’t see each other again for a while.
  Story J                        -         Bay was nervous. Her boyfriend had been acting
                                           weird all through dinner. Bay thought he was going
                                           to dump her. But then he got on one knee.
  Reference (8 tokens)           -         And asked her to marry him.
  Mode                         -4.45       He asked her to marry him!
  Mode (length 8)              -4.45       He asked her to marry him!
  Mode (length 10)             -6.91       He proposed to her and she said yes!
  Mode (length 12)             -6.88       He asked her to marry him and she said yes!


                                             20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


        Table 10: Examples of prompts with empty and non-empty modes for Alpaca-7B.

   Empty                                                   Non-empty
   “how would you start explaining mathematics             “How can listening to music attentively influ-
   to kids?”                                               ence you?”

   “I want to get in better shape. I work at a desk        “What are some of the most accessible jazz
   all day, and I’ve never really been in good             albums for someone new to jazz?”
   shape. Growing up, I didn’t play sports or
   spend a lot of time outdoors. I know I need to
   improve my physical health, but I really don’t
   know how to get started. Can you recommend
   a workout routine for me?”

   “What is it like to own a dog that sheds every-         “What was the first British instrumental to top
   where?”                                                 the USA charts”

   “Give me a list of date night ideas that I’ve           “What is the difference between a goose and
   never done.”                                            a geese?”

   “How can you take good star photos?”                    “What to do when you are bored?”

   “What are some disadvantages of the way the             “List 7 exotic fruits that I should try.”
   tax code treats incentive stock options?”

   “What activities an admin or an administrator           “What are the names of popular Alternative
   of any data tools & platform or data tools can          music bands from the 1980s and 1990s.”
   do?”

   “What is the future trend of job industry”              “What’s the best BBQ place in Austin”

   “I need to improve my sleep. Give me a list             “What is C++?”
   of ideas for doing so.”

   “Write a brief paragraph of the benefits of             “Should investors time the market?”
   attending Arizona State University”


                                                      21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


       Table 11: Examples of prompts with empty and non-empty modes for Guanaco-7B.

   Empty                                               Non-empty
   “What are some disadvantages of the way the         “What are the words of House Lannister?”
   tax code treats incentive stock options?”

   “how would you start explaining mathematics         “What kind of method is Transfer printing”
   to kids?”

   “What are some best practices to prepare            “What is the best book to read about the Battle
   biryani”                                            of Stalingrad?”

   “What are some tools to help combat ADD             “Is Daft Punk still together?”
   and ADHD?”

   “Imagine you have won the lottery, and have         “Why do cats make purring sounds?”
   5 million dollars after tax to spend in San
   Francisco, where you currently rent a 2 bed-
   room apartment with three roommates who
   are your best friends but who you hate liv-
   ing. Describe how you would use the money,
   keeping in mind you don’t have a high paying
   job so you want to do fun things and also set
   yourself up for the future.”

   “When to use mulch for your landscape?”             “What is the oldest country in the world?”

   “Give me a bulleted list of ingredients that I      “How should I learn guitar?”
   need to bake chewy chocolate chip cookies,
   and include volume measurements for any
   ingredient I have to measure out.”

   “Give step by step instructions on how to           “What was the first British instrumental to top
   make a Long Island Ice Tea.”                        the USA charts”

   “What should I think about when buying a car        “What is Pascal?”
   (summarization)”

   “Describe a plan for a road trip across North-      “What are some of the most common vegeta-
   ern Italy”                                          bles in the broccoli family?”


                                                  22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 12: Examples of prompts with empty and non-empty modes for LLaMA-7B. The modal output
for the “We are getting a new puppy” prompt is an exact repetition of the prompt.

   Empty                                               Non-empty
   “What are the top 5 soccer(football) leagues        “Can cars have odd number of wheels?”
   in the world?”

   “Compared to a human, categorize the follow-        “What black sweet is particularly popular in
   ing as fast or slow animals: sloth, cheetah,        the Netherlands”
   eagle, tortoise, hippo, slug, horse.”

   “When is an object considered a planet?”            “Is 95 degrees Fahrenheit considered to be
                                                       hot weather?”

   “How can I contribute to Spark?”                    “What is the name of Google’s email ser-
                                                       vice?”

   “What are some tools to help combat ADD             “Identify which instrument is string or percus-
   and ADHD?”                                          sion: Clapper, Chagane”

   “Why do cats make purring sounds?”                  “We are getting a new puppy today, I am writ-
                                                       ing this messages to you our beloved children
                                                       that we need to keep the Cats away from the
                                                       new puppy for at least the first 2 weeks.”

   “What is the purpose of a shot clock in bas-        “What is your favorite ice cream flavor?”
   ketball?”

   “What is the best way to drink coffee?”             “Who is the best CEO in the world”

   “Who are some of the most influential inno-         “Which is a species of fish? Goat or Goatfish”
   vators of all time?”

   “Describe how social media can help com-            “Which characters belong to DC or Marvel
   panies make better business decisions. What         Universe? Atom, Hank Pym”
   social media data can be collected to aid in
   business decisions? List four pieces of social
   media data (e.g., Twitter mentions and the
   number of retweets would be counted as two
   pieces).”


                                                  23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 13: Exact Alpaca-7B modes for 10 randomly selected prompts (from the set of inputs which
have non-empty modes)

  Type                     log P (x≥t |x<t )   Text
  Alpaca Prompt A                  -           How can listening to music attentively influence
                                               you?
  Reference (62 tokens)            -           You’ll likely become a better listener in general -
                                               not only in hearing new details in songs but being
                                               a better listener during conversations. Listening to
                                               music attentively will also make you more present
                                               in the moment and enjoy the flow instead of focus-
                                               ing on the future or the past too [...]
  Mode                          -9.37          Listening to music attentively can help to improve
                                               focus and concentration, reduce stress and anxiety,
                                               and improve overall wellbeing.
  Alpaca Prompt B                  -           What are some of the most accessible jazz albums
                                               for someone new to jazz?
  Reference (844 tokens)           -           Jazz music encompasses a wide range of styles,
                                               genres and periods, so it can be difficult and con-
                                               fusing for the non-jazz listener to find a satisfying
                                               entry point. There have been many “greatest of all
                                               time” jazz album lists developed by jazz publica-
                                               tions and critics over the years. The following is a
                                               [...]
  Mode                          -9.45          For someone new to jazz, some of the most acces-
                                               sible albums include In a Sentimental Mood by
                                               Duke Ellington, St. Louis Blues by Count Basie,
                                               Take the ’A’ Train by Duke Ellington, and Mood
                                               Indigo by Duke Ellington.
  Alpaca Prompt C                  -           What was the first British instrumental to top the
                                               USA charts
  Reference (8 tokens)            -            Telstar by The Tornados
  Mode                          -1.88          The first British instrumental to top the USA charts
                                               was ”Apache” by The Shadows in 1960.
  Alpaca Prompt D                  -           What is the difference between a goose and a
                                               geese?
  Reference (75 tokens)            -           A goose and a geese refer to the same type of bird.
                                               These bird(s) are of the Anatidae biological family
                                               of water birds. Anatidate includes ducks, geese,
                                               seabirds, storks, and waterfowls. Goose refers to a
                                               single bird where geese refers to multiple birds.
  Mode                          -2.92          The difference between a goose and a geese is that
                                               a goose is the singular form of the word, while
                                               geese is the plural form.
  Alpaca Prompt E                  -           What to do when you are bored?
  Reference (107 tokens)           -           If you are bored, you can use this as an opportunity
                                               to read a book, go outside for a walk, learn some-
                                               thing new, paint, color, draw, call a friend that you
                                               haven’t spoken to in a while, make a to-do list of
                                               items that you’ve been putting off and get to work
                                               on those, yard work, spend time volunteering to
                                               help [...]
  Mode                          -9.87          When you are bored, there are many things you
                                               can do to pass the time, such as reading a book,
                                               playing a game, watching a movie, going for a
                                               walk, calling a friend, or learning a new skill.



                                                24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Alpaca Prompt F                -          List 7 exotic fruits that I should try.
  Reference (41 tokens)          -          1. Dragon fruit 2. Passion fruit 3. Cherimoya 4.
                                            Soursop 5. Star fruit 6. Papaya 7. Mangosteen
  Mode                         -5.87        1. Durian 2. mangosteen 3. rambutan 4. dragon
                                            fruit 5. jackfruit 6. mangosteen 7. durian
  Alpaca Prompt G                -          What are the names of popular Alternative music
                                            bands from the 1980s and 1990s.
  Reference (301 tokens)         -          Bands that were considered Alternative rock music
                                            in the 1980s were R.E.M., Depeche Mode, Nir-
                                            vana, O.M.D., the Smiths, the Psychadelic Furs,
                                            the Housemartins, Green Day, the Violent Femmes,
                                            the B-52s, the Cure, UB40, and U2, just to name a
                                            few. Keep in mind that some of the bands that had
                                            been [...]
  Mode                         -9.81        1. Nirvana
  Alpaca Prompt H                -          What’s the best BBQ place in Austin
  Reference (86 tokens)          -          Texas BBQ is one of the most famous and popu-
                                            lar food choices for both visitors and locals. The
                                            Franklin BBQ in Austin gets the highest hypes all
                                            these years after former President Obama’s visit.
                                            Its long waiting line has not pushed foodies and
                                            pilgrims away. Other popular but less crowded
                                            places [...]
  Mode                         -1.86        The best BBQ place in Austin is widely considered
                                            to be Franklin Barbecue.
  Alpaca Prompt I                -          What is C++?
  Reference (136 tokens)         -          C++ (pronounced ”C plus plus”) is a high-level,
                                            general-purpose programming language created by
                                            Danish computer scientist Bjarne Stroustrup. First
                                            released in 1985 as an extension of the C program-
                                            ming language, it has since expanded significantly
                                            over time; modern C++ currently [...]
  Mode                         -10.47       <nooutput>
  Alpaca Prompt J                -          Should investors time the market?
  Reference (169 tokens)         -          Timing the market is based on predictions of the
                                            future, which is a challenging endeavor. Benjamin
                                            Graham, the father of value investing and mentor
                                            of Warren Buffett, famously said: ”In the short run,
                                            the market is a voting machine but in the long run,
                                            it is a weighing machine.” This means that in the
                                            [...]
  Mode                         -6.12        No, investors should not time the market.


                                             25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 14: Exact Guanaco-7B modes for 10 randomly selected prompts (from the set of inputs which
have non-empty modes)

  Type                     log P (x≥t |x<t )   Text
  Guanaco Prompt A                 -           What are the words of House Lannister?
  Reference (8 tokens)             -           ”Hear Me Roar”
  Mode                          -8.06          The words of House Lannister are ”A Lannister
                                               always pays his debts”.
  Guanaco Prompt B                 -           What kind of method is Transfer printing
  Reference (265 tokens)           -           Transfer printing is a method of decorating pottery
                                               or other materials using an engraved copper or steel
                                               plate from which a monochrome print on paper is
                                               taken which is then transferred by pressing onto
                                               the ceramic piece. Pottery decorated using the
                                               technique is known as transferware or [...]
  Mode                          -12.36         transfer printing
  Guanaco Prompt C                 -           What is the best book to read about the Battle of
                                               Stalingrad?
  Reference (90 tokens)            -           There are a lot of great books that go into great
                                               detail about the battle of Stalingrad. ”Dogs, Do
                                               You Want to Live Forever” by Fritz Wöss is a good
                                               choice if you like fiction. If you like essays, try
                                               Stalingrad by Antony Beevor or ”Stalingrad, the
                                               Battle as Seen by the Germans” by British WWII
                                               expert [...]
  Mode                          -10.43         ”Stalingrad” by Antony Beevor.
  Guanaco Prompt D                -            Is Daft Punk still together?
  Reference (16 tokens)           -            No. Daft Punk officially broke up in 2021.
  Mode                          -8.81          Yes, they are.
  Guanaco Prompt E                 -           Why do cats make purring sounds?
  Reference (48 tokens)            -           Cats make purring sounds as a way to communi-
                                               cate emotions which may include relaxation, hap-
                                               piness, and sometimes even excitement. However,
                                               the exact reason why cats make the purring sounds
                                               has not been fully understood.
  Mode                          -13.66         Cats purr for a variety of reasons.
  Guanaco Prompt F                 -           What is the oldest country in the world?
  Reference (26 tokens)            -           Egypt is recognized as the oldest country in the
                                               world, its founding accepted to be approximately
                                               3500 BC.
  Mode                          -8.52          The oldest country in the world is China.
  Guanaco Prompt G                 -           How should I learn guitar?
  Reference (30 tokens)            -           Guitar is learned best with a teacher and through
                                               many hours of practice. In addition, there are many
                                               helpful online resources available to learn guitar.
  Mode                          -10.29         guitar
  Guanaco Prompt H                 -           What was the first British instrumental to top the
                                               USA charts
  Reference (8 tokens)            -            Telstar by The Tornados
  Mode                          -8.32          ”Apache” by The Shadows in 1960.
  Guanaco Prompt I                 -           What is Pascal?


                                                26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Reference (63 tokens)          -          Pascal is an imperative and procedural program-
                                            ming language, designed by Niklaus Wirth as a
                                            small, efficient language intended to encourage
                                            good programming practices using structured pro-
                                            gramming and data structuring. It is named in
                                            honour of the French mathematician, philosopher
                                            and [...]
  Mode                         -9.41        Pascal is a programming language.
  Guanaco Prompt J               -          What are some of the most common vegetables in
                                            the broccoli family?
  Reference (44 tokens)          -          The broccoli family includes many cruciferous veg-
                                            etables like cabbage, bok choi, cauliflower, collard
                                            greens, brussel sprouts, and arugula.
  Mode                         -10.49       Brussels sprouts, cabbage, cauliflower, kale, and
                                            broccoli are some of the most common vegetables
                                            in the broccoli family.


                                             27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 15: Exact LLaMA-7B modes for 10 randomly selected prompts (from the set of inputs which
have non-empty modes)

  Type                     log P (x≥t |x<t )   Text
  LLaMA Prompt A                   -           Can cars have odd number of wheels?
  Reference (207 tokens)           -           Cars are vehicles that allow you to commute from
                                               one point to another. These are built by companies
                                               across the world and designed based on the compa-
                                               nies choice, local context, historic reference. The
                                               car has three main parts: i) the engine that provides
                                               the thrust or power to the vehicle. ii) The body or
                                               [...]
  Mode                          -8.03          No.
  LLaMA Prompt B                   -           What black sweet is particularly popular in the
                                               Netherlands
  Reference (53 tokens)            -           In the Netherlands, black sweet is particularly pop-
                                               ular. It is a type of cake made from a light and
                                               fluffy sponge cake, filled with a dark chocolate
                                               ganache and topped with dark chocolate shavings.
  Mode                          -8.54          What black sweet is particularly popular in the
                                               Netherlands
  LLaMA Prompt C                   -           Is 95 degrees Fahrenheit considered to be hot
                                               weather?
  Reference (14 tokens)            -           Yes, 95 degrees would typically be considered to
                                               be hot
  Mode                          -7.51          Yes, 95 degrees Fahrenheit is considered to be hot
                                               weather.
  LLaMA Prompt D                  -            What is the name of Google’s email service?
  Reference (3 tokens)            -            Gmail
  Mode                          -5.07          Gmail
  LLaMA Prompt E                   -           Identify which instrument is string or percussion:
                                               Clapper, Chagane
  Reference (13 tokens)           -            Chagane is string, Clapper is percussion.
  Mode                          -7.81          Clapper
  LLaMA Prompt F                   -           We are getting a new puppy today, I am writing
                                               this messages to you our beloved children that we
                                               need to keep the Cats away from the new puppy
                                               for at least the first 2 weeks.
  Reference (39 tokens)            -           The reason is that the Cat will feel intimated and
                                               attack the new puppy if we don’t separate them
                                               and let them get used to each other for a period of
                                               time.
  Mode                          -7.39          We are getting a new puppy today, I am writing
                                               this messages to you our beloved children that we
                                               need to keep the Cats away from the new puppy
                                               for at least the first 2 weeks.
  LLaMA Prompt G                   -           What is your favorite ice cream flavor?
  Reference (52 tokens)            -           While everyone has different taste buds, there are
                                               many different flavors to enjoy. Most of the basic
                                               flavors are used as a base for other flavors. The
                                               most common being, chocolate, vanilla and straw-
                                               berry.
  Mode                          -8.31          My favorite ice cream flavor is chocolate.
  LLaMA Prompt H                   -           Who is the best CEO in the world
  Reference (11 tokens)            -           Steve Jobs. Because of his invention.


                                                28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Mode                          -8.12         Steve Jobs
    LLaMA Prompt I                  -           Which is a species of fish? Goat or Goatfish
    Reference (4 tokens)            -           Goatfish
    Mode                          -4.87         Goatfish
    LLaMA Prompt J                  -           Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Uni-
                                                verse? Atom, Hank Pym
    Reference (12 tokens)           -           Hank Pym is Marvel, Atom is DC
    Mode                          -7.22         Atom, Hank Pym


D      P ROMPTS FOR LL A MA MODELS

This appendix contains the prompt formats used for the experiments which use LLaMA (Touvron
et al., 2023a) for instruction following, as well as the prompt for getting “Irrelevance” labels from
GPT-4.

Prompt format for exact mode search with LLaMA and Alpaca (Section 3)

           Below is an instruction that describes a task. Write
           a response that appropriately completes the request.
           ### Instruction:
           <prompt>
           ### Response:
           <response begins here>

Prompt format for exact mode search with Guanaco (Section 3)

           ### Human:       <prompt> ### Assistant:              <response begins
           here>

Prompt format for beam search with LLaMA (Section 5)

           Below is a request, and a response to that request
           written by an expert.
           ### Request: <prompt>
           ### Response: <response begins here>

Prompt with context format for beam search with LLaMA (Section 5)

           Below is a request, and a response to that request
           written by an expert.
           ### Request: <prompt>
           ### Input: <context>
           ### Response: <response begins here>


E     ACBS: GPT-2 FINETUNED ON ROC STORIES

Figure 4 shows the results of our experiments with using ACBS to generate outputs of a target length
using the ROC Stories finetuned GPT-2. We generated completions of various lengths for all the
inputs in the ROC Stories development set.


                                                 29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Algorithm 1 Conditional beam search. This searches for an output with a sequence x with a high
value of Pmodel (x, A(x) = a) for some target attribute a. In order to execute this efficiently one needs
to efficiently compute Pmodel and Pclf to avoid recomputation. This will typically involve caching
transformer hidden states, as is standard for causal transformers.
     Input:
       a: The target attribute value
       V : Vocabulary
       B > 0: Beam size
       L > 0: Maximum output length
       k > 0: Number of continuations to score for each hypothesis.
       α > 0: Optional attribute weight.
     Output: A string in V ∗ with length at most L
  1: X[b] = ϵ for b ∈ 1, . . . , B            {Initialize all hypotheses to the empty sequence}
  2: S ← [0, −∞, −∞, . . . , −∞]                 {A length B array of cumulative scores, only S[0] is initially
      finite.}
  3: t ← 1
  4: while Any hypothesis X[i] on the beam is not complete AND t ≤ L do
  5:       Init empty b × k array Ut             {Unconditional scores}
  6:       Init empty b × k array Ct             {Conditional scores)}
  7:       Init empty b × k array Ct′            {Weighted conditional scores, optional}
  8:       Init empty b × k array W              {Continuations}
  9:       for b = 1, . . . , B do
10:             if t < L then
11:                  L[w] ← log Pmodel (w|x1:t = X[b]) {for all w ∈ |V |}
12:             else
13:                  L[:] ← −∞
14:                  L[</s>] ← 0             {If at the max sequence length, all hypotheses are forced to be
      complete}
15:             end if
16:             W [b, :] ← words with top k scores in L
17:             for i = 1, . . . , k do
18:                  w ← W [b, i]
19:                  Ut [b, i] ← S[b] + L[w]
20:                  Ct [b, i] ← U [b, :] + log Pclf (a|xt+1 = w, x1:t = X[b])
21:                  Ct′ [b, i] ← U [b, :] + α log Pclf (a|xt+1 = w, x1:t = X[b])
22:             end for
23:        end for
24:        {We select new beam elements using Ct′ , but update S using Ut .}
25:        for b = 1, . . . , B do
26:             bprev , i ← b-th largest pair of indices into Ct′
27:             S[b, i] ← Ut [bprev , i]
28:             X[b] ← concatenate (X[bprev ], W [bprev , i])
29:        end for
30: end while
31: if Attribute is deterministic then
32:        bbest = 1
33: else
34:        bbest ← argmax Ct [i]            {If the classifier is uncertain about the value of the attribute even
                      i
    for a complete output, we take that into account when selecting the output.}
35: end if
36: Return X[bbest ]


                                                       30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                 100%                                                 Best logprob                                    100%                                               Best logprob
                                                                Conditional < Unconditional                                                                        Conditional < Unconditional
                                                                Conditional = Unconditional                                                                        Conditional = Unconditional
                                                                Conditional > Unconditional                                                                        Conditional > Unconditional
% of sentences   80%                                                                                                  80%


                                                                                                     % of sentences
                 60%                                                                                                  60%


                 40%                                                                                                  40%


                 20%                                                                                                  20%


                  0%                                                                                                   0%
                           0.8     0.9           1.0            1.1             1.2                                          0.8     0.9            1.0            1.1             1.2
                                   Target length / reference length                                                                   Target length / reference length

                                 (a) Beam size 5.                                                                                  (b) Beam size 20.

Figure 4: A comparison of classifier-guided conditional beam search and beam search when generat-
ing outputs that must be a certain length, using our finetuned GPT-2-345M model on the ROC Stories
dev. set. See Table 3a for interpretation.

Table 16: Selected decoding outputs from ROC stories finetuned GPT2-345M to compare conditional
and unconditional beam search (beam size 5). ACBS more consistently leads to grammatical outputs.

                  Type                                     log P (y|x)                 Text
                  Input                                    -                           Kelly hated math class and struggled to learn the concepts.
                                                                                       She struggled a lot with the work and often sought help from
                                                                                       teachers. She worked very hard and it paid off with good
                                                                                       grades. She was entering college in the fall.
                  Reference (7 tokens)                     -                           Kelly graduated with good grades.
                  Unconditional (5 tokens)                 -14.33                      She was so excited
                  Unconditional (6 tokens)                 -18.39                      When she got to college
                  Unconditional (7 tokens)                 -16.35                      She was so excited to start
                  Unconditional (8 tokens)                 -20.58                      When she got to college she was
                  Conditional (5 tokens)                   -10.09                      Kelly got accepted.
                  Conditional (6 tokens)                   -7.63                       Kelly graduated with honors.
                  Conditional (7 tokens)                   -10.16                      Kelly graduated with a B.
                  Conditional (8 tokens)                   -10.01                      Kelly graduated with honors in math.
                  Input                                    -                           Yesterday I played the Powerball game. I picked my numbers
                                                                                       from our family’s bible. I purchased my tickets from a rep-
                                                                                       utable online lottery agent. I prayed nervously as the winning
                                                                                       numbers were drawn.
                  Reference (6 tokens)                     -                           I didn’t win.
                  Unconditional (4 tokens)                 -16.02                      I won the
                  Unconditional (5 tokens)                 -14.07                      I won the lottery
                  Unconditional (6 tokens)                 -13.69                      I won the Powerball
                  Unconditional (7 tokens)                 -18.21                      When the numbers were called,
                  Conditional (4 tokens)                   -7.22                       I won!
                  Conditional (5 tokens)                   -11.61                      I was ecstatic.
                  Conditional (6 tokens)                   -7.24                       I won the lottery!
                  Conditional (7 tokens)                   -7.13                       I won the jackpot!


E.1                     Q UALITATIVE FINDINGS

We see the same qualitative patterns as we did for MT. In particular, ACBS is much more likely to
find an output of the desired length which ends fluently. This demonstrates that the classifier really is
planning ahead to some extent, as mere lexical bias wouldn’t be able to produce this behavior.


F                       R ANDOMLY SAMPLED BEAM SEARCH OUTPUTS


                                                                                              31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 17: Randomly selected length-constrained outputs from the MarianMT Zh-En model using
unconditional and conditional beam search (beam size 5). (As described in Section 5.2.1). Sources
and reference translations are from the WMT17 Zh-En dev. dataset.

 Type                        log P (y|x)   Text
 Input                       -             多鲁斯·德·弗里斯经过医学检查准备前往凯尔特人
                                           足球俱乐部
 Reference (16 tokens)       -             Dorus de Vries undergoes medical ahead of Celtic move
 Unconditional (12 tokens)   -15.98        During a medical examination, Dolores de Fries
 Unconditional (14 tokens)   -19.16        During a medical examination, Dolores de Fris was
                                           ready
 Unconditional (16 tokens)   -21.49        During a medical examination, Dolores de Fris was
                                           ready to go
 Unconditional (17 tokens)   -21.89        During a medical examination, Dolores de Fries is going
                                           to the C
 Unconditional (19 tokens)   -20.66        During a medical examination, Dolores de Fries is going
                                           to Celtic Football
 Conditional (12 tokens)     -15.98        During a medical examination, Dolores de Fries
 Conditional (14 tokens)     -18.40        During the medical check-up, Dolores de Fries
 Conditional (16 tokens)     -21.85        During the medical check-up, Dolores de Fris was.
 Conditional (17 tokens)     -16.84        During a medical examination, Dolores de Fries went
                                           to Celt.
 Conditional (19 tokens)     -11.48        Dolores de Fries is going to the Celtic Football Club
                                           after medical examination.
 Input                       -             日本时事通信社:日本首相安倍将不在二战周年纪
                                           念日参拜靖国神社
 Reference (20 tokens)       -             Japanese PM Abe will not visit war-dead shrine on
                                           WW2 anniversary: Jiji
 Unconditional (16 tokens)   -12.96        Japan Current Affairs News Agency: Japanese Prime
                                           Minister Abe will not visit the
 Unconditional (18 tokens)   -19.23        Japan News Agency for Current Affairs: Japanese
                                           Prime Minister Abe will not visit the Yasu
 Unconditional (20 tokens)   -15.59        Japan News Agency for Current Affairs: Japanese
                                           Prime Minister Abe will not visit the Yasukuni
 Unconditional (22 tokens)   -21.26        Japan Current Affairs News Agency: Japanese Prime
                                           Minister Abe will not visit the Yasukuni shrine on the
 Unconditional (24 tokens)   -19.73        Japan News Agency for Current Affairs: Japanese
                                           Prime Minister Abe will not visit the Yasukuni shrine
                                           on the anniversary
 Conditional (16 tokens)     -12.96        Japan Current Affairs News Agency: Japanese Prime
                                           Minister Abe will not visit the
 Conditional (18 tokens)     -16.36        Japanese News Agency: Japanese Prime Minister Abe
                                           will not visit the Yasukuni.
 Conditional (20 tokens)     -15.26        Japan Current Affairs News Agency: Japanese Prime
                                           Minister Abe will not visit the Yasukuni.
 Conditional (22 tokens)     -19.33        Japan Current Affairs News Agency: Japanese Prime
                                           Minister Abe will not visit the Yasukuni Shrine.
 Conditional (24 tokens)     -19.96        Japan Current Affairs News Agency: Japanese Prime
                                           Minister Abe will not visit the Yasukuni shrine on World
                                           War II
 Input                       -             不过,23岁的张梦凡不愿保持沉默。
 Reference (18 tokens)       -             But 23-year-old Zhang Mengfan won’t stay quiet.
 Unconditional (14 tokens)   -15.04        However, 23-year-old Zhang Dynasty
 Unconditional (16 tokens)   -18.51        However, 23-year-old Zhang Dreamfan did not want to
 Unconditional (18 tokens)   -10.03        However, 23-year-old Zhang Dreamfan was reluctant to
                                           remain silent.
 Unconditional (19 tokens)   -9.89         However, 23-year-old Zhang Dreamfan did not want to
                                           remain silent.

                                              32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Unconditional (21 tokens)   -21.13      However, 23-year-old Zhang Dreamfan did not want to
                                         remain silent..
 Conditional (14 tokens)     -17.46      However, Zhang Dreamfan, aged 23, was reluctant.
 Conditional (16 tokens)     -14.99      However, 23-year-old Zhang Dreamfan refused to si-
                                         lence.
 Conditional (18 tokens)     -10.03      However, 23-year-old Zhang Dreamfan was reluctant to
                                         remain silent.
 Conditional (19 tokens)     -11.92      However, 23-year-old Zhang Xian won’t remain silent.
 Conditional (21 tokens)     -14.51      However, Zhang Dynasty, 23-year-old, would not re-
                                         main silent.
 Input                       -           亚伦·迈克奈夫以上半场的两粒点球使德利城队占
                                         据主动,这两粒点球均因对卢卡斯·舒伯特的犯规而
                                         获得。
 Reference (33 tokens)       -           Aaron McEneff put the Candystripes in control with
                                         two first-half penalties, both given for fouls on Lukas
                                         Schubert.
 Unconditional (26 tokens)   -32.20      Two punctuations from half the field of Aaron McNeefe,
                                         both of which were obtained as a
 Unconditional (29 tokens)   -32.26      Two punctuations from half the field of Aaron McNeefe,
                                         both of which were obtained as a result of the
 Unconditional (33 tokens)   -35.38      Two punctuations from half the field of Aaron McNeeve,
                                         both of which were obtained as a result of irregularities
                                         against Lucas Shubert
 Unconditional (36 tokens)   -38.13      Two punctuations from half the field of Aaron McNeeve,
                                         both of which were obtained as a result of irregularities
                                         against Lucas Schulbert, were
 Unconditional (39 tokens)   -32.17      Two punctuations from half the field of Aaron McNeefe,
                                         both of which were obtained as a result of irregularities
                                         against Lucas Schulbert, took the initiative.
 Conditional (26 tokens)     -28.97      Two dots in half a field above Aaron McNeif, both of
                                         which were obtained as a result of.
 Conditional (29 tokens)     -30.32      Two dots in half a field above Aaron McNeif, both of
                                         which were obtained for irregularities against Lucas
                                         Schulbert.
 Conditional (33 tokens)     -31.55      Two dotballs in half a field above Aaron McNeif, both of
                                         which were obtained as a result of irregularities against
                                         Lucas Schulbert.
 Conditional (36 tokens)     -32.23      Two dots in half a field above Aaron McNeif, both of
                                         which were obtained by fouling Lucas Shubert, took the
                                         initiative of the Derry.
 Conditional (39 tokens)     -36.03      Two punctuations from half the field of Aaron McNeefe,
                                         both of which were obtained as a result of the fouling
                                         of Lucas Shubert, took initiative.
 Input                       -           开庭前,李静仔细审阅了卷宗材料,撰写了阅卷笔
                                         录,并指导合议庭拟定庭审提纲和方案。
 Reference (38 tokens)       -           Before the trial, Li Jing carefully reviewed the file ma-
                                         terials, wrote records of the file review and guided the
                                         collegiate panel to draw up the trial outline and scheme.
 Unconditional (30 tokens)   -32.93      Prior to the opening of the trial, Jing Li carefully re-
                                         viewed the file materials, prepared a transcript of the
                                         volume and directed the Full Court
 Unconditional (34 tokens)   -36.48      Prior to the opening of the trial, Jing Li carefully re-
                                         viewed the file materials, prepared the transcript of the
                                         volume and directed the Full Court to develop the out-
                                         line


                                             33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Unconditional (38 tokens)   -37.65      Prior to the opening of the trial, Jing Li carefully re-
                                         viewed the file materials, prepared the transcript of the
                                         volume and directed the Full Court to develop the out-
                                         line and programme of the
 Unconditional (41 tokens)   -42.24      Prior to the opening of the trial, Jing Li carefully re-
                                         viewed the file materials, prepared the transcript of the
                                         volume and directed the Full Court to develop the out-
                                         line and programme of the trial. The
 Unconditional (45 tokens)   -48.34      Prior to the opening of the trial, Jing Li carefully re-
                                         viewed the file materials, prepared the transcript of the
                                         volume and directed the Full Court to develop the out-
                                         line and programme of the trial. (Signed) J.
 Conditional (30 tokens)     -26.13      Prior to the hearing, Jing Li carefully reviewed the file
                                         materials, prepared transcripts and guided the Full Court
                                         in developing its outline and programme.
 Conditional (34 tokens)     -25.00      Prior to the hearing, Jing Li carefully reviewed the file
                                         materials, wrote the transcripts and directed the Full
                                         Court to develop the outline and programme of the trial.
 Conditional (38 tokens)     -28.53      Prior to the hearing, Li Xing carefully reviewed the
                                         file materials, written the transcripts of the volumes
                                         and directed the Full Court to develop the outline and
                                         programme of the trial.
 Conditional (41 tokens)     -30.96      Prior to the opening of the trial, Li Xing carefully re-
                                         viewed the file materials, written the transcripts of the
                                         volumes and directed the Full Court to develop the out-
                                         line and programme of the trial.
 Conditional (45 tokens)     -36.43      Prior to the opening of the session, Jing Li carefully re-
                                         viewed the case file materials, prepared the transcript of
                                         the volume and directed the Full Court in the drawing up
                                         of the outline and programme of the trial proceedings.
 Input                       -           学校还给警察打了电话,因为将近40分钟过去了我
                                         还没有去接女儿。
 Reference (21 tokens)       -           The school also called the police because I did not pick
                                         up my daughter for about 40 minutes.
 Unconditional (16 tokens)   -15.49      The school also called the police because almost 40
                                         minutes later I had not
 Unconditional (18 tokens)   -17.99      The school also called the police, as almost 40 minutes
                                         had passed before I could
 Unconditional (21 tokens)   -19.96      The school also called the police because almost 40
                                         minutes later I had not been able to pick up
 Unconditional (23 tokens)   -11.08      The school also called the police, as almost 40 minutes
                                         had passed before I could pick up my daughter.
 Unconditional (25 tokens)   -11.23      The school also called the police, as almost 40 minutes
                                         later I had not been able to pick up my daughter.
 Conditional (16 tokens)     -16.26      The school also called the police because almost 40
                                         minutes had passed before I
 Conditional (18 tokens)     -15.97      The school also called the police because almost 40
                                         minutes later I had not gone.
 Conditional (21 tokens)     -16.98      The school also called the police, as almost 40 minutes
                                         later I had not picked up girls.
 Conditional (23 tokens)     -11.08      The school also called the police, as almost 40 minutes
                                         had passed before I could pick up my daughter.
 Conditional (25 tokens)     -15.51      The school also called the police, as almost 40 min-
                                         utes had passed before I had been able to collect my
                                         daughter.
 Input                       -           中国认为消除贫困是避免冲突和危机的钥匙,所以
                                         中国在非洲致力于加强友好交往,帮助非洲真正实
                                         现可持续的发展。


                                             34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Reference (41 tokens)       -           China maintains that eradicating poverty is the key to
                                         avoiding conflicts and crisis. Therefore, China is dedi-
                                         cated to strengthening friendly exchanges in Africa so
                                         as to help Africa to realize sustainable development in
                                         a real way.
 Unconditional (32 tokens)   -26.74      China believes that the eradication of poverty is the
                                         key to avoiding conflicts and crises, and is therefore
                                         committed to strengthening friendly relations in Africa
                                         and helping Africa to
 Unconditional (36 tokens)   -19.82      China believed that the eradication of poverty was the
                                         key to avoiding conflicts and crises, and was therefore
                                         committed to strengthening friendly relations in Africa
                                         and helping Africa to achieve sustainable development.
 Unconditional (41 tokens)   -24.59      China believed that the eradication of poverty was the
                                         key to avoiding conflicts and crises, and it was therefore
                                         committed to strengthening friendly relations in Africa
                                         and helping Africa to achieve sustainable development
                                         in a genuine manner.
 Unconditional (45 tokens)   -45.91      China believed that the eradication of poverty was the
                                         key to avoiding conflicts and crises, and it was therefore
                                         committed to strengthening friendly relations in Africa
                                         and helping Africa to achieve sustainable development
                                         in a genuine manner, and was committed to
 Unconditional (49 tokens)   -42.86      China believed that the eradication of poverty was the
                                         key to avoiding conflicts and crises, and it was therefore
                                         committed to strengthening friendly relations in Africa
                                         and helping Africa to achieve sustainable development
                                         in a genuine manner, and it was committed to doing so.
 Conditional (32 tokens)     -18.41      China believed that poverty eradication was the key
                                         to avoiding conflicts and crises and was committed to
                                         strengthening friendly relations in Africa and helping it
                                         to achieve sustainable development.
 Conditional (36 tokens)     -18.71      China believes that the eradication of poverty is the key
                                         to avoiding conflicts and crises and is therefore com-
                                         mitted in Africa to strengthening friendly relations and
                                         helping Africa to truly achieve sustainable development.
 Conditional (41 tokens)     -22.35      China believes that the eradication of poverty is the key
                                         to the avoidance of conflicts and crises, and it is there-
                                         fore committed to strengthening friendly relations in
                                         Africa and to helping Africa to truly achieve sustainable
                                         development.
 Conditional (45 tokens)     -31.39      China believes that the eradication of poverty is the
                                         key to the avoidance of conflicts and crises, and it is
                                         therefore committed to strengthening friendly relations
                                         in Africa in order to help Africa to achieve real and
                                         sustainable development in Africa.
 Conditional (49 tokens)     -35.48      In view of the fact that the eradication of poverty was the
                                         key to the avoidance of conflicts and crises, China was
                                         committed to strengthening friendly relations in Africa
                                         in order to help it to achieve sustainable development in
                                         a truly sustainable and sustainable manner.
 Input                       -           过去10年间,饭店一直提供高规格的套餐,但“为符
                                         合(《金英兰法》所设定的)餐费上限,我们将被迫
                                         改变几十年的传统,这真是艰难决定”。


                                             35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Reference (65 tokens)       -           In the past ten years, the restaurant has offered high-
                                         specification set meals. However, ”in order to satisfy
                                         the upper limit of table money set by The Improper
                                         Solicitation and Graft Act, we will have to change the
                                         tradition of several decades, which is really a difficult
                                         decision.”
 Unconditional (52 tokens)   -46.62      Over the past 10 years, hotels have been offering high-
                                         grade packages, but “it is difficult to decide that we will
                                         be forced to change decades of tradition in order to meet
                                         the ceiling on meals (set by the Golden England Act)”.
                                         (
 Unconditional (58 tokens)   -55.03      Over the past 10 years, hotels have been offering high-
                                         grade packages, but “it is difficult to decide that we will
                                         be forced to change decades of tradition in order to meet
                                         the ceiling on meals (set by the Golden England Act)”.
                                         (S/PV.4855
 Unconditional (65 tokens)   -63.76      Over the past 10 years, hotels have been offering high-
                                         grade packages, but “it is difficult to decide that we will
                                         be forced to change decades of tradition in order to meet
                                         the ceiling on meals (set by the Golden England Act)”.
                                         (S/PV.4855, p. 3) (para.
 Unconditional (71 tokens)   -73.98      Over the past 10 years, hotels have been offering high-
                                         grade packages, but “it is difficult to decide that we will
                                         be forced to change decades of tradition in order to meet
                                         the ceiling on meals (set by the Golden England Act)”.
                                         (S/PV.4855, p. 3) (A/PV.39, p. 3)
 Unconditional (78 tokens)   -98.44      Over the past 10 years, hotels have been offering high-
                                         grade packages, but “it is difficult to decide that we will
                                         be forced to change decades of tradition in order to meet
                                         the ceiling on meals (set by the Golden England Act)”.
                                         (S/PV.4855, p. 3) (A/PV.39, p. 27, para. 7) (A
 Conditional (52 tokens)     -44.47      Over the past 10 years, the hotel has been providing a
                                         high-precision package, but “it is difficult to decide that
                                         we will be forced to change decades of tradition in order
                                         to meet the ceiling on meals” (set in Kim.
 Conditional (58 tokens)     -38.22      Over the past 10 years, the hotel has been providing a
                                         high-precision package, but “it is difficult to decide that,
                                         in keeping with the ceiling on the cost of meals (set by
                                         the Golden England Act), we will be forced to change
                                         decades of tradition”.
 Conditional (65 tokens)     -56.80      Over the past 10 years, hotels have been offering high-
                                         grade packages, but “it is hard to decide that we will
                                         be forced to change decades of tradition in order to
                                         meet the ceiling on the cost of meals (set by the Golden
                                         England Act)” (A/AC.254/5/Add.1, p. 2).
 Conditional (71 tokens)     -60.98      Over the past 10 years, hotels have been offering high-
                                         grade packages, but “it is a difficult decision for us to
                                         be forced to change decades of tradition in order to
                                         meet the ceiling on the cost of meals (set by the Golden
                                         England Act)” (A/CN.9/WG.I/WP.56, p. 14).
 Conditional (78 tokens)     -85.55      Over the past 10 years, hotels have been offering high-
                                         grade packages, but “it is difficult to decide that we
                                         will be forced to change decades of tradition in order
                                         to meet the ceiling on the cost of meals” (as set out
                                         in the Quintland Law). (Ha’aretz, Jerusalem Post, 15
                                         November) (A/55/PV.40), p


                                             36
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Input                       -           北京至沈阳高铁自北京铁路枢纽引出,经河北省承
                                         德市,辽宁省朝阳、新市后接入沈阳铁路枢纽沈阳
                                         站,全长698公里。
 Reference (51 tokens)       -           The Beijing-Shenyang high speed railway extends from
                                         the railway terminal in Beijing, and passes Chengde in
                                         Hebei Province as well as Chaoyang and Fuxin in Liaon-
                                         ing Province. It measures 698 kilometers in length.
 Unconditional (40 tokens)   -41.02      From Beijing to Shenyang’s railway hub, a total of
                                         698 km of the Shenyang railway hub was connected to
                                         Liaoning province through the city of Chinde,
 Unconditional (45 tokens)   -45.48      From Beijing to Shenyang’s railway hub, a total of
                                         698 km of the Shenyang railway hub was connected to
                                         Liaoning province through the city of Chinde in Hebei
                                         province and to
 Unconditional (51 tokens)   -50.24      From Beijing to Shenyang’s railway hub, a total of
                                         698 km of the Shenyang railway hub was connected to
                                         Liaoning province through the city of Chinde in Hebei
                                         province and to the city of Xiang
 Unconditional (56 tokens)   -52.92      From Beijing to Shenyang’s railway hub, a total of
                                         698 km of the Shenyang railway hub was connected to
                                         Liaoning province through the city of Chinde in Hebei
                                         province and to the city of Xiaoyang after being con-
                                         nected.
 Unconditional (61 tokens)   -59.35      From Beijing to Shenyang’s railway hub, a total of
                                         698 km of the Shenyang railway hub was connected to
                                         Liaoning province through the city of Chinde in Hebei
                                         province and to the city of Xiaoyang after being con-
                                         nected to Shenyang railway hub
 Conditional (40 tokens)     -40.72      From Beijing to Shenyang’s railway hub, a total of
                                         698 km of the Shenyang railway hub was connected to
                                         Liaoning province and Xiangyang City.
 Conditional (45 tokens)     -48.85      From Beijing to Shenyang’s railway hub, a total of
                                         698 km of the Shenyang railway hub was connected to
                                         Liaoning province and Shinyang’s railway hub, via the
                                         city of
 Conditional (51 tokens)     -54.53      From Beijing to Shenyang’s railway hub, a total of
                                         698 km of the Shenyang railway hub was connected to
                                         Liaoning province and the Shinyang railway hub after
                                         being connected to the city of Xiaoyang.
 Conditional (56 tokens)     -60.78      From Beijing to Shenyang’s railway hub, a total of
                                         698 km of the Shenyang railway hub was connected to
                                         Liaoning province through the city of Chinde in Hebei
                                         province, and to Xiangyang City, which is linked.
 Conditional (61 tokens)     -53.08      Beijing to Shenyang’s Iron was drawn from the Bei-
                                         jing railway hub, which was connected to Shenyang
                                         station, 698 kilometres long, via the city of Chinde,
                                         Hebei province, and Liaoning province, as well as to
                                         the city of Xiangyang.
 Input                       -           本 届 书 展 在 阅 读 活 动 的 组 织 安 排 上 围 绕“价
                                         值”和“品质”,突显主题性、大众性和创新性。
 Reference (34 tokens)       -           This year’s Shanghai Bookfair will highlight the topical-
                                         ity, popularity and innovation through a focus on ”value”
                                         and ”quality” when organizing reading activities.
 Unconditional (27 tokens)   -14.79      The exhibition was organized around “values” and
                                         “qualitys” and highlighted thematic, popular and inno-
                                         vative aspects of reading.


                                             37
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Unconditional (30 tokens)   -25.89      The exhibition was organized around “values” and
                                         “qualitys” and highlighted thematic, popular and inno-
                                         vative aspects of the reading exercise..
 Unconditional (34 tokens)   -37.53      The exhibition was organized around “values” and
                                         “qualitys” and highlighted thematic, popular and inno-
                                         vative aspects of the reading exercise, and highlighted
                                         the importance of
 Unconditional (37 tokens)   -33.79      The exhibition was organized around “values” and
                                         “qualitys” and highlighted thematic, popular and in-
                                         novative aspects of the reading exercise, which was
                                         organized around the following themes:
 Unconditional (40 tokens)   -37.27      The exhibition was organized around “values” and
                                         “qualitys” and highlighted thematic, popular and in-
                                         novative aspects of the reading exercise, which was
                                         organized around the theme of “values”.
 Conditional (27 tokens)     -14.79      The exhibition was organized around “values” and
                                         “qualitys” and highlighted thematic, popular and inno-
                                         vative aspects of reading.
 Conditional (30 tokens)     -19.29      The exhibition was organized around “values” and
                                         “qualitys” and highlighted the theme, popularism and
                                         innovation of the reading exercise.
 Conditional (34 tokens)     -30.40      The fair was organized around “values” and “qualitys”
                                         in the context of reading events, highlighting the theme,
                                         popularism and innovation that emerged.
 Conditional (37 tokens)     -28.44      The opening of the book fair focused on the organiza-
                                         tion of reading events around “values” and “qualitys”,
                                         highlighting the subject matter, popularism, and innova-
                                         tiveness.
 Conditional (40 tokens)     -34.10      The opening of the book fair, organized around “values”
                                         and “qualitys” in the context of reading events, high-
                                         lighted the subject matter, popularism and innovation of
                                         the event.


                                             38
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 18: Randomly selected length-constrained outputs from a ROC stories finetuned GPT2-345M
model, using unconditional and conditional beam search (beam size 5). (As described in Section 5.2.1).
Inputs and reference completions are from the ROC Stories dev. dataset.

 Type                         log P (x≥t |x<t )    Text
 Input                        -                    My brother loved candy. He ate a lot of it. He left
                                                   the wrappers on the counter. Our mother scolded
                                                   him for it.
 Reference (15 tokens)        -                    He didn’t listen until we got a lot of ants one spring.
 Unconditional (12 tokens)    -12.49               He said he didn’t want to clean it up.
 Unconditional (13 tokens)    -16.16               He said he didn’t want to clean it up anymore.
 Unconditional (15 tokens)    -19.57               He said he didn’t want to clean it up so he left.
 Unconditional (16 tokens)    -19.83               He said he didn’t want to clean it up, but he did.
 Unconditional (18 tokens)    -21.74               He said he didn’t want to clean it up, so he left it
                                                   alone.
 Conditional (12 tokens)      -12.73               He apologized and bought a new set of wrappers.
 Conditional (13 tokens)      -16.99               He apologized and bought a new set of candy wrap-
                                                   pers.
 Conditional (15 tokens)      -15.78               He got in trouble for leaving candy on the counter
                                                   for so long.
 Conditional (16 tokens)      -19.08               He told her he would never leave candy on the
                                                   counter, ever again.
 Conditional (18 tokens)      -19.87               He got in trouble for leaving the wrappers on the
                                                   counter for a long time.

 Input                        -                    Oscar never made his bed. His mom always wanted
                                                   him to. Finally he decided to start making his bed.
                                                   His mom was proud.
 Reference (8 tokens)         -                    She gave him a dessert treat.
 Unconditional (6 tokens)     -5.47                Oscar made his bed.
 Unconditional (7 tokens)     -5.23                Now Oscar makes his bed.
 Unconditional (8 tokens)     -13.01               Now Oscar makes his bed every night
 Unconditional (9 tokens)     -5.71                Now Oscar makes his bed every night.
 Conditional (6 tokens)       -6.64                Oscar was very happy.
 Conditional (7 tokens)       -5.23                Now Oscar makes his bed.
 Conditional (8 tokens)       -8.03                Now Oscar makes his bed everyday.
 Conditional (9 tokens)       -7.04                Oscar was happy to make his bed.

 Input                        -                    Rachel decided to donate blood at the local blood
                                                   drive. She was a little nervous because this was
                                                   her first time. The next day Rachel received a call
                                                   from the doctor that she saw. The doctor told her
                                                   that he had bad news.
 Reference (7 tokens)         -                    Rachel broke down in tears.
 Unconditional (5 tokens)     -12.42               Rachel had contracted HIV
 Unconditional (6 tokens)     -16.25               Rachel had to stop donating
 Unconditional (7 tokens)     -11.83               Rachel had to stop donating blood
 Unconditional (8 tokens)     -18.38               He had found out that she had


                                                  39
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Conditional (5 tokens)      -7.63            Rachel had died.
 Conditional (6 tokens)      -7.11            Rachel had contracted HIV.
 Conditional (7 tokens)      -10.72           Rachel had contracted the virus.
 Conditional (8 tokens)      -11.84           The donor had died from AIDS.

 Input                       -                Amelia decided to take a vacation to Mexico. She
                                              booked her flight and hotel. When she got to Mex-
                                              ico, she was sure to visit many different things.
                                              She loved every moment of it.
 Reference (11 tokens)       -                Amelia decided to vacation to Mexico more often.
 Unconditional (8 tokens)    -11.15           Amelia couldn’t wait to return home
 Unconditional (9 tokens)    -6.39            Amelia couldn’t wait to return home.
 Unconditional (11 tokens)   -7.62            Amelia couldn’t wait to go back to Mexico.
 Unconditional (12 tokens)   -10.58           Amelia couldn’t wait to go back to Mexico again.
 Unconditional (13 tokens)   -10.84           Amelia couldn’t wait to go back to Mexico next
                                              year.
 Conditional (8 tokens)      -6.80            Amelia couldn’t wait to return.
 Conditional (9 tokens)      -6.39            Amelia couldn’t wait to return home.
 Conditional (11 tokens)     -7.62            Amelia couldn’t wait to go back to Mexico.
 Conditional (12 tokens)     -9.67            Amelia couldn’t wait to return to Mexico next year.
 Conditional (13 tokens)     -10.84           Amelia couldn’t wait to go back to Mexico next
                                              year.

 Input                       -                George had an internship. He really wanted to get
                                              a full time job with the company. George worked
                                              hard and proved to be smart. A position opened up
                                              that George wanted.
 Reference (11 tokens)       -                He eagerly applied for it and was ultimately hired.
 Unconditional (8 tokens)    -14.37           George was able to get the job
 Unconditional (9 tokens)    -7.56            George was able to get the job.
 Unconditional (11 tokens)   -14.12           George got the job and was very happy with it
 Unconditional (12 tokens)   -9.01            George got the job and was very happy with it.
 Unconditional (13 tokens)   -9.74            George got the job and was very happy with his
                                              decision.
 Conditional (8 tokens)      -8.21            George got the job right away.
 Conditional (9 tokens)      -7.82            George got the job and loved it.
 Conditional (11 tokens)     -9.97            George got the job and is very happy now.
 Conditional (12 tokens)     -9.01            George got the job and was very happy with it.
 Conditional (13 tokens)     -9.41            George got the job and now has a full time job.

 Input                       -                A girl falls in love with a boy and he liked her
                                              too. She finds out that their parents don’t get along.
                                              The boy and the girl love each other so much. But,
                                              they don’t want to hurt their parents feelings so
                                              they stay away
 Reference (8 tokens)        -                But eventually they get together anyway.
 Unconditional (6 tokens)    -16.41           . The girl and the
 Unconditional (7 tokens)    -15.29           . The girl and the boy


                                             40
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Unconditional (8 tokens)    -17.36           . The girl and the boy are
 Unconditional (9 tokens)    -13.74           . The girl and the boy get married
 Conditional (6 tokens)      -14.31           . The girl gets pregnant
 Conditional (7 tokens)      -9.23            . The girl is devastated.
 Conditional (8 tokens)      -7.62            . The girl is heartbroken.
 Conditional (9 tokens)      -8.90            . The girl falls in love again.

 Input                       -                Tom bought a new plant. He kept it by his bed. The
                                              plant stopped growing. His mother said it needed
                                              sunlight.
 Reference (10 tokens)       -                So Tom moved the plant to a window.
 Unconditional (8 tokens)    -5.14            Tom watered the plant every day.
 Unconditional (9 tokens)    -9.47            Tom didn’t care and kept it.
 Unconditional (10 tokens)   -8.65            Tom didn’t care and kept the plant.
 Unconditional (11 tokens)   -9.94            Tom watered the plant every day for a week.
 Unconditional (12 tokens)   -10.69           Tom didn’t care and kept it in the dark.
 Conditional (8 tokens)      -5.14            Tom watered the plant every day.
 Conditional (9 tokens)      -9.84            Tom watered the plant and it grew.
 Conditional (10 tokens)     -10.49           Tom watered the plant and the plant grew.
 Conditional (11 tokens)     -11.10           Tom watered it every day and it grew back.
 Conditional (12 tokens)     -11.91           Tom watered the plant every day to keep it grow-
                                              ing.

 Input                       -                The little sister found out she was having a baby
                                              brother. She was excited until she found out she
                                              would no longer be the baby. Then she started
                                              acting out. She colored on the walls.
 Reference (10 tokens)       -                The little sister got punished with a timeout.
 Unconditional (8 tokens)    -8.92            The little sister was very sad.
 Unconditional (9 tokens)    -19.96           The little sister was so upset she cried
 Unconditional (10 tokens)   -16.02           Her mom had to take her to the hospital
 Unconditional (11 tokens)   -8.81            Her mom had to take her to the hospital.
 Unconditional (12 tokens)   -21.19           Her mom had to take her to the hospital for her
 Conditional (8 tokens)      -8.92            The little sister was very sad.
 Conditional (9 tokens)      -11.63           The little sister was sad and cried.
 Conditional (10 tokens)     -11.55           The little sister was so upset she cried.
 Conditional (11 tokens)     -15.72           The little sister was so sad she cried too.
 Conditional (12 tokens)     -15.01           The little sister was so upset she threw a fit.

 Input                       -                John went skydiving for the first time. He went
                                              with an instructor on a plane into the air. He
                                              screamed when they jumped. John was terribly
                                              afraid of heights and passed out.
 Reference (11 tokens)       -                When he woke up, he had already landed.
 Unconditional (8 tokens)    -7.32            He woke up in the hospital.
 Unconditional (9 tokens)    -13.62           He woke up hours later in the hospital
 Unconditional (11 tokens)   -14.35           He woke up in the hospital with a broken leg


                                             41
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Unconditional (12 tokens)       -8.99               He woke up in the hospital with a broken leg.
 Unconditional (13 tokens)       -16.61              He woke up hours later in the hospital with a bro-
                                                     ken leg
 Conditional (8 tokens)          -7.32               He woke up in the hospital.
 Conditional (9 tokens)          -10.90              He woke up in the hospital afterwards.
 Conditional (11 tokens)         -9.38               He woke up in the hospital with a concussion.
 Conditional (12 tokens)         -8.99               He woke up in the hospital with a broken leg.
 Conditional (13 tokens)         -11.36              He woke up a few hours later with a broken neck.

 Input                           -                   Holly asked her brother to put suntan lotion on her
                                                     back. He took his time and applied it very carefully.
                                                     Later that day, Holly wondered why people were
                                                     laughing. She later realized her brother had made
                                                     a design with the lotion.
 Reference (13 tokens)           -                   Holly yelled at her brother to get back at him.
 Unconditional (10 tokens)       -21.72              The lotion was a fake lotion,
 Unconditional (11 tokens)       -23.49              The lotion was a fake lotion, and
 Unconditional (13 tokens)       -27.53              The lotion was a fake lotion that looked like real
 Unconditional (14 tokens)       -24.45              The lotion was a fake lotion, and Holly was embar-
                                                     rassed
 Unconditional (15 tokens)       -18.71              The lotion was a fake lotion, and Holly was embar-
                                                     rassed.
 Conditional (10 tokens)         -14.87              She was so embarrassed she never asked again.
 Conditional (11 tokens)         -13.26              Holly was so embarrassed she never asked him
                                                     again.
 Conditional (13 tokens)         -17.70              She was so embarrassed, she decided to never ask
                                                     again.
 Conditional (14 tokens)         -15.91              She was so embarrassed, she decided to never ask
                                                     him again.
 Conditional (15 tokens)         -15.16              She was so embarrassed, she never asked him to
                                                     do it again.


G     A RCHITECTURES AND H YPERPARAMETERS OF CLASSIFIERS

This appendix gives additional details for the training of the classifiers described in subsection 5.


G.1    ATTRIBUTE CLASSIFIER ARCHITECTURE (M ARIAN MT AND GPT-2)

This section describes the classifier architecture, and how it is used for conditional beam search. The
classifier must be able to make predictions about the class of possible continuation tokens, while not
needing to run the full decoder model on each of those continuations to make a hidden state. To make
that possible, the classifier uses the model hidden states at time t (and earlier) to make a classification
prediction for time t + 1.
                                                         (ℓ)
We’ll formalize the prediction process here. Let h1:T be the layer ℓ hidden states of the decoder,
with the decoder having M total layers and an embedding dimension of dmodel . Suppose we want
to predict the final label for an output sequence with a prefix of x1:t , and a candidate next token
xt+1 . In order to make the computation for each continuation lightweight, we frame it in terms of the


                                                    42
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


word embedding of that token13 , w. For some dimension sizes dclf and dout , the classifier output is
computed as follows:

   (stacked)              (0)     (1)         (M )
 h1:t        = Concat [h1:t ; h1:t ; . . . ; h1:t ]  // Concatenate all hidden states layerwise

        (in)            (stacked)
      h1:t = Linear h1:t                             // Project down: RT ×(M dmodel ) → Rt×dclf
        (out)                      (in)
       h1:t = Transformer(h1:t )                         // Rt×dclf → Rt×dout
                          (out)
    ct+1 = Concat([ht             , w])                  // Concatenate output for time t to token emb.
  Logitst = MLP(ct+1 )                                   // Apply MLP without output dimension |A|

At training time, the classifier is only passed the tokens that actually occur in the training example, so
this is done in parallel for every position in the sequence. At inference time, it needs to evaluate k
candidate continuation tokens (See Algorithm 1). Since the the transformer output from time t is
shared across all evaluations of tokens for time t + 1, it only needs to be run once for each position,
while the MLP is run k times.14
The reason to include the transformer instead of just the MLP is that it allows the classifier to use
as many of the NLG model’s hidden states as possible, instead of just the hidden states from time t.
This is similar to the architecture used by FUDGE, but using a transformer instead of a LSTM.

G.2     L ENGTH PREDICTOR HYPERPARAMETERS FOR M ARIAN MT Z H -E N MODEL

The transformer which is applied to the seq2seq decoder’s hidden states has two layers, a model
dimension of dclf = 240, 12 attention heads, dout = 24, and is trained with a dropout rate of 0.33.
The MLP has two hidden layers with dimension 48, uses a ReLU activation, and has an output
dimension of 24 (the number of classes for the classification problem).
The classifier (consisting of the transformer and MLP together) Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014) using a
learning rate of 10−3 , a weight decay of 3 × 10−8 , and a batch size of 8.
Training was run for three epochs using sampled outputs for 1.1M source sentences.

G.3     L ENGTH PREDICTOR HYPERPARAMETERS FOR ROC S TORIES FINETUNED GPT2-345M
        MODEL

The hyperparameters for the classifier for the ROC stories GPT-2 model are the same as those from
the previous subsection, except for the data and number of epochs. Training was run for 8 epochs
using 300K samples.
We use beam sizes of 5 and 20 for our experiments, and always evaluate k = 100 candidate next
tokens for ACBS. We use α = 1 as defined in Algorithm 1, so this is exactly the theoretical version
of ACBS derived in Section 5.1.

G.4     LL A MA ATTRIBUTE CLASSIFIER ARCHITECTURE AND HYPERPARAMETERS

The classifier architecture we used for running ACBS with LLaMA is essentially a finetuned LLaMA
model, with a linear classification head in place of the output projection. However, in order to reduce
the memory footprint of this approach, we use several techniques.

LoRA (Hu et al., 2021). We avoid needing two full copies of the weights by instantiating the
classifier as a LoRA finetune of LLaMA-7B. We can make a single forward pass which evaluates
both the language model and the classifier by batching the hidden states.
  13
    These embeddings come from the input embedding table from the underlying decoder model.
  14
    To avoid possible confusion, there are two transformers: the one in the underlying NLG model, and the one
being used for classification. Both of them only need to make one forward pass per sequence during training,
and one forward pass per token during inference.


                                                    43
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4-bit quantization. We use the blockwise quantization method introduced by Dettmers et al. (2023),
but with the AF4-64 code15 instead of their NF4 code. As in Dettmers et al. (2023), we only quantize
the pretrained model weights, not the LoRA parameters.

KV-cache sharing. The attribute classifier needs to be run on 100 candidate tokens, which would
require executing the LLaMA-7B model with a batch size of 100 if done naively. However, all these
tokens share the same past, so we batch the candidate tokens, but not the KV-cache, so the memory
footprint is far lower than a full batch-size 100 execution. Both the KV-cache and the candidate
tokens are batched across beam hypotheses, so the KV-cache has a single batch dimension while the
hidden states for the candidate tokens have two.

Shared trunk. Running both the unmodified LLaMA-7B model and a LoRA finetuning of it would
require two copies of the hidden states, i.e. the key-value-cache would be twice as large as for
ordinary LM decoding. For beam search, this is also multiplied by the beam size, which would
make running decoding on a single GPU impractical. We reduce this amount by only training LoRA
parameters on the last three of LLaMA’s 32 layers. This way, the LoRA finetuned classifiers can
still take advantage of LLaMA’s pretrained knowledge to some extent, but they only need distinct
key-value caches for the final few layers.

Training data and Hyperparameters. The classifier training data consists of 14,000 outputs from
LLaMA-7B which were produced using beam search with a beam size of 5 on distinct prompts from
the Alpaca (Taori et al., 2023) dataset. 95% of the outputs were used for training, while the remaining
5% were used for validation/early stopping. We train the classifier for 3 epochs with a batch size of
16. The rank constraint of the LoRA parameters is 8. We use Adam with a learning rate of 3 × 10−5
and a weight decay value of 10−3 .


H         D ETAILS OF H UMAN AND GPT-4 EVALUATION OF LL A MA-7B OUTPUTS

For both the human and GPT-4 evaluation, the ACBS and beam search outputs were randomly ordered
and labeled with A and B. The annotator (or GPT-4) was then told to evaluate which was better. The
GPT-4 prompt format is as follows (no other prompts were tested for scoring other than modifying
the prompt to enforce the correct output format when parsing failed initially):

            <System message>: You compare pairs responses to
            prompts. You MUST select one of the options as
            better. You must always respond with the letter A
            or the letter B and nothing else, or output will not
            be parsed correctly.
            <User message>: Choose the response which is overall
            higher quality, no matter how slightly.
            Prompt: <prompt>
            A: <Option A>
            B: <Option B>
            Is A or B a better response?



I        LL A MA-7B BEAM SEARCH OUTPUTS

Tables 19 and 20 show inputs for which ACBS and ordinary beam search had the largest increase and
decrease in reward model score respectively. Recall from Section 5.3 that ACBS leads to a higher
reward on 64% of inputs from the Alpaca dataset, so this sample of an equal number of positive and
negative cases is not balanced. The examples also exclude inputs for which ordinary beam search
produced an empty output.

    15
         See: https://github.com/davisyoshida/abnormal-floats.


                                                  44
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The positive examples show that ACBS often leads to an answer instead of a failure to answer. For
example, beam search often leads to an output such as “Here is a list of different ways to brew coffee”,
without any actual response. ACBS produces actual answers in these cases.
On the other hand, ACBS shows quite a bit of repetition, on both the improved and worsened inputs.
This is likely because the reward model itself doesn’t punish repetition, so the conditioning doesn’t
affect this behavior.

Table 19: LLaMA-7B: The 10 prompts for which ACBS led to the largest increase in score compared
to ordinary beam search, with beam search producing a non-empty output. Prompts come from the
Alpaca dataset.

  Can you provide a        Here is a list of foods that   Foods that are high in protein and low in
  list of foods that are   are high in protein and low    fat include lean meats, fish, poultry, eggs,
  both high in protein     in fat.                        beans, nuts, and low-fat dairy products.
  and low in fat?
  Why is customer ob-      \begin{blockquote}             Customer obsession is important because it
  session important        \begin{blockquote}             allows a company to understand what their
                           \begin{blockquote}             customers want and need. This allows a
                           <continues>                    company to create products and services
                                                          that meet the needs of their customers.
  Which author cre-        Al Capp                        Dick Tracy was created by Chester Gould.
  ated Dick Tracy
  Who is the best bas-     The Boston Celtics are the     The best basketball team in the NBA is the
  ketball team in the      best basketball team in the    Golden State Warriors.
  NBA?                     NBA.
  What are some easy       Here are some easy food        Beef stew, roast beef, hamburgers, and
  food recipes that in-    recipes that include beef.     meatballs.
  clude beef?
  What is a Hummum         A hummum is a musical in-      A hummum (or hummus) is a Middle
                           strument.                      Eastern dip or spread made from cooked,
                                                          mashed chickpeas or other beans, blended
                                                          with tahini (sesame seed paste), olive oil,
                                                          lemon juice, salt and garlic.
  Give me a list of dif- Here is a list of different      1. Pour hot water over ground coffee beans.
  ferent ways to brew ways to brew coffee                 2. Pour boiling water over ground coffee
  coffee                                                  beans.
                                                          3. Pour cold water over ground coffee
                                                          beans.
                                                          4. Pour hot water over instant coffee gran-
                                                          ules.
                                                          5. Pour boiling water over instant coffee
                                                          granules.
  What is the capital      Berlin                         The capital of Germany is Berlin.
  of Germany?
  Identify which ani-      African Elephant               The African Elephant is alive. The Troodon
  mal species is alive                                    is extinct.
  or extinct: Troodon,
  African Elephant
  Why do you like bal-     I like ballet because it       I like ballet so much because I think it is
  let so much?             makes me feel like a           the most beautiful and graceful of all the
                           princess.                      performing arts. I love the way the dancers
                                                          move and the music they dance to.


                                                   45
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 20: LLaMA-7B: The 10 prompts for which ACBS led to the largest decrease in score compared
to ordinary beam search. Prompts come from the Alpaca dataset.

 In the comic book     Calvin is named after           Calvin and Hobbes are named after Calvin
 series Calvin and     Calvin Coolidge, the 30th       Coolidge, the 30th President of the United
 Hobbes, who are       President of the United         States (1923-1929), and John Calhoun, the
 Calvin and Hobbes     States, and Hobbes is           7th Vice President of the United States
 named after?          named after Thomas              (1825-1832).
                       Hobbes,      an English
                       philosopher.
 What kind of socks    Grizzlies do not wear           Grizzly bears, also known as brown bears
 do grizzlies wear?    socks.                          or North American brown bears, are large
                                                       carnivorous mammals of the family Ursidae.
                                                       Grizzly bears (Ursus arctos horribilis) are a
                                                       subspecies of the brown bear (Ursus arctos),
                                                       which also includes the Kodiak bear (Ur-
                                                       sus arctos middendorffi), the polar bear (Ur-
                                                       sus arctos maritimus), and the Asian black
                                                       bear (Ursus thibetanus). Grizzly bears are
                                                       found in Alaska, British Columbia, Idaho,
                                                       Montana, Washington, and Wyoming in the
                                                       United States, and in Al
 What is the plot      John Wick is a 2014 Amer-       The plot of the movie John Wick is about a
 of the movie John     ican neo-noir action thriller   retired hitman who comes out of retirement
 Wick?                 film directed by Chad Sta-      to avenge the murder of his puppy.
                       helski and written by Derek
                       Kolstad. It stars Keanu
                       Reeves, Michael Nyqvist,
                       Alfie Allen, Adrianne Pal-
                       icki, Bridget Moynahan,
                       Dean Winters, Ian Mc-
                       Shane, John Leguizamo,
                       and Willem Dafoe. The
                       film was released in the
                       United States on October
                       24, 2014, by Summit En-
                       tertainment.
 What is the differ-   A Narrow Transformation A Narrow Transformation is a transforma-
 ence between a Nar-   is a transformation that is tion that operates on a single record. A
 row Transformation    applied to a single column Wide Transformation is a transformation
 and Wide Transfor-    of data. A Wide Transfor- that operates on multiple records.
 mation                mation is a transformation
                       that is applied to multiple
                       columns of data.
 Does taking long      Yes, it does.                   Taking long walks does not do anything
 walks do anything                                     good for your health.
 good for my health?


                                                46
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Give me a list of 1. Idli                               1. Idli
 south Indian break- 2. Dosa                             2. Dosa
 fast dishes I should 3. Vada                            3. Vada
 try.                 4. Uttapam                         4. Upma
                      5. Upma                            5. Pongal
                      6. Pongal                          6. Paniyaram
                      7. Paniyaram                       7. Appam
                      8. Appam                           8. Appalam
                      9. Appalam                         9. Kesari Bath
                      10. Kesari Bath                    10. Puliyogare
                                                         11. Sambar
                                                         12. Rasam
                                                         13. Chutney
                                                         14. Sambar Vada
                                                         15. Puliyogare Vada
                                                         16. Puliyogare Idli
                                                         17. Puliyogare Dosa
                                                         18. Puliyogare Upma
                                                         19. Puliyogare Pongal
                                                         20. P
 What is seek speed      Seek speed is the time it       Seek speed in HDFS is the time it takes
 in HDFS and why is      takes to find a block in the    to find a block in the file system. This is
 it no longer going to   file system.                    important because it determines how long
 be important?                                           it takes to read or write a block of data to or
                                                         from the file system.
                                                         Seek speed in HDFS is the time it takes
                                                         to find a block in the file system. This is
                                                         important because it determines how long
                                                         it takes to read or write a block of data to or
                                                         from the file system.
                                                         Seek speed in HDFS is the time it takes
                                                         to find a block in the file system. This is
                                                         important because it determines how long
                                                         it takes to read or write a block of data to or
                                                         from the file system
 What activities an      An admin or an administra-      An admin or an administrator of any data
 admin or an admin-      tor of any data tools & plat-   tools & platform or data tools can do the
 istrator of any data    form or data tools can do       following activities:
 tools & platform or     the following activities:
 data tools can do?      \begin{itemize}
                         \item Create new data tools
                         & platform or data tools.
                         \item Edit data tools &
                         platform or data tools.
                         \item Delete data tools &
                         platform or data tools.
                         \end{itemize}


                                                  47
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 What would Bruce         Bruce lee would do what    If Bruce Lee were alive today, he would be
 lee do if he is alive?   Bruce lee would do.        76 years old. He died in 1973 at the age of
                                                     32. If Bruce Lee were alive today, he would
                                                     be 76 years old. He died in 1973 at the age
                                                     of 32. If Bruce Lee were alive today, he
                                                     would be 76 years old. He died in 1973 at
                                                     the age of 32. If Bruce Lee were alive today,
                                                     he would be 76 years old. He died in 1973
                                                     at the age of 32. If Bruce Lee were alive
                                                     today, he would be 76 years old. He died in
                                                     1973 at
 What was invented        Dr.     Albert Southwick   Dr. Albert Southwick invented the South-
 by Dr Albert South-      invented the Southwick     wick Gauge in 1881.
 wick in 1881             stethoscope in 1881.


                                               48
