Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


T WO - SIDED C OMPETING M ATCHING M ARKETS W ITH
C OMPLEMENTARY P REFERENCES
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         In this paper, we propose a new algorithm for addressing the problem of two-sided
         matching markets with complementary preferences, where agents’ preferences are
         unknown a priori and must be learned from data. The presence of complementary
         preferences can lead to instability in the matching process, making this problem
         challenging to solve. To overcome this challenge, we formulate the problem as
         a bandit learning framework and propose the Multi-agent Multi-type Thompson
         Sampling (MMTS) algorithm. The algorithm combines the strengths of Thompson
         Sampling for exploration with a double matching technique to achieve a stable
         matching outcome. Our theoretical analysis demonstrates the effectiveness of
         MMTS as it is able to achieve stability at every matching step and has a sublinear
         Bayesian regret over time. Our approach provides a useful method for addressing
         complementary preferences in real-world scenarios.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Two-sided matching markets have been a mainstay of theoretical research and real-world applications
for several decades since the seminal work by (Gale and Shapley, 1962). Matching markets are used
to allocate indivisible “goods” to multiple decision-making agents based on mutual compatibility
as assessed via sets of preferences. Matching markets embody a notion of scarcity in which the
resources on both sides of the market are limited. One of the key concepts that contribute to the
success of matching markets is stability, which criterion ensures that all participants have no incentive
to block a prescribed matching (Roth, 1982). Matching markets often consist of participants with
complementary preferences that can lead to instability (Che et al., 2019). Examples of complementary
preferences in matching markets include: firms seeking workers with skills that complement their
existing workforce, sports teams forming teams with players that have complementary roles, and
colleges admitting students with diverse backgrounds and demographics that complement each other.
Studying the stability issue in the context of complementary preferences is crucial in ensuring the
successful functioning of matching markets with complementarities.
In this paper, we propose a novel algorithm and present an in-depth analysis of the problem of
complementary preferences in matching markets. Specifically, we focus on a many-to-one matching
scenario and use the job market as the example. In our proposed model, there are a set of agents (e.g.,
firms), each with limited quota, and a set of arms (e.g., workers), each of which can be matched to at
most one agent. Each arm belongs to a unique type, and each agent wants to match with a minimum
quota of arms from each type. This leads to complementarities in agents’ preferences. Additionally,
the agents’ preference of arms from each type is unknown a priori and must be learned from data,
which we refer to as the problem of competing matching under complementary preference (CMCP).
Our first result is the formulation of CMCP into a bandit learning framework as described in (Latti-
more and Szepesvári, 2020). Using this framework, we propose a new algorithm, the Multi-agent
Multi-type Thompson Sampling (MMTS), to solve CMCP. Our algorithm builds on the strengths
of Thompson Sampling (TS) in terms of exploration and further enhances it by incorporating a
double matching technique to find a stable solution under CMCP. The TS algorithm, as described
in (Thompson, 1933; Agrawal and Goyal, 2012; Russo et al., 2018), can effectively address the
incapable exploration problem in the competing matching problem, as described in (Liu et al., 2020),
by using the randomized sampling, also illustrated in Section 3.2. Unlike the upper confidence bound
(UCB) algorithm, TS method can achieve sufficient exploration by incorporating a deterministic,


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


non-negative bias inversely proportional to the number of matches into the observed empirical means.
Furthermore, the double matching technique proposed in this paper uses two stages of matching to
satisfy both the type quota and total quota requirements. These two stages mainly consist of using the
deferred acceptance (DA) algorithm from (Gale and Shapley, 1962), which is easy to be implemented.
Second, we present a theoretical analysis of the proposed MMTS algorithm. Our analysis shows
that MMTS can achieve stability at each matching step and show the incentive compatibility (IC)
of the MMTS. The proof of stability is obtained through a two-stage design of the double matching
technique, and the proof of IC is obtained through the lower bound of the regret. To the best of our
knowledge, MMTS is the first algorithm to achieve stability and IC in the CMCP.
Finally, our theoretical results indicate that MMTS can achieve a Bayesian total regret that scales
with the square root of the time horizon (T ) and is nearly linear in the total quota of all firms (Q).
Furthermore, we find that the Bayesian total regret only depends on the square root of the maximum
number
 P       of workers (Kmax ) in one type rather than the square root of the total number of workers
( m Km ) in all types. This is a more challenging setting than that considered in previous works
such as (Liu et al., 2020; Jagadeesan et al., 2021), which only consider a single type of worker in the
market and a quota of one for each firm. To address these challenges, we use the eluder dimension
(Russo and Van Roy, 2013) to measure the uncertainty set widths and bound the instantaneous regret
for each firm, and use the union bound of concentration results to measure the probability of bad
events occurring to get the final regret. Bounding the uncertainty set width is the key step for deriving
the sublinear regret upper bound of MMTS.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we introduce the necessary components
in the problem of CMCP. Meanwhile, we also state the challenges of this problem. In Section 3, we
provide the MMTS algorithm, its comparison with other algorithms, and show the incapability of
the UCB algorithm in CMCP. Then we present the stability, regret upper bound, and the incentive-
compatibility of the MMTS in Section 4. Finally, in Section 5, we show two examples, present the
distribution of learning parameters, and demonstrate the robustness of MMTS in large markets.

2       P ROBLEM
2.1     P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

We now describe the problem formulation of the Competing Matching under Complementary
Preferences problem (CMCP). Using the scenario of worker-firm matching as our running example,
we introduce the notation and key components of the CMCP. We define T as the time horizon and
without loss of generality, we assume it is known1 . We denote [N ] = [1, 2, ..., N ] where N 2 N+ .
Define the bold x 2 Rd be a d-dimensional random vector.
(I) Environment. We consider a centralized platform with N firms, denoted by the set N =
{p1 , p2 , ..., pN }, and various types of workers, represented by sets Km = {am 1 , a2 , ...aKm }, for
                                                                                      m       m

m 2 [M ], where Km is the number of m-th type workers. Each firm pi has a specific minimum
type quota qim to recruit m-type workers, and a maximum total quota Qi (e.g., seasonal headcount in
                                                      PM
company), for all i 2 [N ], m 2 [M ] and we assume i=1 qim  Qi . Additionally, we define the total
                         PN                                                                PM
market quota as Q = i=1 Qi and the total number of available market workers as K = m=1 Km .
It is assumed without loss of generality that the total number of quotas is greater less than the total
number of available market workers (Q ⌧ K) and T is large.
(II) Preference. We give preferences of both sides of the market. There are two preference lists: the
preferences of workers towards firms, and the preferences of firms towards workers.
a. Preferences of m-type workers towards firms ⇡ m : Km 7! N , 8m 2 [M ]. We assume that
preferences of types of worker to firms are fixed, known over time. For instance, workers submit
their preferences over different firms to the platform. We denote ⇡j,im
                                                                        as the rank order of firm pi
in the preference list of m type worker am  j , and assume that there are no ties in the rank orders2 .
The centralized platform knows the fixed preferences of m type worker towards firms, denoted as
    1
    The unknown T can be handled with the well-known doubling trick (Auer et al., 1995).
    2
    The strict preference is not necessary for stable matching and regret metric. However, for simplicity, we
assume preference is strict, which avoids the multiple optimal stable matching solutions even they are equivalent.


                                                        2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


⇡mj ✓ {⇡j,1 , ..., ⇡j,N } [ {aj }, 8aj 2 Km and m 2 [M ], and singleton aj represents the worker’s
          m         m

preference to remain unmatched. In other words, ⇡ m      j is a subset of the permutation of [N ] plus the
worker itself. And ⇡j,im      m
                          < ⇡j,i 0 implies that m     type worker amj prefers firm pi over firm pi0 and as
a shorthand, denoted as pi <m    j  p i 0 . This known worker-to-firm preference is a mild and common

assumption in the matching market literature (Liu et al., 2020; 2021; Li et al., 2022).
b. Preferences of firms towards m type workers rm : N 7! Km , 8m 2 [M ]. The true unknown
preferences of firms towards workers are fixed over time. The goal of the platform is to infer these
unknown preferences through historical matching data. We denote ri,j      m
                                                                             as the true rank of worker am
                                                                                                         j
in the preference list of firm pi , and assume there are no ties. pi ’s preferences towards workers is
represented by rm  i , which is a subset of the permutation of [Km ] plus the firm pi itself, representing
the firm’s preference to remain unmatched. Here ri,j   m      m
                                                           < ri,j 0 implies that firm pi prefers worker aj
                                                                                                         m

over worker am j0 , and the notation a m
                                       j <  m m
                                            i a j0 similarly denotes  this preference.
We refer to the above preference setting as
marginal preferences (MP). To illustrate the dis-
tinction between marginal preferences and joint
(couple) preferences (JP) (Che et al., 2019), we
provide an example in Figure 1 involving two
types of workers as an example. In the MP set-
ting, preferences of each type of worker are inde-
pendent of those of the other types. Here we use            Type 2


x-axis to represent the firm pi ’s preference levels
or called utility (µ1i 2 [0, 1]) over type 1 work-
ers (a1 , a2 ), shown as red circles, and we use
the y-axis to represent the firm pi ’s preference
levels (µ2i 2 [0, 1]) over type 2 workers (b1 , b2 ),                               Type 1



shown as blue triangles. The first row of Figure                    Figure 1: MP v.s. JP.
1 represents the MP setting, while the second
row represents the JP that the MP cannot cover.
In the MP setting, we show three possible patterns of combination matchings, {(a1 , b2 ), (a2 , b1 )}
where two types of workers a and b are matched by firm, concatenated a solid line. Besides, a dashed
arrow (a1 ! a2 ) is used to represent the preference over matching, indicating that a1 <i a2 . Thus,
the first row can be captured by the MP setting as the preference is consistent across the two types
of workers. In contrast, the second row cannot be represented by the MP as it is not possible to
compare the preference between (a1 , b2 ) and (a2 , b1 ) using {(a1 > a2 ), (b2 < b1 )}. This MP setting
is similar to the responsive preferences as defined in (Roth, 1985). Here we only consider the MP
and the finding of efficient algorithm to solve the JP problem is notoriously difficult and unsolved
(Che et al., 2019) and deserved more efforts.
(III) Matching Policy. At time t, for each firm pi , um   t (pi ) : N 7! Km [ ; is a mapping function
that satisfies um
                t (pi ) 2 Km [ ;, 8i 2 [N ], where ; represents a null set. At each time t, the platform
assigns m type workers um    t (pi ) for firm pi . We define ut (pi ) as the function that maps each firm
                                                              m

pi in the set N to a set of m type workers Km at time t. The assignments um          t (pi ) for each firm
are not only based on the firm’s proposals (submitted preferences), but also on the competing status
with other firms and workers’ preferences. A centralized platform, such as LinkedIn or Amazon
Mechanical Turks, coordinates this matching process in this competitive environment.
(IV) Stable Matching. The concept of stability is a widely used notion in the literature of stable
matching, which refers to the property that no pair of agents (e.g., firms and workers) would mutually
prefer each other over their current match (Gale and Shapley, 1962; Roth, 2008). This property is
typically formalized as the absence of blocking pairs in the matching literature, which are pairs of
agents that would both prefer to be matched with each other over their current match. The formal
definition is illustrated as below.
Definition 1. (Blocking pair). A matching u is blocked by a firm pi if pi prefers being single to being
matched with u(pi ), i.e. pi >i u(pi ). A matching u is blocked by a pair of firm and worker (pi , aj ) if
they each prefer each other to the partner they receive at u, i.e. aj >i u(pi ) and pi >j u 1 (aj ).

Roth (2008) stated if some preferences are not strict, arbitrarily breaking ties lets each agent fill out a strict
preference list.


                                                        3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Definition 2. (Stable Matching). A matching u is stable if it isn’t blocked by any individual or pair
of worker and firm.

In this setting, however, each firm has a minimum quota vector qi = [qi1 , ..., qiM ] 2 RM for each
type of worker to fill. Therefore, we define the concept of stability as the absence of "blocking
pairs" across all types of workers and firms. Based on the definition of the stable matching, we also
discussed the feasibility of the stable matching in the Appendix A. Here without loss of generality,
we assume there exists the stable matching in the scheme of the complementary preference.
(V) Matching Reward. At time t, when firm pi is matched with worker am         j , the firm receives a
stochastic reward yi,j
                   m
                       (t) which is assumed to be the true matching reward µm
                                                                            i,j (t) plus a noise ✏i,j (t),
                                                                                                  m

                 m
                yi,j (t) = µm          m
                            i,j (t) + ✏i,j (t), 8i 2 [N ], 8j 2 [Km ], 8m 2 [M ], 8t 2 [T ],                   (1)
where we assume that ✏m  i,j (t)’s are independently drawn from a sub-Gaussian random variable with
parameter . That is, for every ↵ 2 R, it is satisfied that E[exp(↵✏mi,j (t))]  exp(↵
                                                                                      2 2
                                                                                          /2). The goal
of the centralized platform is to design a learning algorithm that achieves stable matchings through
learning the firms’ preferences for multiple types of workers preciously from the previous matchings.
(VI) Regret. Based on model (1), we can observe a matching reward ym          i (t) := yi,um
                                                                                           t (pi )
                                                                                                   (t) at time t
when firm pi is matched with the assigned m type workers um        t  (p i ). The  mean reward     µ i,um
                                                                                                        t (pi )
                                                                                                                (t)
represents the noiseless reward (or mean utility) of firm pi wrt its assigned matching m type workers
umt (pi ) at time t. We define the cumulative firm-optimal regret with m-type worker for firm pi as

                                                T
                                                X              T
                                                               X
                                Rim (T, ✓) :=         µi,um
                                                          i
                                                                     µi,um
                                                                         t (pi )
                                                                                 (t),                          (2)
                                                t=1            t=1

where we denote ✓ as the sampled problem instance, and it is independently generated from a
distribution ⇥. This firm-optimal regret represents the difference between the capability of a policy
  i := {ut (pi )}t=1 in hindsight and the optimal stable matching oracle policy ui . As each
                                                                                                 m
um          m       T

firm must recruit M types of workers with total quota Qi , the total cumulative firm-optimal stable
regret
   hP for firm   pi is defined as the sum of this difference i     over all types of workers, Ri (T, ✓) :=
       M   PT                PM PT
E              t=1 µi,ui                t=1 µi,ut (pi ) (t)|✓ . Finally, the Bayesian total cumulative firm-
                        m                        m
       m=1                      m=1
optimal stable regret for all firms is defined has the expected value
                                                                  i      of the total cumulative firm-optimal
                                                 PN
stable regret over all firms, R(T ) := E✓2⇥         i=1 Ri (T, ✓) . Our goal is to design an algorithm that
minimizes this value over the time horizon T .

2.2    C HALLENGES AND S OLUTIONS

When preferences are unknown a priori in matching markets, the stability issue while satisfying
complementary preferences and quota requirements is a challenging problem due to the interplay of
multiple factors.
Challenge 1: How to design a stable matching algorithm for markets with complementary
preferences? This is a prevalent issue in real-world applications such as hiring workers with
complementary skills in hospitals and high-tech firms or admitting students with diverse backgrounds
in college admissions. Despite its importance, no implementable algorithm is currently available to
solve this challenge. In this paper, we propose a novel approach to resolving this issue by utilizing a
double matching (Algorithm 3) to marginalize complementary preferences and achieve stability. Our
algorithm can efficiently learn a stable matching solution using historical matching data, providing a
practical solution to the problem of competing matching under complementary preferences.
Challenge 2: How to balance the exploration and exploitation to achieve the sublinear regret?
The centralized platform must find a way to collect more firm-worker matching feedback while also
achieving optimal matching at each time step. Compared to traditional matching algorithms, the
CMCP is more challenging as it requires more time to balance this trade-off. In previous research,
the classic UCB method could not achieve sublinear regret in some scenarios (Liu et al., 2020). We
will also show an example in Section 3.2 to illustrate it. To overcome this challenge, we propose the
use of TS algorithm which allows for random exploration and achieves sublinear regret.


                                                        4
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Algorithm 1: Multi-agent Multi-type Thompson Sampling (MMTS)
  Input :Time horizon T ; firms’ priors (↵m,0  i   , m,0
                                                       i  ), 8i 2 [N ], 8m 2 [M ]; workers’ preference
             m
            ⇡ , 8m 2 [M ].
1 for t 2 {1, ..., T } do
2     S TEP 1: S AMPLING S TAGE
3          Get all firms’ estimated rankings r̂m                                    m
                                                i (t) and estimated mean reward µ̂i (t) over all types
        of workers, 8i 2 [N ], m 2 [M ] from the Sampling stage in Algo 2.
4     S TEP 2: D OUBLE M ATCHING S TAGE
5          Get the matching result umt (pi ), 8i 2 [N ], m 2 [M ] from the double matching in Algo 3.
6     S TEP 3: C OLLECTING R EWARDS S TAGE
7          Each firm receives its corresponding rewards from all types of workers ym   i (t).
8     S TEP 4: U PDATING B ELIEF S TAGE
9          Based on received rewards, firms update their posterior belief.


 Challenge 3: How to solving CMCP with quota constraints in large markets? Unlike the
 classic DA algorithm (Gale and Shapley, 1962), our problem involves type-specific and total quota
 requirements for each firm. Can we find a stable matching algorithm that satisfies these constraints
 while also adapting to unknown preferences? Furthermore, can this algorithm be applied in large
 markets with efficiency? We address these challenges by proposing a novel algorithm, double
 matching, that effectively balances exploration and exploitation while can also be partially parallel
 implemented.

  3     A LGORITHMS
 In this section, we propose the Multi-agent Multi-type Thompson Sampling algorithm (MMTS),
 which aims to learn the true preferences of all firms over all types of workers, achieve stable matchings,
 and maximize the firms’ Bayesian expected reward. We provide a detailed description of the algorithm
 and demonstrate its benefits of using TS. Besides, we also discuss the computational complexity of
 MMTS in Appendix B.

  3.1   A LGORITHM D ESCRIPTION

 The MMTS in Algorithm 1 is composed of four stages, sampling stage, double matching stage,
 collecting reward stage, and updating belief stage. The common knowledge for centralized platform
 is the time horizon T , the number of participants, workers’ preference {⇡ m }M
                                                                               m=1 , and firms’ learning
 priors {(↵m,0
             i  ,  m,0 M
                   i  )}  m=1 , 8i 2 [N ]. Then at each matching step t, MMTS   iterates these four steps.
  Step 1: Sampling Stage. For each firm pi , it samples the estimated mean reward µ̂m           i,j (t) for
  m type worker am     j  from  a specific distribution P m
                                                          j (e.g.,  Gaussian  or beta distribution)   with
                           m,t 1    m,t 1
  learned parameters (↵i,j , i,j          ) from the previous time step t        1, which is µ̂i,j (t) ⇠
                                                                                                m
       m,t 1    m,t 1
  P(↵i,j     , i,j    ), 8i 2 [N ], 8m 2 [M ], 8j 2 [Km ]. Besides, for the firm pi , it sorts these
                                                                        Km
  type-specific workers based on the sampled mean reward {µ̂m   i,j (t)}j=1 in descending order and gets
                        m
  the estimated rank r̂i (t) for m type workers. After that, all firms submit their estimated ranks to
  the centralized platform. The above steps are shown in Algorithm 2.
  Step 2: Double matching stage. With the shared estimated mean rewards µ̂(t) := {µ̂m        i,j (t)}i,j,m
  and estimated ranks r̂(t) := {r̂m
                                  i (t)} i,m from firms at time t, the double matching   algorithm   takes
  these ranks and quota constraints from firms as input and match firms and workers in two-stage
  matchings as shown in Algorithm 3. The goal of the first match is to allow all firms to satisfy their
  minimum type-specific quota qim first. The second match is to fill the left-over positions Q̃i (defined
  below) for each firm and match firms and workers without type consideration. Before implementing
  the second match, we have to sanitize the status quo as a priori.
 First Match: The platform implements the type-specific DA in Appendix Algorithm 4 given quota
 requirement {qim }M
                   m=1 , 8i 2 [N ]. The matching road map starts from matching all firms with type
 from 1 to M and returns the matching result {ũm
                                                t (pi )}m2[M ] , which can be implemented in parallel.


                                                     5
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


  Algorithm 2: Sampling Stage
  Input :Time horizon T ; firms’ priors (↵m,0 i   , m,0
                                                    i    ), 8i 2 [N ], 8m 2 [M ].
                                                 m,t  1    m,t 1
1 Sample: Sample mean reward µ̂i,j (t) ⇠ P(↵i,j
                                 m
                                                        , i,j    ), 8i 2 [N ], 8m 2 [M ], 8j 2 [Km ].
                                                                                                m
2 Sort: Sort estimated mean rewards µ̂i,j (t) in descending order and get the estimated rank r̂i (t).
                                      m
                               m                                           m
3 Output: The estimated rank r̂i (t) and the estimated mean rewards µ̂i (t), 8i 2 [N ], m 2 [M ].


   Algorithm 3: Double Matching
   Input :firms’ estimated rank r̂m                                m
                                       i (t), estimated mean µ̂i (t), type quota qi , 8m 2 [M ], i 2 [N ]
                                                                                       m

               and total quota Qi , 8i 2 [N ]; workers’ preference {⇡ m }m2[M ] .
 1 S TEP 1: F IRST M ATCH
 2      Submit all firms’ estimated ranks r̂m  i (t) and all workers’ preferences ⇡ to the platform.
                                                                                         m

 3      Run the firm choice DA in Algo 4 and return the matching ũt (pi ) for firms over all types.
                                                                               m

 4 S TEP 2: S ANITIZE Q UOTA
 5      Sanitize whether all firms’ positions have been filled. For each company pi , if
            PM                                                      PM
               m=1 qi > 0, set the left quota as Q̃i                    m=1 qi for firm pi .
                      m                                                        m
     Qi                                                     Qi
 6 S TEP 3: S ECOND M ATCH

 7 if Q̃ 6= 0 then

 8      Submit left quota {Q̃i }i2[N ] , estimated means µ̂(t), and workers’ preferences {⇡ m }m2[M ]
          to the centralized platform. Run the firm choice DA Algo 5 and return the matching ŭt (pi ).
 9 else
10      Set the matching ŭt (pi ) = ;.
   Output :The matching um     t (pi )    Merge(ũm t (pi ), ŭt (pi )) for all firms.


  Sanitize Quota: After Step 1’s first match, the centralized platform will sanitize each firm’s left-over
                     PM
  quota Q̃i = Qi        m=1 qi , 8i 2 [N ]. If there exists a firm pi , s.t., Q̃i > 0, then the platform will
                              m

  step into the second match. For those firms like pi whose leftover quota is zero Q̃i = 0, their matched
  workers will skip the second match.
  Second Match: When rest firms and workers continue to join in the second match, the centralized
  platform implements the standard DA in Algorithm 5 without type consideration. That is, each
  firm will re-rank the rest M types of workers who do not have a match in the first match, and fill
  available vacant positions. It is worth noting that in Algorithm 5, each firm will not propose to the
  previous workers who rejected him/her and already matched worked in Step 1. Then firm pi gets
  the corresponding matched workers ŭt (pi ) in the second match. Finally, the centralized platform
  merges the first and second results to obtain a final matching for firm pi with m type worker
  umt (pi ) = Merge(ũt (pi ), ŭt (pi )), 8i 2 [N ], m 2 [M ] at time step t.
                      m

  Step 3: Collecting Rewards Stage. When the platform broadcasts the matching result um    t (pi ) to all
  firms, each firm then receives its corresponding stochastic reward ym
                                                                      i (t), 8i 2 [N ], m 2 [M ].

  Step 4: Updating Belief Stage. After receiving these noisy rewards, firms update their belief (poste-
  rior) parameters as follows, (↵m,t m,t
                                 i , i ) = Update(↵i
                                                       m,t 1
                                                             , m,t
                                                                i
                                                                    1
                                                                      , ym
                                                                         i (t)), 8i 2 [N ], 8m 2 [M ].

  In summary, Algorithm 2 samples mean rewards and ranks based on historical matching data.
  Algorithm 3 computes the stable matching based on the estimated rewards and ranks from the
  sampling step. Step 3 (collecting rewards) and Step 4 (updating belief) update learning parameters
  based on received feedback from the assigned matching.

  3.2    I NCAPABLE E XPLORATION
  We show why the TS has an advantage over the UCB style method in estimating the ranks of workers.
  We even find that centralized UCB does achieve linear firm-optimal stable regret in some cases and
  show it in Appendix C with detailed experimental setting and analysis.Why TS is capable of avoiding
  the curse of linear regret? By the property of sampling shown in Algorithm 2. Firm pi ’s initial
  prior over worker ai is a uniform random variable, and thus rj (t) > ri (t) with probability µ̂j ⇡ µj ,


                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


rather than zero! This differs from the UCB style method, which cannot update ai ’s upper bound
due to lacking exploration over ai . The benefit of TS is that it can occasionally explore different
ranking patterns, especially when there exists such a previous example. In Figure 2(a), we show
a quick comparison of centralized UCB (Liu et al., 2020) in the settings shown above and MMTS
when M = 1, Q = 1, N = 3, K = 3. The UCB method occurs a linear regret for firm 1 and firm 2.
However, TS method suffers a sublinear regret in firm 1 and firm 2.

4     P ROPERTIES OF MMTS: S TABILITY AND R EGRET
In Section 4.1, we demonstrated the double matching technique providing the stability property for
CMCP. Then we established the Bayesian regret upper bound for all firms when they follow the
MMTS in Section 4.2. And we discussed the incentive-compatibility of the MMTS in Appendix G.

4.1   S TABILITY

In the following theorem, we show the double matching technique can provide stable matching
solution based on preferences from the firms’ preferences over multiple types of workers provided by
the MMTS and fixed and known preferences from workers.
Theorem 4.1. Given two sides’ strict preferences from firms and M types of workers. The double-
matching procedure can provide a firm-optimal stable matching solution 8t 2 [T ].
Proof. The detailed proof can be found in Appendix Section E.
Remark. The sketch proof of the stability property of MMTS is two steps, naturally following the
design of MMTS. The first match is conducted in parallel, and the output is stable and guaranteed by
(Gale and Shapley, 1962). As the need of MMTS, before the second match, firms without leftover
quotas (Q̃ = 0) will quit the second round of matching, which will not affect the stability. After
the quota sanitizing stage, firms and leftover workers will continue to join in the second matching
stage, where firms do no need to consider the type of workers designed by double matching. And
the standard DA algorithm will provide a stable result based on each firm’s sub-preference list. The
reason is that for firm pi , all previous possible favorite workers have been proposed in the first match.
If they are matched in the first match, they quit together, which won’t affect the stability property;
otherwise, the worker has a better candidate (firm) and has already rejected the firm pi . So for each
firm pi , it only needs to consider a sub-preference list excluding the already matched workers in the
first match and the proposed workers in the first match. It will provide a stable match in the second
match and won’t be affected by the first match. So the overall double matching is a stable algorithm.

4.2   BAYESIAN R EGRET U PPER B OUND

Next we provide the MMTS algorithm’s Bayesian total cumulative firm-optimal regret upper bound.
                                                              PM
Theorem 4.2. Assume Kmax = max{K1 , ..., KM }, K = m=1 Km , with probability 1 1/QT ,
when all firms follow p the MMTS algorithm, firms together will suffer the Bayesian expected regret
R(T )  8Q log(QT ) Kmax T + N K/Q.
Proof. The detailed proof can be found in Appendix F.
Remark. The derived Bayesian regret bound, which is dependent on the square root of the time
horizon T and a logarithmic term, is nearly rate-optimal. Additionally, we examine the dependence of
this regret bound on other key parameters. The first of which is a near-linear dependency on the total
quota Q. Secondly, the regret bound is dependent only on the square root of the maximum worker
                                                                 PM
Kmax of one type, as opposed to the total number of workers, m=1 Km in previous literature (Liu
et al., 2020; Jagadeesan et al., 2021). This highlights the ability of our proposed algorithm, MMTS,
to effectively capture the interactions of multiple types of matching in CMCP. The second term in the
regret is a constant which is only dependent on constants N, K and the total quota Q. Notably, if we
assume that each qi = 1 and Qi = M , then N K/Q will be reduced to N K/(N M ) = K/M , which
is an unavoidable regret term due to the exploration in bandits (Lattimore and Szepesvári, 2020).
This also demonstrates that the Bayesian total cumulative firm-optimal exploration regret is only
dependent on the average number of workers of each type available in the market, as opposed to the
total number of workers or the maximum number of workers available of all types. Additionally, if
one Qi is dominant over other firms’ Qi , then the regret will mainly be determined by that dominant
quota Qi and Kmax , highlighting the inter-dependence of this complementary matching problem.


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5     E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we present simulation results to demonstrate the effectiveness of MMTS in learning the
unknown preferences of firms. The overall experiment setup can be found in Appendix I. In Section
5.1, we present two examples and analyze the underlying causes of the interesting phenomenon of
negative regret. In Appendix I.2, we showcase the learning parameters from MMTS and provide
insight into the reasons for non-optimal stable matchings. Additionally, we demonstrate the robustness
of MMTS in large markets in Appendix I.3. All simulation results are run in 100 trials.

5.1   T WO E XAMPLES

Example 1. There are N = 2 firms, M = 2 types of workers, and there are Km = 5 free workers
for each type. The quota qim for each type and each firm pi is 2, and the total quota/capacity for each
firm is Qi = 5. The time horizon is T = 2000.
Preferences. True preferences from all types of workers to firms and from firms to different types of
workers are all randomly generated. Workers to firms’ preferences {⇡ m }Mm=1 are fixed and known.
We use the data scientist (D/DS) and software developer engineer (S/SDE) as our example. The
following are randomly generated true preferences for two-sided participants,
         D 1 : p1    p2 ,    D 2 : p1     p2 ,   D 3 : p2   p1 ,   D 4 : p1    p2 ,   D 5 : p2     p1 ,
         S 1 : p1    p2 ,    S 2 : p1     p2 ,   S 3 : p2   p1 ,   S 4 : p2    p1 ,   S 5 : p1     p2 ,
                                                                                                             (3)
         ⇡11 : D4     D2      D3     D5      D1 ,      ⇡12 : S1    S4     S5     S2    S3 ,
         ⇡21 : D2     D3      D1     D5      D4 ,      ⇡22 : S4    S2     S5     S1    S3 .
The true matching reward of each worker for the firm is randomly generated from the uniform
distribution U ([0, 1]), and shown in Appendix Table 1. In addition, noisy reward yi,j          m
                                                                                                   (t) received
(0 or 1) by each firm is generated by the Bernoulli distribution yi,j  m
                                                                          (t) ⇠ Ber(µm  i,j (t)), where  µm
                                                                                                          i,j (t)
is the true matching reward at time t. If two sides’ preferences are known, the firm optimal stable
matching is ū1 = {[D2 , D4 ], [S5 , S1 , S3 ]}, ū2 = {[D3 , D1 , D5 ], [S4 , S2 ]} by the double matching
algorithm. However, if firms’ preferences are unknown, MMTS can learn these unknown preferences
and attain the optimal stable matching while achieving a sublinear regret for each firm.
                                      m,0      m,0
MMTS Parameters. We set priors ↵i,j       = i,j    = 0.1, 8i 2 [N ], 8j 2 [Km ], 8m 2 [M ] to avoid
too strong impact of the prior information. Each firm follows the MMTS algorithm to propose
multiple types of workers. The update formula for each firm pi at time t of the m-type worker am          j
      m,t+1     m,t
is ↵i,j     = ↵i,j  + 1 if the worker amj is matched with  the firm p i , that is a m
                                                                                    j  2 u m
                                                                                           t (p i ), and the
                                                          m,t+1       m,t      m,t+1        m,t
received reward for firm pi is yi,j
                                 m
                                    (t) = 1; otherwise ↵i,j      = ↵i,j    ; i,j       = i,j     + 1 if the
worker am j is matched with the firm pi and the received reward for firm pi is yi,j (t) = 0, otherwise
                                                                                     m
  m,t+1      m,t
  i,j     = i,j  . For other unmatched pairs (firm, m type worker), the parameters retain.
Results. In Figure 2(b), we find that firm 1, 2 achieve a total negative sublinear regret and a total
positive sublinear regret separately (solid lines). However, we find that due to the incorrect rankings
provided by firms, firm 1 benefits from this non-optimal matching result in terms of negative sublinear
regret specifically for matching with type 1 workers (blue dashed line). More discussion about the
negative regret phenomenon is available in Appendix I.1.
Example 2. We enlarge the market by expanding the DS market, particularly wanting to explore
interactions between two types of workers. N = 2 firms, M = 2 types, K1 = 20 (DS) and K2 = 6
(SDE). The DS quota for two firms is q11 = q21 = 1 and the SDE quota for two firms is q12 = q22 = 3,
and the total quota is Qi = 6 for both firms. Preferences from firms to workers and workers to firms
are randomly generated. Therefore, the matching result for each firm should consist of three workers
for each type, and type II workers will be fully allocated in the first match, and the rest workers are
all type II workers. All MMTS initial parameters are the same as in Example 1.
Results. In Figure 2(c), we show when excessive type II workers exist, and type I workers are
just right. Both firms can achieve positive sublinear regret. We find that since type II worker
K2 = q12 + q22 = 6, which means in the first match stage, those type II workers are fully allocated into
two firms. Thus, in the second match stage, the left quota would be all allocated to the type I workers


                                                       8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 2: Left: A comparison of centralized UCB and TS. Right: firms and their sub-types regret for
Example 1 and, firms and their sub-types regret for Example 2.


for two firms. Two dotted lines represent type II regret suffered by two firms. Both firms can quickly
find the type II optimal matching since finding the optimal type II match just needs the first stage of
the match. However, the type I workers’ matching takes a longer time to find the optimal matching
(take two stages), represented by dashed lines, and both are positive sublinear regret. Therefore, these
two types of matching are fully independent, which is different from Example 1.

6    R ELATED W ORKS

We review multiple works in the literature, including matching while learning, multi-agent systems,
assortment optimization, and matching markets. More can be found in Appendix J.
Matching while Learning. Liu et al. (2020) considers the multi-agent multi-armed competing
problem in the centralized platform with explore-then-commit (ETC) and upper confidence bound
(UCB) style algorithms where preferences from agents to arms are unknown and need to be learned
through streaming interactive data. Jagadeesan et al. (2021) considers the two-sided matching
problem where preferences from both sides are defined through dynamic utilities rather than fixed
preferences and provide regret upper bounds over different contexts settings, and Min et al. (2022)
apply it to the Markov matching market. Cen and Shah (2022) show that if there is transfer between
agents, then the three desiderata (stability, low regret, and fairness) can be simultaneously achieved.
Li et al. (2022) discuss the two-sided matching problem when the arm side has dynamic contextual
information and preference is fixed from the arm side and propose a centralized contextual ETC
algorithm to obtain the near-optimal regret bound. Besides, there are a plethora of works discussing
the two-sided matching problem in the decentralized markets (Liu et al., 2021; Basu et al., 2021;
Sankararaman et al., 2021; Dai and Jordan, 2021a;b; Dai et al., 2022). In particular, Dai and Jordan
(2021b) study the college admission problem and provides an optimal strategy for agents, and shows
its incentive-compatible property. Moreover, Jagadeesan et al. (2022) explores the phenomenon of
the two-sided matching problem with two competing markets.


7    C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK

In this paper, we proposed a new algorithm, MMTS to solve the CMCP. MMTS builds on the
strengths of TS for exploration and employs a double matching method to find a stable solution.
Through theoretical analysis, we show the effectiveness of the algorithm in achieving stability at
every matching step, achieving a sublinear Bayesian regret over time, and exhibiting the IC property.
There are several directions for future research. One is to investigate more efficient exploration
strategies to reduce the time required to learn the agents’ unknown preferences. Another is to examine
scenarios where agents have indifferent preferences, and explore the optimal strategy for breaking ties.
Additionally, it is of interest to incorporate real-world constraints such as budget or physical locations
into the matching process, which could be studied using techniques from constrained optimization.
Moreover, it is interesting to incorporate side information, such as agents’ background information,
into the matching process. This can be approached using techniques from recommendation systems or
other machine learning algorithms that incorporate side information. Finally, it would be interesting
to extend the algorithm to handle time-varying matching markets where preferences and the number
of agents may change over time.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
H. Abeledo and U. G. Rothblum. Paths to marriage stability. Discrete applied mathematics, 63(1):
  1–12, 1995.
S. Agrawal and N. Goyal. Analysis of thompson sampling for the multi-armed bandit problem. In
   Conference on learning theory, pages 39–1. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2012.
A. Aouad and D. Saban. Online assortment optimization for two-sided matching platforms. Manage-
  ment Science, 2022.
I. Ashlagi, M. Braverman, and A. Hassidim. Matching with couples revisited. In Proceedings of the
   12th ACM conference on Electronic commerce, pages 335–336, 2011.
I. Ashlagi, A. K. Krishnaswamy, R. Makhijani, D. Saban, and K. Shiragur. Assortment planning for
   two-sided sequential matching markets. Operations Research, 70(5):2784–2803, 2022.
P. Auer and R. Ortner. Logarithmic online regret bounds for undiscounted reinforcement learning.
   Advances in neural information processing systems, 19, 2006.
P. Auer, N. Cesa-Bianchi, Y. Freund, and R. E. Schapire. Gambling in a rigged casino: The adversarial
   multi-armed bandit problem. In Proceedings of IEEE 36th annual foundations of computer science,
   pages 322–331. IEEE, 1995.
E. M. Azevedo and J. W. Hatfield. Existence of equilibrium in large matching markets with comple-
   mentarities. Available at SSRN 3268884, 2018.
H. Aziz, J. Chen, S. Gaspers, and Z. Sun. Stability and pareto optimality in refugee allocation
  matchings. In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and
  MultiAgent Systems, pages 964–972, 2018.
S. Basu, K. A. Sankararaman, and A. Sankararaman. Beyond log2 (t) regret for decentralized bandits
   in matching markets. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 705–715. PMLR,
   2021.
P. Biró, D. F. Manlove, and I. McBride. The hospitals/residents problem with couples: Complexity
   and integer programming models. In International Symposium on Experimental Algorithms, pages
   10–21. Springer, 2014.
N. Boehmer and K. Heeger. A fine-grained view on stable many-to-one matching problems with
  lower and upper quotas. ACM Transactions on Economics and Computation, 10(2):1–53, 2022.
S. H. Cen and D. Shah. Regret, stability & fairness in matching markets with bandit learners. In
   International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pages 8938–8968. PMLR, 2022.
Y.-K. Che, J. Kim, and F. Kojima. Stable matching in large economies. Econometrica, 87(1):65–110,
   2019.
X. Dai and M. Jordan. Learning in multi-stage decentralized matching markets. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 34:12798–12809, 2021a.
X. Dai and M. I. Jordan. Learning strategies in decentralized matching markets under uncertain
  preferences. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22:260–1, 2021b.
X. Dai, Y. Qi, and M. I. Jordan. Incentive-aware recommender systems in two-sided markets. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2211.15381, 2022.
L. E. Dubins and D. A. Freedman. Machiavelli and the gale-shapley algorithm. The American
  Mathematical Monthly, 88(7):485–494, 1981.
T. Fiez, B. Chasnov, and L. J. Ratliff. Convergence of learning dynamics in stackelberg games. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:1906.01217, 2019.
D. Gale and L. S. Shapley. College admissions and the stability of marriage. The American
  Mathematical Monthly, 69(1):9–15, 1962.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D. González-Sánchez and O. Hernández-Lerma. Discrete–time stochastic control and dynamic
  potential games: the Euler–Equation approach. Springer Science & Business Media, 2013.
M. Greinecker and C. Kah. Pairwise stable matching in large economies. Econometrica, 89(6):
 2929–2974, 2021.
J. Hadad and A. Teytelboym. Improving refugee resettlement: insights from market design. Oxford
   Review of Economic Policy, 38(3):434–448, 2022.
N. Immorlica, B. Lucier, V. Manshadi, and A. Wei. Designing approximately optimal search on
  matching platforms. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM Conference on Economics and Computation,
  pages 632–633, 2021.
M. Jagadeesan, A. Wei, Y. Wang, M. Jordan, and J. Steinhardt. Learning equilibria in matching
 markets from bandit feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:3323–3335,
 2021.
M. Jagadeesan, M. I. Jordan, and N. Haghtalab. Competition, alignment, and equilibria in digital
 marketplaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.14423, 2022.
C. Jin, P. Netrapalli, and M. Jordan. What is local optimality in nonconvex-nonconcave minimax
  optimization? In International conference on machine learning, pages 4880–4889. PMLR, 2020.
B. Klaus and F. Klijn. Stable matchings and preferences of couples. Journal of Economic Theory,
  121(1):75–106, 2005.
D. E. Knuth. Marriages stables. Technical report, 1976.
D. E. Knuth. Stable marriage and its relation to other combinatorial problems: An introduction to
  the mathematical analysis of algorithms, volume 10. American Mathematical Soc., 1997.
J. Komiyama, J. Honda, and H. Nakagawa. Optimal regret analysis of thompson sampling in
   stochastic multi-armed bandit problem with multiple plays. In International Conference on
   Machine Learning, pages 1152–1161. PMLR, 2015.
T. Lattimore and C. Szepesvári. Bandit algorithms. Cambridge University Press, 2020.
Y. Li, C.-h. Wang, G. Cheng, and W. W. Sun. Rate-optimal contextual online matching bandit. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2205.03699, 2022.
M. L. Littman. Markov games as a framework for multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Machine
 learning proceedings 1994, pages 157–163. Elsevier, 1994.
M. L. Littman. Value-function reinforcement learning in markov games. Cognitive systems research,
  2(1):55–66, 2001.
L. T. Liu, H. Mania, and M. Jordan. Competing bandits in matching markets. In International
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pages 1618–1628. PMLR, 2020.
L. T. Liu, F. Ruan, H. Mania, and M. I. Jordan. Bandit learning in decentralized matching markets. J.
  Mach. Learn. Res., 22:211–1, 2021.
D. F. Manlove, I. McBride, and J. Trimble. “almost-stable” matchings in the hospitals/residents
  problem with couples. Constraints, 22(1):50–72, 2017.
Y. Min, T. Wang, R. Xu, Z. Wang, M. I. Jordan, and Z. Yang. Learn to match with no regret:
  Reinforcement learning in markov matching markets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.03684, 2022.
T. Nguyen and R. Vohra. Near-feasible stable matchings with couples. American Economic Review,
   108(11):3154–69, 2018.
T. Nguyen and R. Vohra. Complementarities and externalities. 2022.
J. Perolat, B. Piot, and O. Pietquin. Actor-critic fictitious play in simultaneous move multistage
   games. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pages 919–928. PMLR,
   2018.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I. Rios, D. Saban, and F. Zheng. Improving match rates in dating markets through assortment
   optimization. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 2022.
A. E. Roth. The economics of matching: Stability and incentives. Mathematics of operations research,
  7(4):617–628, 1982.
A. E. Roth. The college admissions problem is not equivalent to the marriage problem. Journal of
  economic Theory, 36(2):277–288, 1985.
A. E. Roth. On the allocation of residents to rural hospitals: a general property of two-sided matching
  markets. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, pages 425–427, 1986.
A. E. Roth. Deferred acceptance algorithms: History, theory, practice, and open questions. interna-
  tional Journal of game Theory, 36(3):537–569, 2008.
A. E. Roth and M. Sotomayor. Two-sided matching. Handbook of game theory with economic
  applications, 1:485–541, 1992.
D. Russo and B. Van Roy. Eluder dimension and the sample complexity of optimistic exploration.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 26, 2013.
D. Russo and B. Van Roy. Learning to optimize via posterior sampling. Mathematics of Operations
  Research, 39(4):1221–1243, 2014.
D. J. Russo, B. Van Roy, A. Kazerouni, I. Osband, Z. Wen, et al. A tutorial on thompson sampling.
  Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning, 11(1):1–96, 2018.
A. Sankararaman, S. Basu, and K. A. Sankararaman. Dominate or delete: Decentralized competing
  bandits in serial dictatorship. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
  pages 1252–1260. PMLR, 2021.
C. Shi, R. Wan, G. Song, S. Luo, R. Song, and H. Zhu. A multi-agent reinforcement learning
  framework for off-policy evaluation in two-sided markets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.10574, 2022.
P. Shi. Optimal matchmaking strategy in two-sided marketplaces. Management Science, 2022.
T. Sönmez. Manipulation via capacities in two-sided matching markets. Journal of Economic theory,
   77(1):197–204, 1997.
W. R. Thompson. On the likelihood that one unknown probability exceeds another in view of the
  evidence of two samples. Biometrika, 25(3-4):285–294, 1933.
K. Tomoeda. Finding a stable matching under type-specific minimum quotas. Journal of Economic
  Theory, 176:81–117, 2018.
C.-Y. Wei, Y.-T. Hong, and C.-J. Lu. Online reinforcement learning in stochastic games. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
K. Zhang, Z. Yang, H. Liu, T. Zhang, and T. Basar. Finite-sample analyses for fully decentralized
  multi-agent reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.02783, 2018.
H. Zhong, Z. Yang, Z. Wang, and M. I. Jordan. Can reinforcement learning find stackelberg-nash
  equilibria in general-sum markov games with myopic followers? arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.13521,
  2021.
M. Zinkevich, M. Johanson, M. Bowling, and C. Piccione. Regret minimization in games with
 incomplete information. Advances in neural information processing systems, 20, 2007.


                                                  12
