Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L INEARITY OF R ELATION D ECODING IN
T RANSFORMER L ANGUAGE M ODELS
 Evan Hernandez1∗                   Arnab Sen Sharma2∗            Tal Haklay3                  Kevin Meng1
 Martin Wattenberg4                 Jacob Andreas1                Yonatan Belinkov3            David Bau2



                                                   A BSTRACT

             Much of the knowledge encoded in transformer language models (LMs) may be ex-
             pressed in terms of relations: relations between words and their synonyms, entities
             and their attributes, etc. We show that, for a subset of relations, this computation is
             well-approximated by a single linear transformation on the subject representation.
             Linear relation representations may be obtained by constructing a first-order approx-
             imation to the LM from a single prompt, and they exist for a variety of factual, com-
             monsense, and linguistic relations. However, we also identify many cases in which
             LM predictions capture relational knowledge accurately, but this knowledge is not
             linearly encoded in their representations. Our results thus reveal a simple, inter-
             pretable, but heterogeneously deployed knowledge representation strategy in LMs.

1       I NTRODUCTION
How do neural language models (LMs) represent relations between entities? LMs store a wide variety
of factual information in their weights, including facts about real world entities (e.g., John Adams was
elected President of the United States in 1796) and common-sense knowledge about the world (e.g.,
doctors work in hospitals). Much of this knowledge can be represented in terms of relations between
entities, properties, or lexical items. For example, the fact that Miles Davis is a trumpet player can
be written as a relation (plays the instrument), connecting a subject entity (Miles Davis), with an
object entity (trumpet). Categorically similar facts can be expressed in the same type of relation, as
in e.g., (Carol Jantsch, plays the instrument, tuba). Prior studies of LMs (Li et al., 2021; Meng et al.,
2022; Hernandez et al., 2023) have offered evidence that subject tokens act as keys for retrieving
facts: after an input text mentions a subject, LMs construct enriched representations of subjects that
encode information about those subjects. Recent studies of interventions (Hase et al., 2023) and
attention mechanisms (Geva et al., 2023) suggest that the mechanism for retrieval of specific facts is
complex, distributed across multiple layers and attention heads. Past work establishes where relational
information is located: LMs extract relation and object information from subject representations. But
these works have not yet described what computation LMs perform while resolving relations.
In this paper, we show that LMs employ a simple system for representing a portion of their relational
knowledge: they implicitly implement (an affine version of) a linear relational embedding (LRE)
scheme (Paccanaro & Hinton, 2001). Given a relation r such as plays the instrument, a linear relational
embedding is an affine function LRE (s) = Wr s + br that maps any subject representation s in the
domain of the relation (e.g., Miles Davis, Carol Jantsch) to the corresponding object representation
o (e.g., trumpet, tuba). In LMs, the inputs to these implicit LREs are hidden representations of
subjects at intermediate layers, and their outputs are hidden representations at late layers that can be
decoded to distributions over next tokens. Thus, a portion of transformer LMs’ (highly non-linear)
computation can be well-approximated linearly in contexts requiring relation prediction.
More specifically, we find that for a variety of relations: (a) transformer LMs decode relational
knowledge directly from subject entity representations (s in Figure 1); (b) for each such relation,
the decoding procedure is approximately affine (LRE); and (c) these affine transformations can be
computed directly from the LM Jacobian on a prompt expressing the relation (i.e. ∂o/∂s). However,
this is not the only system that transformer LMs use to encode relational knowledge, and we also
identify relations that are reliably predicted in LM outputs, but for which no LRE can be found.
    1
        Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2 Northeastern University, 3 Technion IIT, 4 Harvard University.
    * Equal contribution. Correspondence to: dez@mit.edu, sensharma.a@northeastern.edu.


                                                          1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                  Miles                                       Miles
                           resolve                                          resolve
                           subject                                          subject
                                                                               s
                 Davis        s
                                     s                        Davis                       s


                  plays                                         R : s→o                linear
                                                             Relation r can be            R
                                                              represented as a                     (b)
                                                                                         plays
                                                             linear function R        instrument
                    the                              o

                                            (a)    trumpet
                                                                                          o     trumpet
Figure 1: Within a transformer language model, (a) how it resolves many relations r, such as plays the
instrument, can be well-approximated by (b) a linear function R that maps subject representations s to object
representations o that can be directly decoded.

In GPT and LLaMA models, we search for LREs encoding 47 different relations, covering more than
10k facts relating famous entities (The Space Needle, is located in, Seattle), commonsense knowledge
(banana, has color, yellow), and implicit biases (doctor, has gender, man). In 48% of the relations
we tested, we find robust LREs that faithfully recover subject–object mappings for a majority of the
subjects. Furthermore, we find that LREs can be used to edit subject representations (Hernandez
et al., 2023) to control LM output.
Finally, we use our dataset and LRE-estimating method to build a visualization tool we call an
attribute lens. Instead of showing the next token distribution like Logit Lens (nostalgebraist, 2020)
the attribute lens shows the object-token distribution at each layer for a given relation. This lets us
visualize where and when the LM finishes retrieving knowledge about a specific relation, and can
reveal the presence of knowledge about attributes even when that knowledge does not reach the output.
Our results highlight two important facts about transformer LMs. First, some of their implicit knowl-
edge is representated in a simple, interpretable, and structured format. Second, this representation
system is not universally deployed, and superficially similar facts may be encoded and extracted in
very different ways.

2     BACKGROUND : R ELATIONS AND T HEIR R EPRESENTATIONS
2.1   R EPRESENTATIONS OF KNOWLEDGE IN LANGUAGE MODELS
For LMs to generate factually correct statements, factual information must be represented somewhere
in their weights. In transformer LMs, past work has suggested that most factual information is
encoded in the multi-layer perceptron layers (Geva et al., 2020). These layers act as key–value
stores, and work together across multiple layers to enrich the representation of an entity with relevant
knowledge (Geva et al., 2022). For instance, in the example from Figure 1, the representation s of
Miles Davis goes through an enrichment process where LM populates s with the fact that he plays
the trumpet as well as other facts, like him being born in Alton, IL. By the halfway point of the LM’s
computation, s contains all the information needed to predict a fact about the subject entity when the
LM is prompted to retrieve it.
Once s is populated with relevant facts, the LM must decode the fact most relevant to its current
prediction task. Formally, a language model is a distribution pLM (x) over strings x, so this information
must be retrieved when the LM is prompted to decode a specific fact, such as when it estimates pLM (· |
Miles Davis plays the). Internally, the object must be decoded and written into the final representation
o before the next word (trumpet) is predicted. Techniques like the logit lens (nostalgebraist, 2020)
and linear shortcut approaches (Belrose et al., 2023; Din et al., 2023) reveal that the LM’s final
prediction can be read off of o well before the final layer, and recent work (Geva et al., 2023) suggests
that this occurs because specific attention heads (before the final layer) specialize in reading specific
relations. Meanwhile, prior work studying the structure of s suggests that even though transformers
are complex, non-linear neural networks, attributes of entities can be linearly decoded from their
representations (Li et al., 2021; Hernandez et al., 2023).
But how transformer LMs themselves map from enriched entity representations to language-based
predictions has remained an open question. Here, we will show that for a subset of relations the
transformer LMs implement the learned readout operation in a near-linear fashion.


                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2.2       N EURAL REPRESENTATIONS OF RELATIONS

Why might we expect a linear representation scheme for relational information in the first place?
Separate from (and largely prior to) work on neural language models, a long line of artificial
intelligence research has studied how to represent relational knowledge. A classic symbolic approach
is to encode relational knowledge triplets of the form (subject, relation, object). For example, one
might express the fact that Rome is the capital of Italy as (Rome, is-capital-of, Italy). This triplet
format is extremely flexible, and has been used for a variety of tasks (Richens, 1956; Minsky, 1974;
Lenat, 1995; Miller, 1995; Berners-Lee et al., 2001; Bollacker et al., 2008).
While representing relational triplets symbolically is straightforward, it is far less clear how to embed
these relational structures in deep networks or other connectionist systems. Surveys (Ji et al., 2021;
Wang et al., 2017) list more than 40 techniques. These variations reflect the tension between the
constraints of geometry and the flexibility of the triplet representation. In many approaches, subject
and object entities s and o are represented as vectors s ∈ Rm , o ∈ Rn ; for a given relation r, we
define a relation function R : Rm → Rn , with the property that when (s, r, o) holds, we have
o ≈ R(s).
One way to implement R is to use linear transformations to represent relations. For instance, in linear
relational embedding (Paccanaro & Hinton, 2001), the relation function has the form R(s) = Wr s
where Wr is a matrix depending on relation r. A modern example of this encoding can be seen in the
positional encodings of many transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017). More generally, we can write R
as an affine transformation, learning both a linear operator Wr and a translation br (Lin et al., 2015;
Yang et al., 2021). There are multiple variations on this idea, but the basic relation function is:
                                                     R(s) = Wr s + br .                                           (1)

3       F INDING AND VALIDATING L INEAR R ELATIONAL E MBEDDINGS
3.1       F INDING LRE S

Consider a statement such as Miles Davis plays the trumpet, which expresses a fact (s, r, o) connecting
a subject s to an object o via relation r (see Figure 1). Within the transformer’s hidden states, let s
denote the representation5 of the subject s (Miles Davis) at layer ℓ, and let o denote the last-layer
hidden state that is directly decoded to get the prediction of the object’s first token o (trumpet). The
transformer implements a calculation that obtains o from s within a textual context c that evokes the
relation r, which we can write o = F (s, c).
Our main hypothesis is that F (s, c) can be well-approximated by a linear projection, which can be
obtained from a local derivative of F . Denote the Jacobian of F as W = ∂F/∂s. Then a first-order
Taylor approximation of F about s0 is given by:
                                          F (s, c) ≈ F (s0 , c) + W (s − s0 )
                                                   = W s + b,                                                     (2)
                                          where b = F (s0 , c) − W s0
This approximation would only be reasonable if F has near-linear behavior when decoding the
relation from any s. In practice, we estimate W and b as the mean Jacobian and bias at n examples
si , ci within the same relation, which gives an unbiased estimate under the assumption that noise in
F has zero value and zero Jacobian in expectation (see Appendix B). That is, we define:

                                  "                  #                     "                             #
                                      ∂F                                                  ∂F
                    W = Esi ,ci                          and b = Esi ,ci       F (s, c) −    s                    (3)
                                      ∂s (si ,ci )                                        ∂s (si ,ci )

This simple formulation has several limitations that arise due to the use of layer normalization
(Ba et al., 2016) in the transformer: for example, s is passed through layer normalization before
contributing to the computation of o, and o is again passed through layer normalization before leading
    5
        Following insights from Meng et al. (2022) and Geva et al. (2023), we read s at the last token of the subject.


                                                               3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


to token predictions, so in both cases, the transformer does not transmit changes in scale of inputs to
changes in scale of outputs. That means that even if Equation 2 is a good estimate of the direction of
change of F , it may not be an accurate estimate of the magnitude of change.
In practice, we find that the magnitude of change in F (s, c) is underestimated in our calculated
W (see Appendix C for empirical measurements). To remedy this underestimation we make W
in Equation (2) steeper by multiplying with a scalar constant β (> 1). So, for a relation r we
approximate the transformer calculation F (s, cr ) as an affine transformation LRE on s:
                                          F (s, cr ) ≈ LRE(s) = β Wr s + br                                            (4)

3.2         E VALUATING LRE S

When a linear relation operator LRE is a good approximation of the transformer’s decoding algorithm,
it should satisfy two properties:

Faithfulness. When applied to new subjects s, the output of LRE(s) should make the same
predictions as the transformer. Given the LM’s decoder head D, we define the transformer prediction
o and LRE prediction ô as:
                         o = argmax D(F (s, c))t and ô = argmax D(LRE(s))t
                                    t                                           t

                                                                     ?
And we define faithfulness as the success rate of o = ô, i.e., the frequency with which predictions
made by LRE from only s match next-token predictions made by the full transformer:
                                                             ?
                                 argmax D(F (s, c))t = argmax D(LRE(s))t                                               (5)
                                     t                                   t


Causality. If a learned LRE is a good description of the LM’s decoding procedure, it should be
able to model causal influence of the relational embedding on the LM’s predictions. If it does, then
inverting LRE tells us how to perturb s so that the LM decodes a different object o′ . Formally, given
a new object o′ , we use LRE to find an edit direction ∆s that satisfies:
                                                 LRE(s + ∆s) = o′                                                      (6)
With β = 1, we can edit s as follows:6
                                    s̃ = s + ∆s, where ∆s = Wr−1 (o′ − o)                                              (7)
We obtain o′ from a different subject s′ that is mapped by F to o′ under the relation r. s̃ here is
essentially an approximation of s′ . Figure 2 illustrates this procedure.

 Miles                             Cat                       (c)      LRE (Wr , b r )                      s~ = s + Δs
                                                                                                  Miles
 Davis              s           Stevens           s'                 r = plays instrument                       (e)
                                                                                                  Davis    s~
  plays                           plays
                                                                                                  plays
      the                o          the               o'
                                                                         Wr†(o'- o) = Δs            the        o'
                  (a) trumpet                   (b) guitar                                  (d)
                                                                                                          (f) guitar

Figure 2: Illustration of the representation editing used to measure causality. Under the relation r = plays
the instrument, and given the subject s = Miles Davis, LM will predict o = trumpet (a); and given the subject
s′ = Cat Stevens, the output is o′ = guitar (b). If the computation from s to o is well-approximated by LRE
parameterized by Wr and br (c), then ∆s (d) should tell us the direction of change from s to s′ . Thus, s̃ = s+∆s
would be an approximation of s′ and patching s̃ in place of s should change the prediction to o′ = guitar (f).

Note that Equation (7) requires inverting Wr , but the inverted matrix might be ill-conditioned. To
make edits more effective, we instead use a low-rank pseudoinverse Wr† , which prevents the smaller
singular values from washing out the contributions of the larger, more meaningful singular values.
See Appendix D.2 for details.
   6
       Full derivation in Appendix D.1


                                                                 4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We call the intervention a success if o′ is the top prediction of the LM after the edit:
                                  ?
                               o′ = argmax D(F (s, cr | s := s + ∆s))                                  (8)
                                        t

Note that for both faithfulness and causality we only consider the first token of the object when
determining success. Limitations of this approach are discussed in Appendix I.

4     E XPERIMENTS
We now empirically evaluate how well LREs, estimated using the approach from Section 3, can
approximate relation decoding in LMs for a variety of different relations.
Models. In all of our experiments, we study autoregressive language models. Unless stated
otherwise, reported results are for GPT-J (Wang & Komatsuzaki, 2021), and we include additional
results for GPT-2-XL (Radford et al., 2019) and LLaMA-13B (Touvron et al., 2023) in Appendix H.
Dataset. To support our evaluation, we manually curate a dataset of 47 relations spanning four
categories: factual associations, commonsense knowledge, implicit biases, and linguistic knowledge.
Each relation is associated with a number of example subject–object pairs (si , oi ), as well as a prompt
template that leads the language model to predict o when s is filled in (e.g., [s] plays the). When
evaluating each model, we filter the dataset to examples where the language model correctly predicts
the object o given the prompt. Table 1 summarizes the dataset and filtering results. Further details on
dataset construction are in Appendix A.
                                                   Table 1: Information about the dataset of relations used
Implementation Details. We estimate LREs to evaluate LM relation decoding in LMs. These rela-
for each relation using the method discussed in tions are drawn from a variety of sources. Evaluation
Section 3 with n = 8. While calculating W is always restricted to the subset of (s, r, o) triples for
and b for an individual example we prepend the which the LM successfully decodes o when prompted
remaining n − 1 training examples as few-shot with (s, r).
examples so that the LM is more likely to gen- Category            # Rel. # Examples # GPT-J Corr.
erate the answer o given a s under the relation r
over other plausible tokens. Then, an LRE is es- Factual             26        9696             4652
timated with Equation (3) as the expectation of     Commonsense       8         374              219
W s and b s calculated on n individual examples. Linguistic           6         806              507
                                                        Bias            7        213             96
We fix the scalar term β (from Equation (4))
once per LM. We also have two hyperparameters specific to each relation r; ℓr , the layer after which
s is to be extracted; and ρr , the rank of the inverse W † (to check causality as in Equation (7)). We
select these hyperparameters with grid-search; see Appendix E for details. For each relation, we
report average results over 24 trials with distinct sets of n examples randomly drawn from the dataset.
LREs are evaluated according to faithfulness and causality metrics defined in Equations (5) and (8).

4.1   A RE LRE S FAITHFUL TO RELATIONS ?

We first investigate whether LREs accurately predict the transformer output for different relations,
that is, how faithful they are. Figure 3 shows faithfulness by relation. Our method achieves over 60%
faithfulness for almost half of the relations, indicating that those relations are linearly decodable from
the subject representation.
We are also interested in whether relations are linearly decodable from s by any other method.
Figure 4 compares our method (from Section 3) to four other approaches for estimating linear
relational functions. We first compare with Logit Lens (nostalgebraist, 2020), where s is directly
decoded with the LM decoder head D. This essentially tries to estimate F (s, c) as an Identity
transformation on s. Next, we try to approximate F as T RANSLATION(s) = s + b, where b is
estimated as E[o − s] over n examples. This T RANSLATION baseline, inspired by Merullo et al.
(2023) and traditional word embedding arithmetic (Mikolov et al., 2013), approximates F from the
intermediate representation of the last token of s until o is generated (Figure 1). Then we compare
with a linear regression model trained with n examples to predict o from s. Finally, we apply LRE
on the subject embedding es before initial layers of the LM get to enrich the representation.
Figure 4 shows that our method LRE captures LM behavior most faithfully across all relation types.
This effect is not explained by word identity, as evidenced by the low faithfulness of LRE(es ). Also,


                                                    5
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               1.0
                                                    LRE faithfulness in GPT-J
               0.9
               0.8
Faithfulness   0.7
               0.6
               0.5
               0.4
               0.3
               0.2
               0.1
               0.0
                       adjective comparative
                        adjective superlative

                          country capital city
                           occupation gender

                          country largest city
                               name birthplace


                        characteristic gender
                           adjective antonym


                     star constellation name
                                verb past tense

                             country language
                  substance phase of matter
                             object superclass
                                 name religion
                                  name gender
                            fruit outside color

                                occupation age
                     person native language
                              fruit inside color


                                word last letter
                      landmark on continent
                                plays pro sport


                             person university
                 person lead singer of band
                               word sentiment
                    person plays instrument
                               word first letter
                             country currency

                                 work location
                          president birth year
                     president election year
                           food from country
                           person occupation



                         landmark in country
                              task person type
                                city in country


                        product by company
                             superhero person
                        person sport position

                     superhero archnemesis
                             task done by tool
                                   company hq
                          pokemon evolution
                                 person mother
                                  person father
                                company CEO
   Figure 3: Relation-wise LRE faithfulness to LM computation F . Horizontal red lines per relation indicate
   accuracy of a random-guess baseline. LRE is consistenly better than random guess and is predictive of the
   behavior of the transformer on most relations. However, for some relations such as company CEO or task done
   by tool, the transformer LM deviates from LRE, suggesting non-linear model computation for those relations.

                                     Factual                Linguistic                   Bias              Commonsense
   (a) Our method, LRE(s )

   (b) LRE (e s)

    (c) LinearRegression( s )

    (d) TRANSLATION ( s )

    (e) Identity ( s)
                              0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00

   Figure 4: Faithfulness comparison of different linear approximations of LM decoding stratified across different
   relation types. (a) Our method, LRE, applied on s extracted after ℓr (b) LRE applied on the subject embedding
   es . The performance different between (a) and (b) shows the importance of the enrichment process s goes through
   in the earlier layers. (c) shows the performance of a linear regression model trained with n = 8 examples, which
   is outperformed by a LRE calculated with similar number of examples, n. (d) is T RANSLATION(s) = s + b,
   where b is estimated as E[o − s] over n samples. The performance drop in (d) compared to (a) emphasizes the
   necessity of the projection term W . In (e) s is directly decoded with the decoder head D.
   low performance of the T RANSLATION and Identity baselines highlight that both the projection and
   bias terms of Equation (4) are necessary to approximate the decoding procedure as LRE.
   However, it is also clear (from Figure 3) that some relations are not linearly decodable from inter-
   mediate representations of the subject, despite being accurately predicted by the LM. For example,
   no method reaches over 6% faithfulness on the Company CEO relation, despite GPT-J accurately
   predicting the CEOs of 69 companies when prompted. This is true across layers (Figure 11 of Ap-
   pendix E.2) and random sampling of n examples for approximating LRE parameters. This indicates
   that some more complicated, non-linear decoding approach is employed by the model to make those
   predictions. Interestingly, the relations that exhibit this behavior the most are those where the range is
   the names of peoples or companies. One possible explanation is that these ranges are so large that the
   LM cannot reliably linearly encode them at a single layer, and relies on a more complicated encoding
   procedures possibly involving multiple layers.

    4.2              D O LRE S CAUSALLY CHARACTERIZE MODEL PREDICTIONS ?

   We now have evidence that some relations are linearly decodable from LM representations using
   a first-order approximation of the LM. However, it could be that these encodings are not used by
   the LM to predict the next word, and instead are correlative rather than causal. To show that LREs
   causally influence LM predictions, we follow the procedure described in Figure 2 to use the inverse
   of LRE to change the LM’s predicted object for a given subject.


                                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                  Factual                Linguistic                       Bias          Commonsense
                 †
(a) Adding W ( o'− o )
      (our intervention)
(b) Replacing with s
  (oracle intervention)
(c) Replacing with eo'

(d) Replacing with o
                           0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00

Figure 5: LRE causality compared with different baselines. (a) LRE causality on best performing hyperparam-
eters (layer ℓr and rank ρr ) for each relation r. (b) is our oracle baseline, inserting the representation s′ of target
subject s′ in place of s. (c) in place of s inserting eo′ , the row in the decoder head matrix D corresponding to o′ ,
and (d) inserting o′ , the output of F (s′ , cr ).
In Figure 5 we compare our causality intervention with 3 other approaches of replacing s such that
LM outputs o′ . If the model computation F from s to o is well-approximated by the LRE, then our
intervention should be equivalent to inserting s′ in place of s. This direct substitution procedure thus
provides an oracle upper-bound. Besides the oracle approach we include 2 more baselines; in place
of s, (1) inserting o′ , the output of F (s′ , cr ) (2) inserting eo′ , the row in the decoder head matrix D
corresponding to o′ as the embedding of o′ . These two additional baselines ensure that our approach
is not trivially writing the answer o′ on the position of s.
Figure 14 of Appendix G.2 compares our method                                       1.0
with the baselines for selected relations and across
layers. The graphs illustrate how our method matches                                0.8
the oracle’s performance and differs from the other
two baselines. This provides causal evidence that
                                                                                    0.6
                                                                        Causality



LRE approximates these relations well.
Figure 6 depicts a strong linear correlation between
                                                          0.4
our metrics when the hyperparameters were selected
to achieve best causal influence. This means that
                                                                         star constellation name
when an LRE causally influences the LM’s predic-          0.2
                                        7
tions, it is also faithful to the model. Also from
Figure 6, for almost all relations LRE causality score    0.0
is higher than its faithfulness score. This suggests         0.0     0.2         0.4          0.6 0.8  1.0
that, even in cases where LRE can not fully capture                              Faithfulness
the LM’s computation of the relation, the linear ap- Figure 6: Faithfulness is strongly correlated with
proximation remains powerful enough to perform a causality (R = 0.84) when hyperparameters are
successful edit.                                       selected to achieve best causal influence (in GPT-J
                                                                         β = 2.25). Each dot represents LRE performance
While our focus within this work is on the linearity of for one relation. Bold dots indicate relations for
relation decoding and not on LM representation edit- which LRE is evaluated on ≥ 30 test examples.
ing, a qualitative analysis of the post-edit generations
reveals that the edits are nontrivial and preserve the LM’s fluency; see Table 8 of Appendix G.2.

4.3      W HERE IN THE NETWORK DO REPRESENTATIONS EXHIBIT LRE S ?

In the previous experiments, for each relation we had fixed ℓr (the layer after which s is to be extracted)
to achieve the best causal influence on the model. However, there are considerable differences in
LRE faithfulness when estimated from different layers. Figure 7 highlights an example relation
that appears to be linearly decodable from representations in layer 7 until layer 17, at which point
faithfulness plummets. Figure 11 of Appendix E.2 shows similar plots for other relations.
Why might this happen? One hypothesis is that a transformer’s hidden representations serve a dual
purpose: they contain both information about the current word (its synonyms, physical attributes,
etc.), and information necessary to predict the next token. At some point, the latter information
structure must be preferred to the former in order for the LM to minimize its loss on the next-word
prediction task. The steep drop in faithfulness might indicate that a mode switch is happening in the

   7
     However, when the hyperparameters are chosen to achieve best faithfulness we did not notice such strong
agreement between faithfulness and causality. Discussion on Appendix E.


                                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


LM’s representations at later layers, where the LM decisively erases relational embeddings in support
of predicting the next word.
                                                                       s followed by o           s followed by t: t ≠ o
Table 2: Example of prompts with and without                     1.0
relation-specific context.
          With relation-specific context                         0.8

    LeBron James plays the sport of basketball


                                                  Faithfulness
                                                                 0.6
    Roger Federer plays the sport of tennis
    Lionel Messi plays the sport of
                                                                 0.4
        Without relation-specific context
                                                                 0.2
    LeBron James basketball
    Roger Federer tennis
    Lionel Messi                                                 0.0


                                                                        11
                                                                        10

                                                                        12
                                                                        13
                                                                        14
                                                                        15
                                                                        16
                                                                        17
                                                                        18
                                                                        19
                                                                        20
                                                                        21
                                                                        22
                                                                        23
                                                                        24
                                                                        25
                                                                        26
                                                                        27
                                                                       emb
                                                                         0
                                                                         1
                                                                         2
                                                                         3
                                                                         4
                                                                         5
                                                                         6
                                                                         7
                                                                         8
                                                                         9
                                                                                         Layer

We indeed see in Figure 7 that LRE faithful-      Figure 7: Later layers switching roles from enriching s
ness keeps improving in later layers when we      to predicting next token. LRE performance across differ-
remove relation specific texts from our prompt,   ent layers of GPT-J for the factual relation plays the sport
                                                  of with and without relation-specific prompt (Table 2).
meaning the o immediately follows s in the        Faithfulness does not decrease in later layers when o im-
prompt (Table 2).                                 mediately follows the s in the prompt.

5     A PPLICATION : T HE ATTRIBUTE L ENS
We apply the LRE to create a novel probing method we call the attribute lens that provides a view
into a LM’s knowledge of an attribute of a subject with respect to a relation r. Given a linear function
LRE for the relation r, the attribute lens visualizes a hidden state h by applying the LM decoder
head D to decode D(LRE(h)) into language predictions. The attribute lens specializes the Logit
Lens (nostalgebraist, 2020) (which visualizes next token information in a hidden state h by decoding
D(h)) and linear shortcut approaches (Belrose et al., 2023; Din et al., 2023) (where an affine probe
Aℓ is trained to skip computation after layer ℓ, directly decoding the next token as D(Aℓ (hℓ )), where
hℓ is the hidden state after ℓ). However, unlike these approaches concerned with the immediate
next token, the attribute lens is motivated by the observation that each high-dimensional hidden
state h may encode many pieces of information beyond predictions of the immediate next token.
Traditional representation probes (Belinkov & Glass, 2019; Belinkov, 2022) also reveal specific
facets of a representation, but unlike probing classifiers that divide the representation space into a
small number of output classes, the attribute lens decodes a representation into an open-vocabulary
distribution of output tokens. Figure 8 illustrates the use of one attribute lens to reveal knowledge
representations that contain information about the sport played by a person, and another lens about
university affiliation.
This attribute lens can be applied to analyze LM Table 3: The performance of the attribute lens on
falsehoods: in particular, it can identify cases repetition-distracted prompts and instruction-distracted
where an LM outputs a falsehood that contra- prompts that (almost) never produce the correct state-
dicts the LM’s own internal knowledge about a ment of a fact. Each row tests 11,891 prompts on GPT-J.
subject. To quantify the attribute lens’s ability Condition                         R@1 R@2 R@3
to reveal such situations, we tested the attribute
lens on a set of 11,891 “repetition distracted” Repetition-distracted prompt 0.02 0.33 0.41
(RD) and the same number of “instruction dis- Attribute lens on RD prompts 0.54 0.65 0.71
tracted” (ID) prompts where we deliberately bait
                                                      Instruction-distracted prompt 0.03 0.17 0.25
the LM to output a wrong o, but the LM would Attribute lens on ID prompts 0.63 0.73 0.78
have predicted the correct o without the distrac-
tion. For example, in order to bait an LM to
predict that The capital city of England is... Oslo, a RD prompt states the falsehood The capital city
of England is Oslo twice before asking the model to complete a third statement, and an ID prompt
states the falsehood followed by the instruction Repeat exactly. Although in these cases, the LM will
almost never output the true fact (it will predict Oslo instead of London), the attribute lens applied to
the last mention of the subject (England) will typically reveal the true fact (e.g., London) within the


                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                 (a) attribute lens “plays sport”                      (b) attribute lens “attended university”                      (c) logit lens “next token”
layer
h.27    hockey        basketball    baseball        baseball   h.27   Harvard    Princeton    Princeton   Princeton h.27   Clinton          ,           a            member

h.24    Driver        basketball    baseball        baseball   h.24   acting     Princeton    Princeton   Princeton h.24                   �          elected        senator

h.21    Driver        basketball    baseball        baseball   h.21   acting     Princeton    Princeton   Princeton h.21                    Jr        elected       Democrat

h.18    Driver        basketball    baseball        baseball   h.18   acting     Princeton    Harvard     Princeton h.18                    Jr        elected      congressman

h.15    Driver        basketball    baseball        baseball   h.15    yours     Princeton    Harvard     Princeton h.15                    Jr         born         politician

h.12    Driver        basketball    baseball        hockey     h.12    yours     Princeton    Harvard     Princeton h.12                    Jr         born        congressman

 h.9    Driver        basketball    football        hockey      h.9    yours     Princeton    Harvard      Harvard   h.9                    Jr         born          pioneer

 h.6    Driver          hockey      hockey          hockey      h.6    yours      Harvard     Harvard      Harvard   h.6                    Jr         born          pioneer

 h.3    Driver          hockey      hockey          hockey      h.3    yours      Harvard     Harvard      Harvard   h.3                    Jr         born         founding

 h.0    hockey          hockey      hockey          hockey      h.0   Harvard     Harvard     Harvard      Harvard   h.0    ows          arrived       hes           heated

input à Bill          Bradley         was              a               Bill      Bradley        was           a            Bill         Bradley        was              a


Figure 8: The attribute lens applied to the hidden states of GPT-J processing       Bill Bradley was a. First two grids
                                                                        Loading [MathJax]/extensions/MathMenu.js

visualize the same set of hidden states under the attribute lens for two different relations. The word in each
rectangle is the most-likely token in the distribution D(LRE(h)), where D applies the transformer decoder
head; darker boxes correspond to higher probabilities of the top prediction. In (a) the relation is plays sport, and
in (b) attended university, and both these cases reveal high-scoring predictions for attributes on the subject. For
comparison, (c) sets LRE = I which produces the Logit Lens (nostalgebraist, 2020) visualization, in which the
visualized relation can be thought of as next token. (Senator Bill Bradley was formerly a basketball player who
went to school at Princeton.)

top 3 predictions. In Table 3 we show performance of the attribute lens to reveal latent knowledge
under this adversarial condition.

6       R ELATED W ORK
Representation probes. The structure of the information represented within a neural network is a
foundational problem that has been studied from several perspectives. One approach is to identify
properties encoded representations by training a probing classifier to predict properties from the
representations (Ettinger et al., 2016; Shi et al., 2016; Hupkes et al., 2018; Conneau et al., 2018;
Belinkov et al., 2017; Belinkov & Glass, 2019). However, such approaches can overestimate the
knowledge contained in a network if the classifier learns to solve a task on its own (Belinkov, 2022);
the problem can be mitigated by comparing to a control task (Hewitt & Liang, 2019) or by limiting
the training of the probe (Voita & Titov, 2020). Our method differs from probing by avoiding the
introduction of a training process entirely: we extract the LRE from the LM itself rather than training
a new model.

Knowledge representation. Ever since emergent neural representations of relations were first
observed in the original backpropagation paper (Rumelhart et al., 1986), neural representations of
knowledge and relations have been a central problem in artificial intelligence. Section 2 surveys
work in this area including knowledge graph embedding (Wang et al., 2017; Yang et al., 2021) and
emergent knowledge representations within a transformer language model (Li et al., 2021; Meng
et al., 2022; Hase et al., 2023; Hernandez et al., 2023; Geva et al., 2023). This paper builds on past
work in by showing that relational aspects of this knowledge are encoded linearly.

Knowledge extraction. The most direct way to characterize knowledge in LMs is to prompt or
query them directly (Petroni et al., 2019; Roberts et al., 2020; Jiang et al., 2020; Shin et al., 2020;
Cohen et al., 2023). However, recent work has suggested that model knowledge and knowledge
retrieval may be localized within small parts of a language model (Geva et al., 2020; Dai et al., 2021;
Meng et al., 2022; Geva et al., 2023). In this paper we further investigate the localized retrieval of
knowledge and ask whether knowledge about relations and objects can be separated, and whether
relations are represented as a linear relational embedding.

7       C ONCLUSION
Reverse-engineering the full mechanism of an LLM is a daunting task. In this work, we have found
that a certain kind of computation, relation decoding, can often be well-approximated by linear
relational embeddings. We have also found that some relations are better-approximated as LREs than
others; relations that have an easier or harder random baseline fall on either end of the spectrum. We
have shown that LREs estimated from a small set of examples lead to faithful representations that are
causally linked to the LM’s behavior. Furthermore, LRE can be used to provide specialized attribute
lens on the LM’s intermediate computation, even revealing cases of LM falsehoods.


                                                                                        9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E THICS S TATEMENT
By revealing and decoding internal model relations before they are explicitly expressed in model
output, LREs can potentially be used to provide information about internal biases or errors, and the
causal effects could provide a way to mitigate undesired biases. However, such representation-level
representation might be only superficial without correcting internal biases in the model; exploring
such applications is a natural step for future work.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
The code and dataset are available at lre.baulab.info. We include full details about dataset
curation in Appendix A. In addition to the experiment details at the beginnings of Sections 4 and 5,
we describe hyperparameter sweeps in Appendix E. We ran all experiments on workstations with
80GB NVIDIA A100 GPUs or 48GB A6000 GPUs using HuggingFace Transformers (Wolf et al.,
2019) implemented in PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019).

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research has been supported by an AI Alignment grant from Open Philanthropy, the Israel
Science Foundation (grant No. 448/20), and an Azrieli Foundation Early Career Faculty Fellowship.
We are also grateful to the Center for AI Safety (CAIS) for sharing their compute resources, which
supported many of our experiments.

R EFERENCES
Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Layer normalization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1607.06450, 2016.

Yonatan Belinkov. Probing classifiers: Promises, shortcomings, and advances. Computational
  Linguistics, 48(1):207–219, 2022.

Yonatan Belinkov and James Glass. Analysis methods in neural language processing: A survey.
  Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 7:49–72, 2019.

Yonatan Belinkov, Nadir Durrani, Fahim Dalvi, Hassan Sajjad, and James Glass. What do neural
  machine translation models learn about morphology? arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.03471, 2017.

Nora Belrose, Zach Furman, Logan Smith, Danny Halawi, Igor Ostrovsky, Lev McKinney, Stella
  Biderman, and Jacob Steinhardt. Eliciting latent predictions from transformers with the tuned lens.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08112, 2023.

Tim Berners-Lee, James Hendler, and Ora Lassila. The semantic web. Scientific american, 284(5):
  34–43, 2001.

Kurt Bollacker, Colin Evans, Praveen Paritosh, Tim Sturge, and Jamie Taylor. Freebase: a collabora-
  tively created graph database for structuring human knowledge. In Proceedings of the 2008 ACM
  SIGMOD international conference on Management of data, pp. 1247–1250, 2008.

Roi Cohen, Mor Geva, Jonathan Berant, and Amir Globerson. Crawling the internal knowledge-base
  of language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.12810, 2023.

Alexis Conneau, German Kruszewski, Guillaume Lample, Loïc Barrault, and Marco Baroni. What
  you can cram into a single vector: Probing sentence embeddings for linguistic properties. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1805.01070, 2018.

Damai Dai, Li Dong, Yaru Hao, Zhifang Sui, Baobao Chang, and Furu Wei. Knowledge neurons in
  pretrained transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08696, 2021.

Alexander Yom Din, Taelin Karidi, Leshem Choshen, and Mor Geva. Jump to conclusions: Short-
  cutting transformers with linear transformations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.09435, 2023.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Allyson Ettinger, Ahmed Elgohary, and Philip Resnik. Probing for semantic evidence of composition
  by means of simple classification tasks. In Proceedings of the 1st workshop on evaluating vector-
  space representations for nlp, pp. 134–139, 2016.
Mor Geva, Roei Schuster, Jonathan Berant, and Omer Levy. Transformer feed-forward layers are
 key-value memories. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.14913, 2020.
Mor Geva, Avi Caciularu, Kevin Ro Wang, and Yoav Goldberg. Transformer feed-forward layers
 build predictions by promoting concepts in the vocabulary space. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.14680,
 2022.
Mor Geva, Jasmijn Bastings, Katja Filippova, and Amir Globerson. Dissecting recall of factual
 associations in auto-regressive language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.14767, 2023.
Peter Hase, Mohit Bansal, Been Kim, and Asma Ghandeharioun. Does localization inform editing?
  surprising differences in causality-based localization vs. knowledge editing in language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.04213, 2023.
Evan Hernandez, Belinda Z Li, and Jacob Andreas. Inspecting and editing knowledge representations
  in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.00740, 2023.
John Hewitt and Percy Liang. Designing and interpreting probes with control tasks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1909.03368, 2019.
Dieuwke Hupkes, Sara Veldhoen, and Willem Zuidema. Visualisation and’diagnostic classifiers’
  reveal how recurrent and recursive neural networks process hierarchical structure. Journal of
  Artificial Intelligence Research, 61:907–926, 2018.
Shaoxiong Ji, Shirui Pan, Erik Cambria, Pekka Marttinen, and S Yu Philip. A survey on knowledge
  graphs: Representation, acquisition, and applications. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and
  Learning Systems, 33(2):494–514, 2021.
Zhengbao Jiang, Frank F Xu, Jun Araki, and Graham Neubig. How can we know what language
  models know? Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 8:423–438, 2020.
Douglas B Lenat. Cyc: A large-scale investment in knowledge infrastructure. Communications of the
 ACM, 38(11):33–38, 1995.
Belinda Z Li, Maxwell Nye, and Jacob Andreas. Implicit representations of meaning in neural
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.00737, 2021.
Yankai Lin, Zhiyuan Liu, Maosong Sun, Yang Liu, and Xuan Zhu. Learning entity and relation
  embeddings for knowledge graph completion. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial
  intelligence, volume 29, 2015.
Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex Andonian, and Yonatan Belinkov. Locating and editing factual
  associations in gpt. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:17359–17372, 2022.
Jack Merullo, Carsten Eickhoff, and Ellie Pavlick. Language models implement simple word2vec-
  style vector arithmetic. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16130, 2023.
Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. Efficient estimation of word representa-
  tions in vector space. arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781, 2013.
George A Miller. Wordnet: a lexical database for english. Communications of the ACM, 38(11):
  39–41, 1995.
Marvin Minsky. A framework for representing knowledge, 1974.
nostalgebraist. interpreting gpt: the logit lens, 2020. URL https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/
  AcKRB8wDpdaN6v6ru/interpreting-gpt-the-logit-lens.
Alberto Paccanaro and Geoffrey E. Hinton. Learning distributed representations of concepts using
  linear relational embedding. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 13(2):
  232–244, 2001.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style,
  high-performance deep learning library. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32,
  2019.
Fabio Petroni, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, Patrick Lewis, Anton Bakhtin, Yuxiang Wu, and
  Alexander Miller. Language models as knowledge bases? In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
  on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference
  on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 2463–2473, 2019.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Richard H Richens. Preprogramming for mechanical translation. Mechanical Translation, 3(1):
  20–25, 1956.
Adam Roberts, Colin Raffel, and Noam Shazeer. How much knowledge can you pack into the
  parameters of a language model? In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in
 Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 5418–5426, 2020.
David E Rumelhart, Geoffrey E Hinton, and Ronald J Williams. Learning representations by
  back-propagating errors. nature, 323(6088):533–536, 1986.
Xing Shi, Inkit Padhi, and Kevin Knight. Does string-based neural mt learn source syntax? In
  Proceedings of the 2016 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing, pp.
  1526–1534, 2016.
Taylor Shin, Yasaman Razeghi, Robert L Logan IV, Eric Wallace, and Sameer Singh. Autoprompt:
  Eliciting knowledge from language models with automatically generated prompts. In Proceedings
  of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp.
  4222–4235, 2020.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
  Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
  efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.
Elena Voita and Ivan Titov. Information-theoretic probing with minimum description length. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2003.12298, 2020.
Ben Wang and Aran Komatsuzaki. GPT-J-6B: A 6 Billion Parameter Autoregressive Language Model.
  https://github.com/kingoflolz/mesh-transformer-jax, May 2021.
Quan Wang, Zhendong Mao, Bin Wang, and Li Guo. Knowledge graph embedding: A survey of
  approaches and applications. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 29(12):
  2724–2743, 2017.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
  Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, et al. Huggingface’s transformers:
  State-of-the-art natural language processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03771, 2019.
Jinfa Yang, Yongjie Shi, Xin Tong, Robin Wang, Taiyan Chen, and Xianghua Ying. Improving
   knowledge graph embedding using affine transformations of entities corresponding to each relation.
   In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2021, pp. 508–517, 2021.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     R ELATIONS DATASET
The dataset consists of 47 relations stratified across 4 groups; factual, linguistic, bias, and common-
sense. Six of the factual relations were scraped from Wikidata while the rest were drawn from the
C OUNTER FACT dataset by Meng et al. (2022). linguistic, bias, and commonsense relations were
newly curated by the authors. See Table 4 for details.
Table 4: Number of examples per relation and the count of accurate predictions by different LMs. Each of
the examples were tested using n = 8 ICL examples (n = 5 for LLaMA-13B). Results presented as mean (±
std) of the counts across 24 trials with different set of ICL examples. For cases where the count of examples
accurately predicted by the LM is less then n, it was replaced with "—". LRE estimation was not calculated
for such cases. ∗∗ We also do not calculate LRE for LLaMA-13B where o is a year (president birth year and
president election year) as LLaMA tokenizer splits years by digits (see Table 9).

                                                                            # Correct
    Category         Relation                      #
                                                                GPT-J         GPT2-xl     LLaMA-13B
                     person mother                994      182.8 ± 5.8     83.5 ± 12.3      613.5 ± 1.5
                     person father                991      206.1 ± 7.6     109.2 ± 6.1      675.5 ± 5.5
                     person sport position        952     243.3 ± 94.1    199.9 ± 67.9      200.0 ± 0.0
                     landmark on continent        947     797.5 ± 74.7    421.9 ± 85.3      200.0 ± 0.0
                     person native language       919     720.2 ± 31.3    697.3 ± 16.1      200.0 ± 0.0
                     landmark in country          836     565.2 ± 14.2    274.1 ± 58.2      200.0 ± 0.0
                     person occupation            821     131.5 ± 28.5     42.0 ± 10.3     404.0 ± 25.5
                     company hq                   674     316.0 ± 10.4    148.8 ± 36.6      200.0 ± 0.0
                     product by company           522      366.4 ± 8.1    262.4 ± 23.8      421.3 ± 6.2
                     person plays instrument      513     237.6 ± 30.7    144.2 ± 27.6     249.0 ± 67.7
                     star constellation name      362      276.3 ± 3.4    210.3 ± 16.7      200.0 ± 0.0
                     plays pro sport              318     244.2 ± 10.8    195.1 ± 13.1      294.8 ± 1.2
                     company CEO                  298       90.2 ± 7.2      15.4 ± 6.1      155.5 ± 4.7
    factual
                     superhero person             100       49.8 ± 2.0      36.6 ± 2.4       71.9 ± 2.3
                     superhero archnemesis         96       21.5 ± 2.6      12.7 ± 2.2       40.8 ± 2.7
                     person university             91       41.0 ± 1.6      35.4 ± 1.9       44.8 ± 2.2
                     pokemon evolution             44       28.7 ± 3.9      30.3 ± 1.1       35.7 ± 0.5
                     country currency              30       19.4 ± 0.9      20.2 ± 0.8       22.0 ± 0.0
                     food from country             30       16.4 ± 1.1      11.2 ± 1.4       18.8 ± 1.4
                     city in country               27       18.0 ± 0.9      18.0 ± 1.1       18.1 ± 0.7
                     country capital city          24       16.0 ± 0.0      15.5 ± 0.6       15.3 ± 0.5
                     country language              24       15.4 ± 0.6      14.9 ± 0.6       15.8 ± 0.4
                     country largest city          24       15.5 ± 0.5      14.0 ± 0.8       15.3 ± 0.5
                     person lead singer of band    21       13.0 ± 0.2      10.1 ± 0.9       13.0 ± 0.0
                     president birth year          19       11.0 ± 0.0              —                ∗∗
                     president election year       19        9.5 ± 0.5       9.9 ± 0.6               ∗∗
                     object superclass             76       52.7 ± 1.5      51.5 ± 2.2       54.4 ± 1.7
                     word sentiment                60       47.2 ± 4.1      42.8 ± 5.1       50.5 ± 2.0
                     task done by tool             52       30.6 ± 1.5      25.8 ± 1.9       33.7 ± 1.8
                     substance phase of matter     50       30.4 ± 6.8      34.2 ± 3.3       40.5 ± 1.9
    commonsense
                     work location                 38       18.2 ± 2.6      19.7 ± 2.6       24.7 ± 2.3
                     fruit inside color            36       10.2 ± 1.0       9.0 ± 0.0       17.3 ± 1.6
                     task person type              32       18.0 ± 1.2      16.1 ± 1.5       19.2 ± 2.1
                     fruit outside color           30       11.7 ± 2.1       9.6 ± 0.7       14.6 ± 1.4
                     word first letter            241      223.9 ± 4.5     199.1 ± 9.8      233.0 ± 0.0
                     word last letter             241       28.2 ± 8.2      21.2 ± 5.3      188.3 ± 6.7
                     adjective antonym            100       64.0 ± 2.3      57.5 ± 2.4       68.5 ± 1.5
    linguistic
                     adjective superlative         80       70.5 ± 0.9      64.4 ± 3.3       70.5 ± 0.7
                     verb past tense               76       61.0 ± 4.6      54.0 ± 3.0       65.8 ± 3.9
                     adjective comparative         68       59.5 ± 0.6      57.6 ± 0.9       60.0 ± 0.2
                     occupation age                45       25.7 ± 2.6      22.9 ± 3.8       32.8 ± 2.6
                     univ degree gender            38               —       21.5 ± 2.4       24.2 ± 2.4
                     name birthplace               31       17.1 ± 2.6      18.0 ± 1.4       21.4 ± 1.1
    bias             name religion                 31       17.0 ± 2.3      15.1 ± 2.2       19.8 ± 1.5
                     characteristic gender         30       15.9 ± 2.7      15.8 ± 2.2       19.7 ± 1.2
                     name gender                   19       11.0 ± 0.0      10.7 ± 0.6       10.8 ± 0.4
                     occupation gender             19        9.6 ± 0.8       9.8 ± 0.7       10.8 ± 0.4


                                                     13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B     A SSUMPTIONS UNDERLYING THE LRE A PPROXIMATION
Our estimate of the LRE parameters is based on an assumption that the transformer LM implements
relation decoding F (s, c) in a near-linear fashion that deviates from a linear model with a non-
linear error term ε(s) where both ε and ε′ are zero in expectation over s, i.e., Es [ε(s)] = 0 and
Es [ε′ (s)] = 0.
                                     F (s, c) = b + W s + ε(s)                                    (9)
Then passing to expectations over the distribution of s we can estimate b and W :
                                  b = F (s, c) − W s − ε(s)                                      (10)
                                  b = Es [F (s, c) − W s] −   [ε(s)]
                                                            Es                                   (11)
                                W = F ′ (s, c) − ε′ (s)                                          (12)
                                            ′
                                W = Es [F (s, c)] −   [ε′
                                                         (s)]                                    (13)

                                                    Es
Equations 11 and 13 correspond to the bias term b and and projection term W of Equation (3) in the
main paper.

C     I MPROVING THE ESTIMATE OF F ′ (s, c) AS βW
Empirically we have found that βW (with β > 1) yields a more accurate linear model of F than W .
In this section we measure the behavior of F ′ in the region between subject representation vectors to
provide some evidence on this.
Take two subject representation vectors s1 and s2 . The projection term of our LRE model W , based
on the mean Jacobian of F calculated at subjects si , yields this estimate of transformer’s behavior
when traversing from one to the other
                                  F (s2 ) − F (s1 ) ≈ W (s2 − s1 ).                              (14)
We can compare this to an exact calculation: the fundamental theorem of line integrals tells us that
integrating the actual Jacobian along the path from s1 to s2 yields the actual change:
                                                        Z s2
                                   F (s2 ) − F (s1 ) =       F ′ (s)ds                          (15)
                                                         s1
                                                        Z s2
                                ||F (s2 ) − F (s1 )|| =      uT F ′ (s)ds                       (16)
                                                          s1

Here we reduce it to a one-dimensional problem, defining unit vectors u ∝ F (s2 ) − F (s1 ) and
v ∝ s2 − s1 in the row and column space respectively, so that
                              ||F (s2 ) − F (s1 )|| ≈ uT W v||s2 − s1 ||                         (17)

By taking the ratio between the sides of (17) we Table 5: Ratio between the right hand sides of Equa-
can see how the actual rate of change from s1 to tion (16) and (17) for some of the relations.
s2 is underestimated by W . Table 5 reports this
value for some selected relations.                 Relation                Underestimation Ratio
In practice we find that setting β as a constant        plays pro sport           2.517 ± 1.043
for an LM (instead of setting it per relation)          country capital city      4.198 ± 0.954
is enough to attain good performance across a           object superclass         3.058 ± 0.457
range of relations. Refer to Appendix E for             name birthplace           4.328 ± 0.991
further details.

D     C AUSALITY
D.1    D ERIVATION OF E QN 7

Under the same relation r = person plays instrument, consider two different (s, o) pairs: (s = Miles
Davis, o = trumpet) and (s′ = Cat Stevens, o′ = guitar). If an LRE defined by the projection term W
and translation term b is an well-approximation of the model calculation F (s, c), then


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               o = β W (s) + b and o′ = β W (s′ ) + b

Subtracting o′ from o


                              o′ − o = βW s′ − βW s
                                     = βW (s′ − s) [since W is linear]
                                               1
                                  ∆s = s′ − s = W −1 (o′ − o)                                         (18)
                                               β

We observe that the edit direction ∆s needs to be magnified to achieve good edit efficacy. In our
experiments we magnify ∆s by β (or set β = 1.0 in Equation (18)).


                                          ∆s = W −1 (o′ − o)                                          (19)

D.2    W HY LOW- RANK INVERSE W † INSTEAD OF FULL INVERSE W −1 IS NECESSARY ?

In practice, we need to take a low rank approximation W † instead of W −1 for the edit depicted in
Figure 2 to be successful. With β set to 1.0,
                                          o′ − o = W (s′ − s)
                                             ∆o = W ∆s

If we take U ΣV T as the SVD of W , then
                                             ∆o = U ΣV T ∆s
                                          U T ∆o = ΣV T ∆s
Considering U T ∆o as ou and V T ∆s as sv ,
                                      ou = Σsv or Σ−1 ou = sv                                         (20)

Here, Σ maps sv to ou . This Σ is a diagonal matrix that contains the non-negative singular values in
it’s diagonal and zero otherwise. The greater the singular value the more its effect on sv . However, if
we take the full rank inverse of Σ while mapping ou to sv then the inverse becomes dominated by
noisy smaller singular values and they wash out the contribution of meaningful singular values. Thus,
it is necessary to consider only those singular values greater than a certain threshold τ or take a low
rank inverse W † instead of a full inverse W −1 .
The significance of different ranks on causality is depicted on Figure 9. We see that the causality
increases with a rank up to some point and starts decreasing afterwards. This suggests that, we are
ablating important singular values from Σ before an optimal rank ρr is reached, and start introducing
noisy singular values afterwards.

E     S ELECTING H YPERPARAMETERS (β, ℓr , AND ρr )
We need to select a scalar value β per LM since the slope W of the first order approximation underes-
timates the slope of F (s, c) (Appendix C). Additionally, we need to specify two hyperparameters per
relation r; ℓr , the layer after which s is to be extracted and ρr , the rank of the low-rank inverse W † .
We perform a grid search to select these hyperparameters. For a specific β, hyperparameters ℓr and
ρr are selected to achieve the best causal influence as there is a strong agreement between faithfulness
and causality when the hparams are selected this way. However, when ℓr and ρr are selected to
achieve best faithfulness there is a weaker agreement between our evaluation metrics (Figure 10).
Appendix E.2 provides an insight on this.


                                                   15
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                      Faithfulness          Causality                       1.0
        1.0

                                                                            0.8
        0.8

                                                                            0.6


                                                                Causality
        0.6
Score


        0.4                                                                 0.4

        0.2                                                                 0.2

        0.0
                 22     24      26     28     210       212                 0.0
                                Rank                                           0.0      0.2     0.4      0.6     0.8     1.0
                                                                                                Faithfulness
 Figure 9: Initially, faithfulness and causality of LRE
 improve with higher rank. However, after rank = 28
                                                                   Figure 10: When hparams are selected to achieve
                                                    best faithfulness there is a weaker correlation of 0.74
 causality starts declining whereas faithfulness remains
                                                    between our evaluation metrics unlike in Figure 6
 stable.
                                                    where hparams were selected to achieve best causality.
 In sweep over layers we notice that LRE perfor- For both this figure and Figure 6 the LM is GPT-J and
 mance per relation increases up to a certain layer β = 2.25.
 and drops afterwards, suggesting a mode-switch in later layers (Figure 11). And, in the sweep over
 ranks we notice that both edit efficacy and faithfulness increases up to a certain rank. After that edit
 efficacy starts dropping while faithfulness remains stable. The reasoning behind how causality is
 affected by higher rank is discussed in Appendix D.2.

 E.1          S ELECTING β
                                                               Table 6: Scores achieved by LRE on different values
 Table 6 represents how performance scores of                  of β on GPT-J. β = 2.25 shows the best correlation
 LRE change with respect to different values of                between our evaluation metrics. Faithfulnessµ means
 β for GPT-J. In our experiments, causality is                 the average faithfulness across all the relations (same for
                                                               Causalityµ ).
 always calculated with β set to 1.0. So, the
 average causality score remain constant. β is
 selected per LM to achieve the best agreement                               β       Faithfulnessµ Causalityµ Corr
 between our performance metrics faithfulness
 and causality. For GPT-J optimal value of β is                             0.00      0.17 ± 0.20                 0.30
 2.25.                                                                      0.25      0.21 ± 0.22                 0.33
                                                                            0.50      0.28 ± 0.24                 0.38
                                                                            0.75      0.36 ± 0.25                 0.48
 E.2  L AYER - WISE LRE PERFORMANCE                                         1.00      0.43 ± 0.26                 0.58
 ON SELECTED RELATIONS (GPT-J)                                              1.25      0.50 ± 0.26                 0.67
                                                                            1.50      0.54 ± 0.25                 0.76
 If LRE remains faithful to model up to layer                               1.75      0.57 ± 0.25                 0.80
 ℓf aith it is reasonable to expect that LRE will re-                       2.00      0.59 ± 0.25                 0.83
 tain high causality until ℓf aith as well. However,                        2.25      0.59 ± 0.25                 0.84
                                                                                                      0.81 ± 0.22
 an examination of the faithfulness and causal-                             2.50      0.59 ± 0.25                 0.84
 ity performances across layers reveals that the                            2.75      0.59 ± 0.25                 0.84
 causality scores drop before ℓf aith (Fig. 11). In                         3.00      0.59 ± 0.25                 0.83
 fact Fig. 14 from Appendix G.2 indicates that                              3.25      0.58 ± 0.25                 0.81
 all the intervention baselines exhibit a decrease                          3.50      0.57 ± 0.25                 0.80
 in performance at deeper layers, particularly our                          3.75      0.56 ± 0.25                 0.78
 method and the oracle method at similar layers.                            4.00      0.55 ± 0.25                 0.76
 This might be a phenomenon associated with                                 4.25      0.54 ± 0.25                 0.75
 this type of intervention in general, rather than                          4.50      0.53 ± 0.25                 0.74
 a fault with our approximation of the target s′ .                          4.75      0.53 ± 0.25                 0.72
 Notice that, in all of our activation patching ex-                         5.00      0.52 ± 0.25                 0.71
 periments we only patch a single state (at the
 position of the last subject token after a layer ℓ).
 If the activation after layer ℓ is patched, layers till ℓ − 1 retains information about the original subject
 s and they can leak information about s to later layers because of attention mechanism. The deeper


                                                              16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


we intervene the more is this leakage from previous states and it might reduce the efficacy of these
single state activation patching approaches.
It is not reasonable to expect high causality after ℓf aith , and causality can drop well before ℓf aith
because of this leakage. This also partly explains the disagreement between the two metrics when the
hyperparameters are chosen to achieve the best faithfulness (Figure 10).
                    country capital city                         food from country                                  word sentiment                           adjective comparative
        1.0                                          1.0                                          1.0                                            1.0

        0.8                                          0.8                                          0.8                                            0.8

        0.6                                          0.6                                          0.6                                            0.6
Score


        0.4                                          0.4                                          0.4                                            0.4

        0.2                                          0.2                                          0.2                                            0.2

        0.0                                          0.0                                          0.0                                            0.0
                    15



                    24


                                                                 12
                                                                 15

                                                                 21
                                                                 24


                                                                                                               12



                                                                                                               21


                                                                                                                                                             12

                                                                                                                                                             18
                                                                                                                                                             21

                                                                                                                                                             27
              emb
                     3
                     6
                     9
                    12

                    18
                    21

                    27


                                                                  3
                                                                  6
                                                                  9



                                                                 18



                                                                 27


                                                                                                                3
                                                                                                                6
                                                                                                                9

                                                                                                               15
                                                                                                               18

                                                                                                               24
                                                                                                               27


                                                                                                                                                              3
                                                                                                                                                              6
                                                                                                                                                              9

                                                                                                                                                             15



                                                                                                                                                             24
                                                           emb


                                                                                                        emb


                                                                                                                                                       emb
                        name birthplace                              name religion                                  work location                                 task done by tool
        1.0                                          1.0                                          1.0                                            1.0

        0.8                                          0.8                                          0.8                                            0.8

        0.6                                          0.6                                          0.6                                            0.6
Score


        0.4                                          0.4                                          0.4                                            0.4

        0.2                                          0.2                                          0.2                                            0.2

        0.0                                          0.0                                          0.0                                            0.0
                    15



                    24


                                                                 12
                                                                 15

                                                                 21
                                                                 24


                                                                                                               12



                                                                                                               21


                                                                                                                                                             12

                                                                                                                                                             18
                                                                                                                                                             21

                                                                                                                                                             27
                     3
                     6
                     9
                    12

                    18
                    21

                    27


                                                                  3
                                                                  6
                                                                  9



                                                                 18



                                                                 27


                                                                                                                3
                                                                                                                6
                                                                                                                9

                                                                                                               15
                                                                                                               18

                                                                                                               24
                                                                                                               27


                                                                                                                                                              3
                                                                                                                                                              6
                                                                                                                                                              9

                                                                                                                                                             15



                                                                                                                                                             24
              emb


                                                           emb


                                                                                                        emb


                                                                                                                                                       emb
                        company CEO                              pokemon evolution                            star constellation name                              person mother
        1.0                                          1.0                                          1.0                                            1.0

        0.8                                          0.8                                          0.8                                            0.8

        0.6                                          0.6                                          0.6                                            0.6
Score


        0.4                                          0.4                                          0.4                                            0.4

        0.2                                          0.2                                          0.2                                            0.2

        0.0                                          0.0                                          0.0                                            0.0
                    15



                    24


                                                                 12
                                                                 15

                                                                 21
                                                                 24


                                                                                                               12



                                                                                                               21


                                                                                                                                                             12

                                                                                                                                                             18
                                                                                                                                                             21

                                                                                                                                                             27
                     3
                     6
                     9
                    12

                    18
                    21

                    27


                                                                  3
                                                                  6
                                                                  9



                                                                 18



                                                                 27


                                                                                                                3
                                                                                                                6
                                                                                                                9

                                                                                                               15
                                                                                                               18

                                                                                                               24
                                                                                                               27


                                                                                                                                                              3
                                                                                                                                                              6
                                                                                                                                                              9

                                                                                                                                                             15



                                                                                                                                                             24
              emb


                                                           emb


                                                                                                        emb


                                                                                 Faithfulness                        Causality                         emb


Figure 11: LRE performance for selected relations in different layers of GPT-J. The last row features some of
the relations where LRE could not achieve satisfactory performance indicating a non-linear decoding process
for them.


 F             VARYING n AND PROMPT TEMPLATE
Figure 12 shows how lre performance changes based on number of examples n used for approxima-
tion. For most of the relations both faithfulness and efficacy scores start plateauing after n = 5. In
our experiment setup we use n = 8 as that is the largest number we could fit for a GPT-J model on a
single A6000. However, Figure 12 suggests that a good LRE estimation may be obtained with less
number of examples.

        1.0
                    country capital city             1.0
                                                                     plays pro sport              1.0
                                                                                                                   person occupation             1.0
                                                                                                                                                                  object superclass

        0.8                                          0.8                                          0.8                                            0.8

        0.6                                          0.6                                          0.6                                            0.6
Score


        0.4                                          0.4                                          0.4                                            0.4

        0.2                                          0.2                                          0.2                                            0.2

        0.0                                          0.0                                          0.0                                            0.0
               3    4    5   6   7   8   9   10 11          3    4   5   6   7    8   9   10 11         3      4     5   6   7   8   9   10 11         3      4    5   6   7   8   9   10 11
                                                                                  Faithfulness                     Causality

                                                      Figure 12: LRE performance across different n.

We also test how LRE performance on a relation r changes when the same relation r is contextualized
with different prompt templates. Table 7 shows minimal change in faithfulness and causality scores
when LRE is calculated with different prompt templates.


                                                                                             17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 7: LRE performance on different prompt templates. The subject s is inserted in place of {}. Performance
scores presented as mean and standard deviation across 24 trials with different sets of training examples.

Relation                   Prompt Template                                               Faithfulness        Causality
                           The capital of {} is                                           0.84 ± 0.09      0.94 ± 0.04
                           The capital of {} is the city of                               0.87 ± 0.08      0.94 ± 0.04
country capital city
                           The capital city of {} is                                      0.84 ± 0.08      0.94 ± 0.04
                           What is the capital of {}? It is the city of                   0.87 ± 0.07      0.92 ± 0.05
                           {} plays the sport of                                          0.78 ± 0.07      0.90 ± 0.03
plays pro sport            {} plays professionally in the sport of                        0.78 ± 0.09      0.90 ± 0.03
                           What sport does {} play? They play                             0.81 ± 0.06      0.90 ± 0.03
                           {} works professionally as a                                   0.41 ± 0.08      0.55 ± 0.09
person occupation          {} works as a                                                  0.44 ± 0.11      0.58 ± 0.07
                           By profession, {} is a                                         0.46 ± 0.14      0.58 ± 0.08
                           The superlative form of {} is                                  0.93 ± 0.02      0.97 ± 0.02
adjective superlative
                           What is the superlative form of {}? It is                      0.92 ± 0.02      0.96 ± 0.03


G      BASELINES

G.1      FAITHFULNESS

In Figure 13 we examine whether our method can be applied to s extracted from zero-shot prompts
that contain only the subject s and no further context. It appears that even when LRE is trained
with few-shot examples, it can achieve similar results when applied to s that is free of any context
specifying the relation.

                            Factual                Linguistic                   Bias              Commonsense
Our method, LRE ( s )

LRE (e s)
LinearRegression ( s )

TRANSLATION (s )

Identity ( s)
                     0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
                                           With few-shot examples           Without few-shot examples

Figure 13: LRE faithfulness on GPT-J compared with different linear functions baselines(same as Figure 4).
Each of the functions were approximated with n = 8 samples, each prepended with n − 1 few-shot examples
(Table 2). Dark blue bars indicate faithfulness when evaluated on s extracted in a similar setup. Light blue
bars represent how LRE (trained on few-shot examples) generalize when applied on s extracted from zero-shot
prompts that contain only the subject and no further context.



G.2      C AUSALITY

Figure 14 shows the LRE causality performance in comparison to other baselines for selected
relations and across different layers. If LRE is a good approximation of the model computation, then
our causality intervention should be equivalent to the oracle baseline, which replaces s with s′ . The
graphs demonstrate the similarity between our method performance and oracle performance across
all layers. This provides causal evidence that LRE can reliably recover s′ for these relations.
While model editing is not the primary focus of this work, it is still worth examining how our
intervention may affect multiple token generation, since it may reveal unexpected side effects of the
method. Based on a qualitative analysis of the post-edit generations, it appears that the edits preserve
the fluency of the model. Table 8 presents examples of generated texts after intervention.


                                                           18
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                         work location                     task person type                        city in country                person lead singer of band
             1.0                               1.0                                  1.0                                     1.0

             0.8                               0.8                                  0.8                                     0.8
 Success@1   0.6                               0.6                                  0.6                                     0.6

             0.4                               0.4                                  0.4                                     0.4

             0.2                               0.2                                  0.2                                     0.2

             0.0                               0.0                                  0.0                                     0.0

                         12
                         15

                         21

                         27


                                                           15

                                                           21

                                                           27


                                                                                                   15

                                                                                                   21
                                                                                                   24
                                                                                                   27


                                                                                                                                        15

                                                                                                                                        21
                                                                                                                                        24
                          3
                          6
                          9



                         18

                         24


                                                            3
                                                            6
                                                            9
                                                           12

                                                           18

                                                           24


                                                                                                    3
                                                                                                    6
                                                                                                    9
                                                                                                   12

                                                                                                   18


                                                                                                                                         3
                                                                                                                                         6
                                                                                                                                         9
                                                                                                                                        12

                                                                                                                                        18



                                                                                                                                        27
                   emb


                                                     emb


                                                                                             emb


                                                                                                                                  emb
                                           †
                                   Adding W (o' −o)              Replacing with s                  Replacing with e o'             Replacing with o

  Figure 14: LRE causality across different layers of GPT-J. The causality curve closely matches the peaks and
  valleys of the oracle baseline, replacing s with s′ , suggesting that LRE is a good approximation of the model
  computation F .



  Table 8: Generated texts, before and after our causal intervention on GPT-J to change its prediction
  to o′ .

        Prompt                             o → o′                                     Before                                        After
        Miles Davis plays the              trumpet → guitar                  trumpet in his band.                        guitar live with his band.
        Siri was created by                Apple → Google                    Apple as a personal as-                     Google and it has be-
                                                                             sistant.                                    come a huge success
                                                                                                                         within Google Maps.
        Chris Martin is the                Coldplay → Foo                    Coldplay and a man of                       Foo Fighters, one of the
        lead singer of                     Fighters                          many talents.                               most successful and pop-
                                                                                                                         ular rock bands in the
                                                                                                                         world.
        What is the past tense             closed → walked                   closed. It means it gets                    walked. What is the past
        of close? It is                                                      closed or is closed.                        tense of read?



  H                 LRE ON GPT2- XL AND L LA M A -13B
  We provide further results for GPT2-xl and LLaMA-13b to show that autoregressive LMs of different
  sizes employ this linear encoding scheme for a range of different relations. Figure 15 present LRE
  performances for each of the three models grouped by relation category.

               1.0                                                                           1.0

               0.8                                                                           0.8
Faithfulness


                                                                                 Causality


               0.6                                                                           0.6

               0.4                                                                           0.4

               0.2                                                                           0.2

               0.0                                                                           0.0
                         Factual   Linguistic Commonsense             Bias                           Factual      Linguistic Commonsense              Bias
                                                            GPT2-xl             GPT-J                     LLaMA-13b

                               Figure 15: LRE performance in different relation categories on different LMs.

 Figures 16a and 16a illustrate the high correlation between our two metrics on GPT2-xl and LLaMA-
 13b respectively. These findings are consistent with the results reported for GPT-J (Figure 6).
  Similarly, Figures 17a and 17b, compare the faithfulness of our method with other approaches of
  achieving a linear decoding scheme for GPT2-xl and LlaMA.


                                                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             1.0                                                                         1.0
                                      name gender

             0.8           word first letter                                             0.8

                                                                                                                                  word first letter
             0.6                                                                         0.6
 Causality


                                                                             Causality
             0.4                                                                         0.4
                               person occupation                                                            task person type

             0.2                                                                         0.2


             0.0                                                                         0.0
                0.0      0.2         0.4           0.6        0.8      1.0                  0.0       0.2      0.4        0.6      0.8           1.0
                                  Faithfulness                                                           Faithfulness
                   (a) GPT2-xl (β = 2.25, corr = 0.85)                                     (b) LLaMA-13B, (β = 8.0, corr = 0.83)

Figure 16: High correlation between faithfulness and causality in both GPT2-xl (R=0.85) and LLaMa-
13B (R=0.83). Each of the dots represent LRE performance for a relation. Bold dots indicate relations
for which LRE is evaluated on ≥ 30 test examples.

                                                         With few-shot examples                   Without few-shot examples
                                     Factual                        Linguistic                          Bias                   Commonsense
Our method, LRE ( s )

LRE (e s)
LinearRegression ( s )

TRANSLATION (s )

Identity ( s)
                           0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
                                                                      (a) GPT2-xl

                                     Factual                        Linguistic                          Bias                   Commonsense
Our method, LRE ( s )

LRE (e s)
LinearRegression ( s )

TRANSLATION (s )

Identity ( s)
                           0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
                                                                    (b) LLaMA-13B

Figure 17: LRE faithfulness on GPT2-xl and LLaMA-13B compared with different baselines. Refer to Figure
Figure 4 for details on these baseline approaches of achieving a linear decoding function.


Lastly, Figure 18 depicts LRE faithfulness in GPT2-xl and LLaMA-13b for each of relations in
our dataset. According to Spearman’s rank-order correlation, GPT-J’s relation-wise performance is
strongly correlated with both GPT2-xl (R = 0.85) and LLaMa-13B (R = 0.71), whereas GPT2-xl
and LLaMa-13B are moderately corelated (R = 0.58).


                                                                          20
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                         GPT-J
           1.0
           0.9
           0.8
Faithfulness


           0.7
           0.6
           0.5
           0.4
           0.3
           0.2
           0.1
           0.0

                                                       GPT2-xl
           1.0
           0.9
           0.8
Faithfulness


           0.7
           0.6
           0.5
           0.4
           0.3
           0.2
           0.1
           0.0

                                                   LLaMA-13B
           1.0
           0.9
           0.8
Faithfulness


           0.7
           0.6
           0.5
           0.4
           0.3
           0.2
           0.1
           0.0
                          country largest city


                  substance phase of matter



                        characteristic gender


                 person lead singer of band


                     superhero archnemesis
                       adjective comparative
                        adjective superlative


                    person plays instrument


                     president election year
                           occupation gender


                          country capital city
                            object superclass


                     person native language


                           person occupation



                     star constellation name
                           adjective antonym


                            person university


                      landmark on continent


                            superhero person
                        person sport position

                        product by company
                            task done by tool
                               verb past tense

                              name birthplace
                            country language



                                 name gender


                               word last letter

                          president birth year
                                name religion
                           fruit outside color
                               plays pro sport
                               occupation age
                             fruit inside color


                            country currency


                             task person type



                         landmark in country


                                  company hq
                          pokemon evolution
                                person mother
                                 person father
                               company CEO
                              word sentiment


                                work location


                               city in country
                              word first letter


                           food from country


  Figure 18: Relation-wise LRE faithfulness to the LM relation decoding function F . Horizontal red lines per
 relation indicate accuracy of a random-guess baseline. Relations are ordered according to their LRE faithfulness
 in GPT-J. We do not calculate LRE estimation for GPT2-xl on the relation president birth year as GPT2-xl can
 not accurately answer for that relation (Table 4). We also do not calculate LRE of LLaMa-13B for the relations
 where the o is a year (i.e. president birth year and president election year) as tokenizer of LLaMA models splits
 the digits of a year. Such behavior of LLaMA tokenizer makes the relation decoding function trivial, since most
 of the answers start with "1" for these relations. Those cases were included in this plot (grayed out) to align LRE
 faithfulness of different LMs by relations.


                                                         21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I   L IMITATIONS
Our analysis of linear relational embeddings has several core limitations.

Dataset size We have only tested a small set of 47 relations; although we have covered several
categories of relations, there are many types of relations we have not explored, such as numerical or
physical relations, or logical inferences or multi-hop reasoning.

First-token correctness criterion During all of our experiments, we consider a predicted object
correct if the first predicted token matches the first token of the true object. This introduces a risk
for false positives: if multiple different objects share a first token, we might erroneously label a
prediction as correct. For example, in the relation person university, many of the university names
start with "University of" and such cases would inflate our measurements. We quantify the risk for
such false positives in Table 9 and find that many relations have few to no collisions. Nevertheless,
the first-token evaluation scheme limits the relations that can be reliably evaluated for linear decoding
using this approach.

Table 9: Relation-wise range (count of unique o) in our dataset along with the percentage of o s
uniquely identified by their first token when tokenized with different LM tokenizers. The number
inside parenthesis is the actual count of unique first tokens.
∗
  Tokenizer for LLaMA models splits numeric words by digits. For the relation president birth year it only finds
one unique first token {1}, since all the years in this relation start with 1. For president election year LLaMA
tokenizer finds only two unique first tokens {1, 2}. Counts for these relations were ignored while calculating
average first token coverage for LLaMA-13B,

     Relation                         |ranger |             GPT-J            GPT2-xl      LLaMA-13B
     adjective antonym                       95      100.0% (95)        100.0% (95)         98.9% (94)
     adjective comparative                   57      100.0% (57)        100.0% (57)         93.0% (53)
     adjective superlative                   79       97.5% (77)         97.5% (77)         98.7% (78)
     city in country                         21       95.2% (20)         95.2% (20)         95.2% (20)
     company CEO                            287      72.5% (208)        72.5% (208)        67.6% (194)
     company hq                             163     100.0% (163)       100.0% (163)        93.3% (152)
     country currency                        23      100.0% (23)        100.0% (23)         91.3% (21)
     landmark in country                     91      100.0% (91)        100.0% (91)         97.8% (89)
     person father                          968      41.3% (400)        41.3% (400)        38.9% (377)
     person lead singer of band              21       85.7% (18)         85.7% (18)         85.7% (18)
     person mother                          962      39.5% (380)        39.5% (380)        31.9% (307)
     person occupation                       31      100.0% (31)        100.0% (31)         93.5% (29)
     person university                       69       53.6% (37)         53.6% (37)         50.7% (35)
     pokemon evolution                       44       90.9% (40)         90.9% (40)         81.8% (36)
     president birth year                    15        60.0% (9)          60.0% (9)          6.7% (1)∗
     president election year                 18       77.8% (14)         77.8% (14)         11.1% (2)∗
     product by company                      30      100.0% (30)        100.0% (30)         86.7% (26)
     star constellation name                 31       93.5% (29)         93.5% (29)         87.1% (27)
     superhero archnemesis                   90       84.4% (76)         84.4% (76)         81.1% (73)
     superhero person                       100       89.0% (89)         89.0% (89)         84.0% (84)
     task done by tool                       51       98.0% (50)         98.0% (50)         90.2% (46)
     Relation where all o is
     uniquely identified by                  —               100%               100%               100%
     the first token (×26)
     Average                                 —             93.17%             93.17%            92.17%

Single object assumption In some relations, there may be more than one correct answer (e.g.,
fruits often take many different outside colors). Our dataset only catalogs one canonical related object
in each case. This does not impact our results because for each subject we focus on the single object
that the LM predicts, but future work could extend our evaluation scheme to measure how well LREs
estimate the LM’s distribution of candidate objects.


                                                      22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      Table 10: Relation-wise LRE performance on GPT-J, and respective hyperparameters.

    relation, r                  |ranger |     ℓr     β     ρr    Faithfulness    Causality
    adjective antonym                  95     8             243   0.69 ± 0.07    0.86 ± 0.04
    adjective comparative              57     10            121   0.98 ± 0.01    0.94 ± 0.04
    adjective superlative              79     10            143   0.93 ± 0.02    0.99 ± 0.01
    characteristic gender               2     1              74   0.77 ± 0.11    0.97 ± 0.04
    city in country                    21     2             115   0.44 ± 0.10    0.89 ± 0.09
    company CEO                       287     6             173   0.06 ± 0.03    0.31 ± 0.05
    company hq                        163     6             126   0.21 ± 0.06    0.49 ± 0.04
    country capital city               24     3              68   0.88 ± 0.07    0.99 ± 0.02
    country currency                   23     3              88   0.58 ± 0.08    0.98 ± 0.03
    country language                   14     1              63   0.88 ± 0.09    0.99 ± 0.03
    country largest city               24     10             74   0.92 ± 0.05    0.99 ± 0.02
    food from country                  26     3             113   0.51 ± 0.12    0.97 ± 0.05
    fruit inside color                  6     7             107   0.65 ± 0.15    0.93 ± 0.07
    fruit outside color                 9     5             160   0.78 ± 0.15    0.83 ± 0.12
    landmark in country                91     6              97   0.36 ± 0.06    0.68 ± 0.02
    landmark on continent               5     4             158   0.56 ± 0.13    0.91 ± 0.02
    name birthplace                     8     7              91   0.92 ± 0.05    0.96 ± 0.07
    name gender                         2    emb             17   0.80 ± 0.16    0.94 ± 0.04
    name religion                       5     4              57   0.80 ± 0.10    0.99 ± 0.02
    object superclass                  10     7              91   0.85 ± 0.05    0.93 ± 0.03
    occupation age                      2     5              34   0.68 ± 0.03    1.00 ± 0.00
    occupation gender                   2     4              34   0.98 ± 0.04    1.00 ± 0.00
    person father                     968     8      2.25   217   0.07 ± 0.03    0.28 ± 0.04
    person lead singer of band         21     8             163   0.64 ± 0.09    0.84 ± 0.09
    person mother                     962     6             170   0.14 ± 0.04    0.39 ± 0.05
    person native language             30     6              92   0.65 ± 0.16    0.87 ± 0.03
    person occupation                  31     8             131   0.49 ± 0.08    0.66 ± 0.06
    person plays instrument             6     9             198   0.59 ± 0.10    0.76 ± 0.04
    person sport position              14     5              97   0.42 ± 0.15    0.74 ± 0.05
    person university                  69     4             153   0.64 ± 0.11    0.91 ± 0.04
    plays pro sport                     5     6             117   0.76 ± 0.06    0.94 ± 0.01
    pokemon evolution                  44     7             206   0.15 ± 0.05    0.25 ± 0.08
    president birth year               15     6             106   0.54 ± 0.14    0.84 ± 0.08
    president election year            18    emb             84   0.52 ± 0.20    0.91 ± 0.09
    product by company                 30     4             158   0.31 ± 0.14    0.54 ± 0.05
    star constellation name            31     8             152   0.41 ± 0.08    0.27 ± 0.04
    substance phase of matter           3     7              60   0.87 ± 0.09    0.97 ± 0.03
    superhero archnemesis              90     11            192   0.30 ± 0.08    0.60 ± 0.10
    superhero person                  100     8             228   0.44 ± 0.06    0.71 ± 0.07
    task done by tool                  51     5             145   0.29 ± 0.10    0.76 ± 0.07
    task person type                   32     8             109   0.49 ± 0.10    0.77 ± 0.10
    verb past tense                    76     11            182   0.95 ± 0.03    0.97 ± 0.02
    word first letter                  25     7             121   0.58 ± 0.09    0.91 ± 0.02
    word last letter                   18     6              61   0.57 ± 0.13    0.83 ± 0.10
    word sentiment                      3     4              94   0.63 ± 0.16    0.93 ± 0.03
    work location                      24     5             112   0.55 ± 0.09    0.94 ± 0.06


                                                23
