Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                              N EUROFORMER : M ULTIMODAL AND M ULTITASK
                                              G ENERATIVE P RETRAINING FOR B RAIN DATA
                                               Antonis Antoniades∗, Yiyi Yu, Joseph Canzano, William Wang, Spencer LaVere Smith
                                               University of California, Santa Barbara



                                                                                             A BSTRACT
arXiv:submit/5474436 [q-bio.NC] 15 Mar 2024


                                                          State-of-the-art systems neuroscience experiments yield large-scale multimodal
                                                          data, and these data sets require new tools for analysis. Inspired by the success
                                                          of large pretrained models in vision and language domains, we reframe the analy-
                                                          sis of large-scale, cellular-resolution neuronal spiking data into an autoregressive
                                                          spatiotemporal generation problem. Neuroformer is a multimodal, multitask gen-
                                                          erative pretrained transformer (GPT) model that is specifically designed to handle
                                                          the intricacies of data in systems neuroscience. It scales linearly with feature size,
                                                          can process an arbitrary number of modalities, and is adaptable to downstream
                                                          tasks, such as predicting behavior. We first trained Neuroformer on simulated
                                                          datasets, and found that it both accurately predicted simulated neuronal circuit
                                                          activity, and also intrinsically inferred the underlying neural circuit connectivity,
                                                          including direction. When pretrained to decode neural responses, the model pre-
                                                          dicted the behavior of a mouse with only few-shot fine-tuning, suggesting that
                                                          the model begins learning how to do so directly from the neural representations
                                                          themselves, without any explicit supervision. We used an ablation study to show
                                                          that joint training on neuronal responses and behavior boosted performance, high-
                                                          lighting the model’s ability to associate behavioral and neural representations in
                                                          an unsupervised manner. These findings show that Neuroformer can analyze neu-
                                                          ral datasets and their emergent properties, informing the development of models
                                                          and hypotheses associated with the brain.


                                              1       I NTRODUCTION

                                              Systems neuroscience experiments are growing in complexity with a cascade of technical advances.
                                              In addition to recording neuronal activity from hundreds to thousands of neurons in parallel from
                                              multiple brain areas (Yu et al., 2021; Stirman et al., 2016; de Vries et al., 2020a;b), experimenters
                                              are also simultaneously acquiring behavioral data including eye positions and body movements
                                              (Stringer et al., 2019; Steinmetz et al., 2019). Neuroscientists seek models for these rich datasets to
                                              obtain insights into how neural circuitry is involved with behavior. However, complex datasets and
                                              experimental designs present challenges for model development, particularly in incorporating the
                                              various modalities, and subsequently creating models for a host of different applications.

                                              In recent years, deep neural networks (DNNs) have demonstrated their potential in modeling
                                              neural activity and circuitry (Yamins et al., 2014; Kubilius et al., 2018; Richards et al., 2019).
                                              Brain-inspired DNNs have exhibited responses similar to visually evoked neural responses in visual
                                              cortical areas (Yamins et al., 2014; Kindel et al., 2019; Mineault et al., 2021; Yamins & DiCarlo,
                                              2016). These models were trained in a goal-driven approach, such as the classification of images.
                                              Then intermediate representations in the model were compared to observed neuronal activities
                                              in biological brains. In other work, autoencoder-based latent variable models have been applied
                                              to the analysis of neuronal activities, with the assumption that the single-trial spiking activity of
                                              a behavior task depends on underlying dynamics (Sussillo et al., 2016; Ye & Pandarinath, 2021;
                                              Zhao & Park, 2017; Schneider et al., 2022). These approaches can provide insight into principles
                                              of neural circuitry, but often entail inductive biases that are not always ideal. General purpose,
                                              multimodal models can provide a complementary approach.
                                                  ∗
                                                      Contact: antonis@ucsb.edu, Code: https://github.com/a-antoniades/Neuroformer


                                                                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To develop models for correlating neuron activities, sensory input, and behavior, we sought
a powerful multimodal architecture and training objective. The transformer architecture has
demonstrated its flexibility in modeling data from various domains, finding widespread adoption in
applications including vision, language, and sound (Liu et al., 2021a; Brown et al., 2020a; Huang
et al., 2018; Radford et al., 2021; Gan et al., 2020; Li et al., 2021). In particular, transformer-based
language-vision models exhibit high performance for learning multimodal representations for text
and images, enabling text-to-image generation (Ramesh et al., 2021; Radford et al., 2021). Key to
this is that a) the transformer is scalable; i.e it does not suffer from the vanishing gradient problem
(Pascanu et al., 2012) b) it makes few assumptions about the input data (minimal inductive bias)
(Jaegle et al., 2021b;a) and c) it can contextualize information within long-duration multimodal con-
texts. Here we present a transformer-based model for multimodal datasets in systems neuroscience,
including neuronal activity, stimuli, and behavior. We developed a generative model which firstly
aligns and subsequently fuses neuronal activities, input signals (e.g., visual stimuli) and behavior.
Our key contributions are as follows: a) Introduce an approach that reframes the population re-
sponse inference problem as a causally-masked, spatiotemporal autoregressive generation problem.
b) Show how to employ a generative pretraining paradigm for neural data. c) Investigate the po-
tential of multimodal, multitask, generative transformer models to analyze and parse neuroscience
data, and obtain insights.


2    R ELATED W ORK

Representational and Functional Similarities between DNNs and Mammalian Brains There
are similarities between the hierarchical representations of convolutional DNNs and the visual and
inferior-temporal cortices (Yamins et al., 2014; Kubilius et al., 2018; Kindel et al., 2019; Mineault
et al., 2021; Yamins & DiCarlo, 2016). More recently, parallel-path networks trained using a
contrastive-predictive objective were shown to separate into pathways that mirrored the functional
specializations of the dorsal and ventral streams in mouse visual cortex (Bakhtiari et al., 2021). Sim-
ilarly, there are parallels between human speech and language models (Caucheteux & King, 2022;
Millet et al., 2022). Lastly, reports have shown the plausibility of transformers replicating specific
neural functions and circuits (Whittington et al., 2021; Bricken & Pehlevan, 2022). In our work,
establishing a similarity between a DNN and the brain is not our focus. Instead, we are focused
on developing an analytical and functional tool. This tool, Neuroformer, can exhibit similarities in
representational and functional characteristics with biological neural circuitry, and we explore that
here.

Learning Latent Dynamics of Population Activity Variational auto-encoders have been used to
infer latent dynamics embedded in complex, high-dimensional neural data (Sussillo et al., 2016;
Zhou & Wei, 2020). Recently, a transformer architecture has been used in place of RNNs for the
same application (Ye & Pandarinath, 2021), and another project has trained a latent model using
a contrastive objective (Schneider et al., 2022). These empirical findings show that this approach
avoids over-fitting and outperforms previous methods. In our work, we integrate these paradigms,
by employing a contrastive objective at the front end of a generative model.

Large Multimodal and Multitask Models The transformer has proven effective at processing a
variety of modalities including vision, languange, and sound (Liu et al., 2021a; Brown et al., 2020a;
Huang et al., 2018). Subsequently, the field introduced multimodal models. For example, models for
interactions between images and text (Tan & Bansal, 2019; Chen et al., 2019; Lu et al., 2019). Some
models attempt to align the modalities with separate feature encoders using contrastive learning
approaches (Radford et al., 2021; Gan et al., 2020), and alignment and fusion (Li et al., 2021). We
experimentally validate these methods on neural data, by using our own generative and contrastive
learning objective. Furthermore, architecture innovations have resulted in models that are agnostic
to the input modalities and can be applied to a large variety of tasks (Jaegle et al., 2021b;a). Lastly, it
has been recently observed, that large models pretrained on massive datasets of text exhibit emergent
properties. This has been observed in Large Language Models (LLMs) as in (Brown et al., 2020b;
Wei et al., 2023; Jung et al., 2022; Creswell et al., 2022; Ganguli et al., 2023), but also in scientific
domains (Rives et al., 2021; Bakhtiari et al., 2021). We take inspiration from these lines of work to


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


build a framework for modelling neural data that can efficiently scale to large inputs and an arbitrary
number of modalities.

3   M ODEL

                Token                Current State                        Neural History                  Visual                     Arbitrary Modality             Masked Token
                 Enc.


                                                                                   Multi-modal feature fusion                                                                         AR Decoding


                                                                                                                                                                                          ID Proj.
                                                                                                                                                                                                     ID


                                                                                                                                                  Cross Attention
                                                                                                               Cross Attention
                                                                 Cross Attention


                                                                                                                                 Self Attention
                                                                                              Self Attention


                                                                                                                                                                     Self Attention
      Feature


                                                Self Attention
     Encoding     Contrastive
                   Matching


                                                                                                                                                                                          dt Proj.
                                                                                                                                                                                                     dt


Figure 1: Neuroformer architecture. Inputs undergo contrastive matching to ensure efficient repre-
sentations for downstream processing. Neural activity, stimuli, and other modalities are added to
the Current State using cascading self- and cross-attention modules. Finally, the output of spike
predictions (neuron ID and time interval tokens) are read out. During inference time, neuron IDs
autoregressively populate the block, and the corresponding predicted time tokens act as additive
temporal encodings.


Workflow As input, our model takes action potential data, i.e., spike trains, from multiple neurons
recorded or imaged simultaneously, and breaks them up into the Current State Ic , and past state Ip
according to specified temporal context windows (wc , wp ) (Fig. 1, blue and purple, respectively).
We do this to discretize them and precisely align the neural representations with features from other
modalities. Model inputs, including neural, visual, and other features, are optionally processed by
feature encoders. The modalities are first aligned via a multimodal contrastive module (Radford
et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2020; Oord et al., 2018) which aims to learn matching representations for
the neural features and the features from other modalities. Subsequently, a cross-modal transformer
fuses the current neural response Ic with all other features. We then decode our fused representation
using a causally-masked transformer decoder. All training is self-supervised and requires no data
labelling.

Feature Backbones We assign an ID (number) to each neuron in our dataset and model it as a
token. At each step, a learnable look-up table projects each neuron spike contained in our Current
and Past States onto an embedding space E, resulting in vectors (Tc , E) and (Tp , E), where Tc , T p
are the corresponding state’s sequence length (number of spikes + padding). For video frames,
we optionally use a single layer of 3D Convolutions (Hara et al., 2017) before splitting them into
patches of size ( Tf , H, W, E ), as is standard for visual transformers (Fig. 1, Feature Encoding,
green) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021b; Li et al., 2019). We then feed these patches into
the cross-modal layers.

Multimodal Contrastive Representation Learning Drawing from recent developments in vision
and language representation learning (Radford et al., 2021; Zellers et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021), our
approach leverages a contrastive learning objective before fusing our feature sets (Fig. 1, Con-
trastive Matching). Our architecture allows alignment of an arbitrary number of modalities; how-
ever, here we focus on the three-modal case. We use Visual features Fp,c ∼ (B, T, H, W, E),
Current State neural embeddings Ic ∼ (B, Tc , E), and Behavior features Ac ∼ (B, Ta , E) as our
modality representatives, where B = Batch Size and T = sequence length. These are projected
to a latent dimension d using three linear layers gf , gi , ga . We calculate pairwise similarities be-
tween the modalities, yielding three matrices of dimensions (Bf , Bi ), (Bi , Ba ), (Ba , Bf ) where


                                                                            3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Bf = Bi = Ba = B. The diagonal entries correspond to ground-truth pair similarities. These
scores are then softmax-normalized and used to compute the contrastive loss via cross-entropy H,
where the probability p should be 0 and 1 for the negative and positive pairs y, respectively. We
generalize the computations with pair notation (m,n) where m and n are any of the modalities (either
F, I, or A):

                                                                 exp(s(m, nk )/τ )
             s(m, n) = gm (mp,c )T gn (nc )              pmn
                                                          k  = PK                                     (1)
                                                                k=1 exp(s(m, nk )/τ )

We then apply these equations to each pair (F,I), (I,A), (A,F), and compute the contrastive loss:

             1
    Lvna =     E(F,I,A)∈d [H(y f i (F ), pf i (F )) + H(y ia (I), pia (I)) + H(y af (A), paf (A))]    (2)
             3

By explicitly imposing alignment, we encourage the model to uncover the representational common-
alities between biologically relevant features (Schneider et al., 2022). This is particularly helpful in
low-data settings, mitigating the over-fitting that can occur with variable neural signals. We observe
consistent performance improvement upon adding the contrastive objective (see Fig. 6, 10.)

Feature Fusion Following alignment, the masked Current State, Ic is fused with all other features,
in our case the visual F and neural Past State features, Ip by cascading cross-attention modules.
This stage of the model is similar to the (Jaegle et al., 2021b;a), where cross-attention between a
smaller latent array (Tc , E), in our case the Current State and larger byte arrays (Tf , sE), in our
case the Past State neural features, is iteratively carried out. This architecture decision has two main
advantages: a) It introduces a bottleneck imposed by the smaller Ic array, of length size Tc that upon
operating with a larger feature array of length Tf , reduces the complexity of attention from O(Tf2 ) to
O(Tc Tf ). When Tc is much less than Tf (expressed mathematically as limTc →0,Tf →∞ Tc /Tf = 0),
the complexity scales linearly with Tf . This enables the use of finer-grained features, like large-
resolution visual features or in our case raw video frames, which are essential for modeling lower-
level visual areas. b) The iterative nature of the algorithm enables us to fuse an arbitrary number of
modalities with our Current State.

Causal Spike Modelling After it has been fused with all other modalities, the resulting Current
State is decoded using a causally masked transformer (Brown et al., 2020a). At each prediction step,
the model predicts both which neuron will fire, and within which sub-interval (dt(n) = n ∈ wc ),
using two linear projections from the last self-attention layer (Fig. 1, AR Decoding) mapping to
the corresponding (pi , pdt ) label distributions. Notice that two Spikes can occur at the same time,
and therefore by predicting bins within which neurons fire, we can sequentially predict spikes that
occur simultaneously. We optimize for this objective, by minimizing the cross entropy between the
predicted and ground truth distributions:


           Lce(I) = E(I)∼d H(yI , pI )                         Lce(dt) = E(dt)∼d H(ydt , pdt )


Loss Function The model is jointly optimized end-to-end using the contrastive objective Lvnc ,
and cross-entropy loss for both Ic and dtc , (Lce(I) , Lce(dt) ). The resulting loss is a weighted average
of the three losses:
                        L = (γ)Lvnc + (µ)Lce(I) + (1 − γ − µ)Lce(dt)                                   (3)

Inference - Generating Simulations At inference time, the model autoregressively predicts the
distributions of the nth step, (Ic (n), dtc (n)), outputting an end-of-state [EOS] token to indicate it
has completed the Current Target State Wc , in a similar fashion to work in image-text generation
(Ramesh et al., 2021), (Fig. 1, AR Decoding) . To sample from the respective distributions (pI , pdt )
we use nucleus sampling (Holtzman et al., 2019). The predicted Current Target State neuron IDs are
then incorporated into the Past State according to the Past State Context Window wp together with
the predicted sub-intervals dtc , which act as additive temporal embeddings (Fig. 1, dotted arrow
from AR Decoding).


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Finetuning - Transferring to New Tasks A primary motivation for redefining the spike inference
problem in a manner compatible with contemporary pretraining paradigms is the ability to utilize a
broad spectrum of techniques developed within this framework. To transfer to a new task, whether it
be behavioral prediction or any other downstream task, we adopt a straightforward heuristic. First,
if necessary, the data distribution is discretized into n classes. Then, a mean-pooled representation
from our final latent layer is projected onto the appropriate feature space pv ∈ n. The loss is
calculated using the standard multi-class cross-entropy for classification (Howard & Ruder, 2018;
Yosinski et al., 2014; Hinton et al., 2015) of mean-squared error for regression.

Training We trained all Neuroformer models with 8 layers and 8 heads for the decoder and each
of the cross-attention modules, with an embedding dimension of 256 and an 80/20 train/test split.
V1+AL and Visnav models equated to a total of 40, 000, 000 and 100, 000, 000 parameters respec-
tively. We emprically observed an increase in performance up until the specified parameter sizes.
We used AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019) in PyTorch. Learning rate was 2e-4, with
linear warmup and cosyne decay schedules. Batch size was kept at 224 for pretraining and 32 for
fine-tuning.

4     R ESULTS
To evaluate performance of Neuroformer, we used both artificial data sets, with known ground truth,
and real neural data sets, with authentic variability and real-world relevance. We analyzed the per-
formance in terms of inference and features.

4.1   DATA

Simulated Dataset We simulated a spiking neural network characterized by directional connec-
tivity with three hub neurons using Brian2 simulator (Stimberg et al., 2019) (Hub-net simulation).
The network has N = 300 leaky integrate-and-fire neurons with stochastic current. The membrane
potential (Vi ) of each neuron was simulated as a stochastic differential equation:
                                                        r
                                     dVi    I − Vi         2                                   (4)
                                         =          +σ        · xi
                                      dt       τ           τ
The membrane time constant was set to τ = 10ms as a Gaussian random variable with zero mean
and 1 standard deviation. We scaled the random variable by σ = 0.5. The total dataset equated to 1
million tokens.

Two-photon calcium imaging datasets We assessed the performance of Neuroformer using real
neural datasets. These consisted of neuronal activity recorded from awake mice, which were either
passively viewing visual stimuli (Passive-Stim data), or actively engaged in a visually-guided navi-
gation task (Visnav data). The activity was recorded using two-photon calcium imaging, (Dombeck
et al., 2007; Yu et al., 2021; 2022) and neuronal spikes were deconvolved from calcium traces via the
suite2p calcium imaging processing pipeline, (Stimberg et al., 2019) complemented by a Bayesian
spike inference method (Pnevmatikakis et al., 2013). The Passive-Stim data comprised recordings
from 386 neurons in the primary visual cortex and a higher visual area (V1 + AL). These neurons
responded reliably to drifting grating stimuli and a naturalistic movie. Two Visnav datasets were
derived from recordings in the lateral visual cortex (2022 neurons) or L2/3 medial (1905 neurons),
spanning V1 and multiple higher visual areas. During these recordings, the mice were engaged in
a visually-guided navigation task within a virtual environment, with their movements tracked by a
ball system (Harvey et al., 2009) that controlled the first-person view within the virtual environment.
The Visnav neurons conveyed information about both the visual input and the speed of the animal’s
movements. The resulting dataset sizes equated to 80 × 103 , 800 × 103 and 1 × 106 tokens.

4.2   ATTENTION R EVEALS THE F UNCTIONAL C ONNECTIVITY OF S IMULATED N EURONAL
      C IRCUITS

To test our hypothesis that attention can provide insights into neural circuitry, we first trained the
Neuroformer on a simulated dataset with known ground-truth connectivity. This dataset is unimodal,


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


a                                                                                                                b                                 Ground truth
                                                                                                                                              Synaptic connection weight
                                                              Ground truth network
                                                              Red neurons are hub neurons
                                                                                                                                                                               0.8


                                                                                                                     Target neuron ID
                                                                                                                                        100                                    0.6

                                                                                                                                                                               0.4

                                                                                                                                        200                                    0.2
c
                                                                                                                                                                               0
Spike data from ground truth network
Predictions from Neuroformer                                                                                                            300
                                                                                                                                                   100      200          300
                                                                                                                                                                               -0.2
                                                                                                                                                  Source neuron ID

                                                      d                     Pearson correlation                  e                        Inferred from Neuroformer
                                                                             of neuronal activity                                              using average attention
    Neuron


                                                                                                          1                                                                    0.05

                                                                                                                                                                               0.04


                                                   Target neuron ID


                                                                                                                     Target neuron ID
                                                                      100                                 0.5                           100
                                                                                                                                                                               0.03

                                                                                                                                                                               0.02
                                                                      200                                 0                             200
                                         1s
        40                                                                                                                                                                     0.01
Count


        20
                                                                      300                                 -0.5                          300                                    0
        0                                                                       100      200        300                                            100      200          300
        -0.4           0           0.4       0.8                              Source neuron ID                                                    Source neuron ID
               Test - prediction correlation


Figure 2: Validating Neuroformer with ground truth data. (a) A model spiking neural network was
generated to provide ground truth for validation. To provide a salient network feature, three ”hub”
neurons are strongly connected to many other neurons. (b) The ground truth connectivity matrix
provides a reference for the network. (c) Raster plots (top) for neurons show that Neuroformer
provides spike predictions (red) that closely match the spiking of the ground truth network (black).
Correlations between the predicted and ground truth spike trains were generally positive, and ¿0.1
(bottom). (d) A simple Pearson correlation analysis reveals three subnetworks, but not the hub
neurons, because of the lack of directionality or causality. (e) Attention mechanisms in Neuroformer
infer causality and thus reveal the hub neurons.


so we simply omitted the visual cross-attention module, essentially reducing to a vanilla GPT archi-
tecture. After training, we ran masked inference on the data, aggregating the attention values that are
assigned to each neuron, and counting how many times neurons attend to each other during this pro-
cess. This results to two square matrices Na , N z of size (N, N ), where N is equal to our neuronal
population’s size (300). By dividing (Na ) by (N z) we compute the average attention aav. (i, i) that
neurons assign to one another. Our results recovered the hub connectivity structure of the ground
truth neuronal circuit ( I ∈ 50, 150, 200 ) using only the spiking activity (Fig. 2). This attention
analysis identified the neurons that were driving circuit activity. Compared to a simple correlation
matrix, the attention analysis matrix provides directional, potentially causal, information.

4.3          R EALISTIC AUTOREGRESSIVE S IMULATION OF M ULTIMODAL N EURONAL DATASET

To validate Neuroformer as a viable analysis tool for neuronal population datasets we tested its
ability to model real neuronal data. We trained Neuroformer to predict visually evoked neuronal
activity in a population of 386 neurons, recorded using two-photon calcium imaging in a mouse.
The neurons were recorded simultaneously, and spanned two visual cortical areas: primary visual
cortex (V1) and the anterolateral (AL) higher visual area. After training, Neuroformer is able to au-
toregressively generate whole-trial simulations (96 seconds) of the neuronal population that closely
resemble held-out trials (Fig. 3).

4.3.1           N EUROFORMER O UTPERFORMS GLM
The Generalized Linear Model (GLM) (Truccolo et al., 2005; Pillow et al., 2008b) is a versatile
and widely used statistical modeling framework that generalizes linear regression to accommodate
non-normal response variables and non-linear relationships. It has been widely used by neurosci-
entists as a performant tool for stimulus-response population decoding. Although useful, it has


                                                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


a   Multi-region calcium imaging
                                                  b


                                                       Neuron ID 379


                                                                                                                           Neuron ID 184
                               RL
                                    AL
                          AM             LM LI                                                         corr. 0.73                          corr. 0.52

                          PM                                                                                   10 s
                                V1


                                                                                                                           Neuron ID 234
                                                       Neuron ID 43
              A
                      L


                                                                                                                                                                             2 spikes/s
          M
                  P
                                    1 mm                                                               corr. 0.76                          corr. 0.59
c


                                                      us


                                                                                                                          us
                                                     ul


                                                                                                                          ul
                                                   im


                                                                                                                        im
                                                 St


                                                                                                                      St
                                                                       Gratings   Naturalistic video                                        Gratings    Naturalistic video


                                                   d
                                                      Neuron 1, Layer 0, Head 0              Neuron 1, Layer 0, Head 1   Neuron 10, Layer 3, Head 1 Neuron 62, Layer 1, Head 0


Figure 3: Demonstrating utility of Neuroformer with real data. (a) We measured neural activity in
two visual cortical areas, V1 and AL, in mice using large field-of-view two-photon calcium imaging.
After screening for reliable neuronal responses to stimuli, 386 neurons were included for analysis.
(b) Neuroformer modeled the spiking data accurately, for responses to two classes of visual stimuli:
gratings and naturalistic videos (black ground-truth, red generated). (c) Neuroformer vs. GLM
population response prediction comparison. Our model’s predictions where more correlated with
the ground-truth (t-test, p = 0.0196) (d) Attention provided data-driven maps of the parts of stimuli
that had statistical dependencies with neuronal responses.


some significant disadvantages, in that it requires heavy inductive bias (linear kernel, non-linearity,
Poisson spiking). This limits both its generality and flexibility in simultaneously integrating many
modalities. We compared the predicted, trial-averaged responses from a GLM to Neuroformer on
the V1+AL dataset and found that our model’s predictions where more closely correlated with the
ground-truth (Fig. 3c). Our results revealed that our model could better capture the variability across
the diverse set of stimuli in the dataset. We empirically observed that a single GLM could perform
well on either the diffraction gratings or naturalistic movies, but not both at the same time.

4.3.2     B IOLOGICALLY R ELEVANT F EATURES E MERGE FROM S TIMULUS -R ESPONSE
          C ROSS - ATTENTION
Again, we turned to the attention parameters in the Neuroformer, as we had for the hub neuron anal-
ysis. We plotted the spatial locations on visual stimulus frames where cross-attention was allocated,
i.e., a sort of attention map. These maps exhibited localized features and structure. These maps are
related to the concept of receptive fields, but are specific to the full context of ongoing visual stimuli
and neuronal activity. Thus, they can reveal novel relationships and insights into potentially causal
relationships among neuronal activity and stimuli (Fig. 3).

4.3.3     H IGHLY ACCURATE AND F EW- SHOT P REDICTION OF MOUSE B EHAVIOR
In this section, we introduce the notion of finetuning (Howard & Ruder, 2018) for neuronal data. By
reframing the neuronal modelling problem to be compatible with modern NLP approaches, we can
leverage similar techniques to solve tasks that can benefit from neuronal pretraining. One such task
is predicting the behavior of a mouse from its neuronal responses. This is a common thing to do
in neuroscience analysis, where researchers want to investigate the relationship between neuronal
activity and behavior. Furthermore, such paradigms could be useful in brain-computer interface ap-
plications. For this analysis, we used neural and behavior data from a mouse running in a virtual
reality setup. Neuroformer can support both classification with a mutli-class cross-entropy objec-
tive or regression using mean-squared error, which can be chosen according to the nature of the
task. Here we report results using regression (Fig. 4, Table 1) and have included classification and
regression inference results for all models in the appendix (Figs 11, 12). Similarly to how multi-


                                                                                              7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


task models in the field of vision and language work, finetuning a model for a new task involves
projecting the features of the last layer onto the new feature space. (Howard & Ruder, 2018)

                           Lasso Reg.                                      GLM                                                    MLP                            Bi-directional GRU                                                          Neuroformer
                                           Lasso Reg.                                                        GLM                                    MLP        Bi-directional GRU                                                                              Neuroformer
 1                                         True                                                              True                                   True       True                                                                                            True

 0

 1

 2
            0         50       100      150       200   0            50    100   150                          200   0      50      100        150    200   0        50                 100                    150       200        0        50        100     150       200
                Lasso Reg.                                                                                                           MLP                                                                                               Neuroformer
 1              True                                                                                                                 True                                                                                              True


 0
                                                              GLM                                                                                                                                        Bi-directional GRU
                                                              True                                                                                                                                       True
 1
            0         50       100      150       200   0            50    100   150                          200   0      50      100        150    200   0        50                 100                    150       200        0        50        100     150       200



                  Figure 4: Raw Speed vs. Predicted for all methods for medial (top) and lateral (bottom).

Despite the inherent stochasticity in the speed
of the mouse, the predictions of our model                   Table 1: Behavior Prediction
when trained on the full dataset are highly cor-
related with the held-out ground-truth. Ad-                                    Pearson Corr (r)
ditionally, Neuroformer significantly outper-
formed conventional approaches, achieving              Model                  Lateral Medial
pearson r = 0.97, with the held-out ground             Lasso Regression        0.62      0.73
truth for the respective lateral and medial            GLM                     0.69      0.81
datasets (Table 1). To determine the effec-            MLP                     0.83      0.85
tiveness of the masked neuronal prediction pre-        Bidirectional GRU       0.83      0.88
training we compared the performance of pre-           Neuroformer             0.97      0.97
trained vs. randomly initialized models on 10%
and 1% of the finetuning data. The pretrained
few-shot models quickly approached the performance of the model trained on the full dataset (Fig.
5b,c). Crucially, we observed that the pretrained model that was finetuned on 1% of the data out-
performed the randomly-initialized model that was finetuned on 10% of the data. This suggests
that pretraining enables the model to begin learning representations that go beyond the optimization
objective as has been observed in generative models within natural language generation. (Radford
et al., 2019; Sanh et al., 2022)
        a 1.5                                                                                                b          No Pretraining, 1%
                                                                                                                                                                                    c 1.0
                            r = 0.97                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Finetune, 1%
                                                                                                                        No Pretraining, 10%
                            p < 0.001                                                                                                                                                                                                                Finetune, 10%
                1.0                                                                                                     Finetune, 1%
                                                                                                            0.8
                                                                                 Ground-Truth Correlation


                                                                                                                                                                              Behavior Loss (holdout)


                                                                                                                        Finetune, 10%                                                                                                                No Pretraining, 1%
                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.9
                                                                                                                        Full Training                                                                                                                No Pretraining, 10%
                0.5
                                                                                                            0.6
Predicted


                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.8
                0.0
                                                                                                            0.4
                0.5                                                                                                                                                                                     0.7


                                                                                                            0.2
                1.0                                                                                                                                                                                     0.6


                1.5                                                                                         0.0
                      1.5     1.0    0.5       0.0      0.5          1.0   1.5                                                                                                                                      0         20        40           60      80       100
                                              True                                                                                       Model                                                                                             Epoch


Figure 5: (a) Velocity prediction vs. Ground Truth. Neuroformer’s predictions were highly corre-
lated (pearson r1%,f ull = 0.97) with the actual speed of the mouse. (b) Pretrained neuronal models
exhibit few-shot learning of mouse speed. The pretrained model finetuned using 1% of speed data
was able to significantly outperform a non-pretrained equivalent trained on 10% of the data. (pearson
r1%,f t = 0.51 vs. r10%,nopre = 0.33 respectively) (c) Behavior loss. The pretrained models (green)
were able to converge faster and to a lower testing loss compared to the non-pretrained equivalents.


5                A BLATIONS

To explore the impact of each component of Neuroformer, we implemented a range of model ver-
sions. Starting from just decoding from the Current State, we progressively incorporated Past State,


                                                                                                                                 8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Video, Behavioral modalities, and Alignment using contrastive learning. With each addition, we
noted an enhancement in the model’s ability to generate realistic neuronal responses (Fig. 6, 10).

                Naturalistic, V1 + AL                               Visnav, Medial                                                   Visnav, Lateral

     0.45                                           0.32                                                             0.34

                                                    0.30
     0.40
                                                                                                                     0.32
                                                    0.28
     0.35
F1


                                               F1


                                                                                                                F1
                                                    0.26                                                             0.30


     0.30                                           0.24
                                                                                                                     0.28
                                                    0.22
     0.25
                                                                                                                     0.26
                                                    0.20
                                          eo


                                                                                   eo


                                                                                                                                                    eo
                                                                                                           e


                                                                                                                                                                            e
                                                                                                 r


                                                                                                                                                                  r
                                te


                                                                             te


                                                                                                                                              te
                te


                                                               te


                                                                                                                                te
                                                                                                io


                                                                                                                                                                 io
                                                                                                          tiv


                                                                                                                                                                           tiv
                              ta


                                                                         ta


                                                                                                                                          ta
            ta


                                                           ta


                                                                                                                            ta
                                         id


                                                                                  id


                                                                                                                                                   id
                                                                                            av


                                                                                                                                                             av
                                                                                                      as


                                                                                                                                                                       as
                           tS


                                                                        tS


                                                                                                                                         tS
            S


                                                           S


                                                                                                                            S
                                     V


                                                                              V


                                                                                                                                               V
                                                                                           eh


                                                                                                                                                            eh
                                                                                                     tr


                                                                                                                                                                      tr
                         as


                                                                    as


                                                                                                                                     as
                                     +


                                                                             +


                                                                                                                                              +
                                                                                                 on


                                                                                                                                                                  on
                                                                                        B


                                                                                                                                                         B
                       P


                                                                    P


                                                                                                                                     P
                                                                                       +


                                                                                                                                                        +
                                                                                                C


                                                                                                                                                                 C
                     +


                                                                +


                                                                                                                                 +
                                                                                            +


                                                                                                                                                             +
Figure 6: Model component effect on performance. Each of the components (Current State, Past
State, Video, Behavior, and Contrastive) improve the predictive capability of the model across
datasets and brain regions. Points color-coded according to model architecture (see Fig. 1)
                                                 .

Of particular interest, was the Lateral dataset where the behavioral modality we incorporated for
the ablation study was eye position (see Fig. 13 for predictions). We hypothesized that by learning
to extrapolate from the eye position to the visual field of the mouse, the model could improve its
performance, which is what we observed. While more investigation needs to go into understanding
exactly how Neuroformer incorporated eye position within this context, this result highlights the
potential of our approach.
By observing the fluctuation in performance as components within the model are selectively in-
corporated, scientists can examine hypotheses about the relevance of various input modalities or
phenomenological behaviors to different brain regions. Ultimately, the development of modular and
performant foundation models of the brain will create new avenues for the scientific exploration of
the principles that underpin neuronal function and intelligence.


6        C ONCLUSION

We have developed a new method to enable generative pretraining of multimodal neural data, and
have demonstrated its utility accross four novel neural datasets with diverse structure. Our initial ob-
servations showed that pretraining not only adopted representations that mirrored the causal patterns
found in neuronal circuitry, but was also able to effectively enhance performance in downstream
applications, enabling rapid few-shot adaptation to behavior-related tasks.
Our model outperformed conventional approaches, while in comparison incorporating minimal in-
ductive biases and retaining an identical architecture across datasets and experiments. Overall, the
model was applied to 4 modalities (neural data, video, speed, eye position), and 3 decoding tasks
(neuron ID, neuron dt, speed). The architecture enables easy expansion of the model to more modal-
ities and tasks, making it compatible with almost any type of systems neuroscience dataset and
decoding objective.
Concluding, the Neuroformer enables systems neuroscience to leverage the full suite of tools in
generative, multitask and multi-modal transformers. It paves the way for scaling training of neuro-
science models and potentially connecting them with Large Language Models. This advancement
could foster models with new emergent capabilities, benefiting not just neural data analysis but also
various other applications. Our work sets the stage for promising research within this domain. 1

     1
         For a more thorough discussion of limitations, please see Appendix A.


                                                                             9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Shahab Bakhtiari, Patrick Mineault, Tim Lillicrap, Christopher C. Pack, and Blake A. Richards.
  The functional specialization of visual cortex emerges from training parallel pathways with self-
  supervised predictive learning. bioRxiv, 2021. doi: 10.1101/2021.06.18.448989. URL https:
  //www.biorxiv.org/content/early/2021/06/18/2021.06.18.448989.
Trenton Bricken and Cengiz Pehlevan. Attention approximates sparse distributed memory, 2022.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M.
  Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz
  Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec
  Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. CoRR,
  abs/2005.14165, 2020a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.14165.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M.
  Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin,
  Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners, 2020b.
Charlotte Caucheteux and Jean-Rémi King. Brains and algorithms partially converge in natural lan-
  guage processing. Communications Biology, 5(1):134, Feb 2022. ISSN 2399-3642. doi: 10.1038/
  s42003-022-03036-1. URL https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-03036-1.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework
  for contrastive learning of visual representations, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2002.05709.
Yen-Chun Chen, Linjie Li, Licheng Yu, Ahmed El Kholy, Faisal Ahmed, Zhe Gan, Yu Cheng, and
  Jingjing Liu. UNITER: learning universal image-text representations. CoRR, abs/1909.11740,
  2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1909.11740.
Antonia Creswell, Murray Shanahan, and Irina Higgins. Selection-inference: Exploiting large lan-
  guage models for interpretable logical reasoning, 2022.
Saskia E J de Vries, Jerome A Lecoq, Michael A Buice, Peter A Groblewski, Gabriel K Ocker,
  Michael Oliver, David Feng, Nicholas Cain, Peter Ledochowitsch, Daniel Millman, Kate Roll,
  Marina Garrett, Tom Keenan, Leonard Kuan, Stefan Mihalas, Shawn Olsen, Carol Thompson,
  Wayne Wakeman, Jack Waters, Derric Williams, Chris Barber, Nathan Berbesque, Brandon Blan-
  chard, Nicholas Bowles, Shiella D Caldejon, Linzy Casal, Andrew Cho, Sissy Cross, Chinh Dang,
  Tim Dolbeare, Melise Edwards, John Galbraith, Nathalie Gaudreault, Terri L Gilbert, Fiona Grif-
  fin, Perry Hargrave, Robert Howard, Lawrence Huang, Sean Jewell, Nika Keller, Ulf Knoblich,
  Josh D Larkin, Rachael Larsen, Chris Lau, Eric Lee, Felix Lee, Arielle Leon, Lu Li, Fuhui Long,
  Jennifer Luviano, Kyla Mace, Thuyanh Nguyen, Jed Perkins, Miranda Robertson, Sam Seid, Eric
  Shea-Brown, Jianghong Shi, Nathan Sjoquist, Cliff Slaughterbeck, David Sullivan, Ryan Valenza,
  Casey White, Ali Williford, Daniela M Witten, Jun Zhuang, Hongkui Zeng, Colin Farrell, Lydia
  Ng, Amy Bernard, John W Phillips, R Clay Reid, and Christof Koch. A large-scale standardized
  physiological survey reveals functional organization of the mouse visual cortex. Nature neuro-
  science, 23(1):138—151, January 2020a. ISSN 1097-6256. doi: 10.1038/s41593-019-0550-9.
  URL https://europepmc.org/articles/PMC6948932.
Saskia EJ de Vries, Jerome A Lecoq, Michael A Buice, Peter A Groblewski, Gabriel K Ocker,
  Michael Oliver, David Feng, Nicholas Cain, Peter Ledochowitsch, Daniel Millman, et al. A
  large-scale standardized physiological survey reveals functional organization of the mouse visual
  cortex. Nature neuroscience, 23(1):138–151, 2020b.
Daniel A Dombeck, Anton N Khabbaz, Forrest Collman, Thomas L Adelman, and David W Tank.
  Imaging large-scale neural activity with cellular resolution in awake, mobile mice. Neuron, 56
  (1):43–57, 2007.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszko-
  reit, and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at
  scale, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.11929.
Zhe Gan, Yen-Chun Chen, Linjie Li, Chen Zhu, Yu Cheng, and Jingjing Liu. Large-scale adversarial
  training for vision-and-language representation learning. CoRR, abs/2006.06195, 2020. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.06195.
Deep Ganguli, Amanda Askell, Nicholas Schiefer, Thomas I. Liao, Kamilė Lukošiūtė, Anna Chen,
  Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Catherine Olsson, Danny Hernandez, Dawn Drain, Dustin Li,
  Eli Tran-Johnson, Ethan Perez, Jackson Kernion, Jamie Kerr, Jared Mueller, Joshua Landau,
  Kamal Ndousse, Karina Nguyen, Liane Lovitt, Michael Sellitto, Nelson Elhage, Noemi Mercado,
  Nova DasSarma, Oliver Rausch, Robert Lasenby, Robin Larson, Sam Ringer, Sandipan Kundu,
  Saurav Kadavath, Scott Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Sheer El Showk, Tamera Lanham, Timothy
  Telleen-Lawton, Tom Henighan, Tristan Hume, Yuntao Bai, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Ben Mann,
  Dario Amodei, Nicholas Joseph, Sam McCandlish, Tom Brown, Christopher Olah, Jack Clark,
  Samuel R. Bowman, and Jared Kaplan. The capacity for moral self-correction in large language
  models, 2023.
Kensho Hara, Hirokatsu Kataoka, and Yutaka Satoh. Learning spatio-temporal features with 3d
  residual networks for action recognition, 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1708.
  07632.
Christopher D. Harvey, Forrest Collman, Daniel A. Dombeck, and David W. Tank. Intracellular dy-
  namics of hippocampal place cells during virtual navigation. Nature, 461(7266):941–946, 2009.
  doi: 10.1038/nature08499. URL https://doi.org/10.1038/nature08499.
Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network, 2015.
Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. The curious case of neural text
  degeneration, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.09751.
Jeremy Howard and Sebastian Ruder. Universal language model fine-tuning for text classification.
   In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
   (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 328–339, Melbourne, Australia, July 2018. Association for Com-
   putational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P18-1031. URL https://aclanthology.org/
   P18-1031.
Cheng-Zhi Anna Huang, Ashish Vaswani, Jakob Uszkoreit, Noam Shazeer, Curtis Hawthorne, An-
  drew M. Dai, Matthew D. Hoffman, and Douglas Eck. An improved relative self-attention mech-
  anism for transformer with application to music generation. CoRR, abs/1809.04281, 2018. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/1809.04281.
Andrew Jaegle, Sebastian Borgeaud, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Carl Doersch, Catalin Ionescu, David
  Ding, Skanda Koppula, Daniel Zoran, Andrew Brock, Evan Shelhamer, Olivier J. Hénaff,
  Matthew M. Botvinick, Andrew Zisserman, Oriol Vinyals, and João Carreira. Perceiver IO:
  A general architecture for structured inputs & outputs. CoRR, abs/2107.14795, 2021a. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.14795.
Andrew Jaegle, Felix Gimeno, Andrew Brock, Andrew Zisserman, Oriol Vinyals, and João Carreira.
  Perceiver: General perception with iterative attention. CoRR, abs/2103.03206, 2021b. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.03206.
Jaehun Jung, Lianhui Qin, Sean Welleck, Faeze Brahman, Chandra Bhagavatula, Ronan Le Bras,
  and Yejin Choi. Maieutic prompting: Logically consistent reasoning with recursive explanations,
  2022.
W. F. Kindel, E. D. Christensen, and J. Zylberberg. Using deep learning to reveal the neural code
  for images in primary visual cortex. J. Vis, 19., 2019.
J. Kubilius, M. Schrimpf, A. Nayebi, D. Bear, D. L. K. Yamins, and J. J. DiCarlo. CORnet: Modeling
   the Neural Mechanisms of Core Object Recognition. bioRxiv, 1–9, 2018.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Junnan Li, Ramprasaath R. Selvaraju, Akhilesh Deepak Gotmare, Shafiq Joty, Caiming Xiong, and
  Steven Hoi. Align before fuse: Vision and language representation learning with momentum
  distillation, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.07651.

Liunian Harold Li, Mark Yatskar, Da Yin, Cho-Jui Hsieh, and Kai-Wei Chang. Visualbert: A simple
  and performant baseline for vision and language, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  1908.03557.

Ze Liu, Yutong Lin, Yue Cao, Han Hu, Yixuan Wei, Zheng Zhang, Stephen Lin, and Bain-
  ing Guo. Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows. CoRR,
  abs/2103.14030, 2021a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.14030.

Ze Liu, Yutong Lin, Yue Cao, Han Hu, Yixuan Wei, Zheng Zhang, Stephen Lin, and Baining Guo.
  Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows, 2021b. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2103.14030.

Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization, 2019.

Jiasen Lu, Vedanuj Goswami, Marcus Rohrbach, Devi Parikh, and Stefan Lee. 12-in-1: Multi-
   task vision and language representation learning. CoRR, abs/1912.02315, 2019. URL http:
   //arxiv.org/abs/1912.02315.

Juliette Millet, Charlotte Caucheteux, Pierre Orhan, Yves Boubenec, Alexandre Gramfort, Ewan
  Dunbar, Christophe Pallier, and Jean-Remi King. Toward a realistic model of speech processing
  in the brain with self-supervised learning, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.
  01685.

Patrick Mineault, Shahab Bakhtiari, Blake Richards, and Christopher Pack. Your head is
  there to move you around: Goal-driven models of the primate dorsal pathway. In M. Ran-
  zato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 28757–28771. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/file/
  f1676935f9304b97d59b0738289d2e22-Paper.pdf.

Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predic-
  tive coding, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1807.03748.

Razvan Pascanu, Tomas Mikolov, and Yoshua Bengio. On the difficulty of training recurrent neural
  networks, 2012. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1211.5063.

Jonathan W. Pillow, Jonathon Shlens, Liam Paninski, Alexander Sher, Alan M. Litke, E. J.
  Chichilnisky, and Eero P. Simoncelli. Spatio-temporal correlations and visual signalling in a com-
  plete neuronal population. Nature, 454(7207):995–999, July 2008a. doi: 10.1038/nature07140.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1038/nature07140.

Jonathan W Pillow, Jonathon Shlens, Liam Paninski, Alexander Sher, Alan M Litke, E J
  Chichilnisky, and Eero P Simoncelli. Spatio-temporal correlations and visual signalling in a
  complete neuronal population. Nature, 454(7207):995–999, Aug 2008b. ISSN 1476-4687 (Elec-
  tronic); 0028-0836 (Print); 0028-0836 (Linking). doi: 10.1038/nature07140.

Eftychios A. Pnevmatikakis, Josh Merel, Ari Pakman, and Liam Paninski. Bayesian spike inference
  from calcium imaging data. In 2013 Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems and Computers,
  pp. 349–353, 2013. doi: 10.1109/ACSSC.2013.6810293.

Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. 2019.

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya
  Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. CoRR,
  abs/2103.00020, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.00020.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2102.12092.
Blake A. Richards, Timothy P. Lillicrap, Philippe Beaudoin, Yoshua Bengio, Rafal Bogacz, Amelia
  Christensen, Claudia Clopath, Rui Ponte Costa, Archy de Berker, Surya Ganguli, Colleen J.
  Gillon, Danijar Hafner, Adam Kepecs, Nikolaus Kriegeskorte, Peter Latham, Grace W. Lind-
  say, Kenneth D. Miller, Richard Naud, Christopher C. Pack, Panayiota Poirazi, Pieter Roelf-
  sema, João Sacramento, Andrew Saxe, Benjamin Scellier, Anna C. Schapiro, Walter Senn,
  Greg Wayne, Daniel Yamins, Friedemann Zenke, Joel Zylberberg, Denis Therien, and Kon-
  rad P. Kording. A deep learning framework for neuroscience. Nature Neuroscience, 22(11):
  1761–1770, Nov 2019. ISSN 1546-1726. doi: 10.1038/s41593-019-0520-2. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.1038/s41593-019-0520-2.
Alexander Rives, Joshua Meier, Tom Sercu, Siddharth Goyal, Zeming Lin, Jason Liu, Demi Guo,
  Myle Ott, C. Lawrence Zitnick, Jerry Ma, and Rob Fergus. Biological structure and function
  emerge from scaling unsupervised learning to 250 million protein sequences. Proceedings of
  the National Academy of Sciences, 118(15):e2016239118, 2021. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2016239118.
  URL https://www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.2016239118.
Victor Sanh, Albert Webson, Colin Raffel, Stephen H. Bach, Lintang Sutawika, Zaid Alyafeai,
  Antoine Chaffin, Arnaud Stiegler, Teven Le Scao, Arun Raja, Manan Dey, M Saiful Bari, Canwen
  Xu, Urmish Thakker, Shanya Sharma Sharma, Eliza Szczechla, Taewoon Kim, Gunjan Chhablani,
  Nihal Nayak, Debajyoti Datta, Jonathan Chang, Mike Tian-Jian Jiang, Han Wang, Matteo Manica,
  Sheng Shen, Zheng Xin Yong, Harshit Pandey, Rachel Bawden, Thomas Wang, Trishala Neeraj,
  Jos Rozen, Abheesht Sharma, Andrea Santilli, Thibault Fevry, Jason Alan Fries, Ryan Teehan,
  Tali Bers, Stella Biderman, Leo Gao, Thomas Wolf, and Alexander M. Rush. Multitask prompted
  training enables zero-shot task generalization, 2022.
Steffen Schneider, Jin Hwa Lee, and Mackenzie Weygandt Mathis. Learnable latent embeddings for
  joint behavioral and neural analysis, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.00673.
Nicholas A Steinmetz, Peter Zatka-Haas, Matteo Carandini, and Kenneth D Harris. Distributed
  coding of choice, action and engagement across the mouse brain. Nature, 576(7786):266–273,
  2019.
Marcel Stimberg, Romain Brette, and Dan FM Goodman. Brian 2, an intuitive and efficient neu-
 ral simulator. eLife, 8:e47314, aug 2019. ISSN 2050-084X. doi: 10.7554/eLife.47314. URL
 https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.47314.
Jeffrey N. Stirman, Ikuko T. Smith, Michael W. Kudenov, and S. L. S. Wide field-of-view. multi-
   region two-photon imaging of neuronal activity. Nat. Biotechnol, 34, 2016.
Carsen Stringer, Marius Pachitariu, Nicholas Steinmetz, Charu Bai Reddy, Matteo Carandini, and
  Kenneth D Harris. Spontaneous behaviors drive multidimensional, brainwide activity. Science,
  364(6437):eaav7893, 2019.
David Sussillo, Rafal Józefowicz, L. F. Abbott, and Chethan Pandarinath. LFADS - latent factor
  analysis via dynamical systems. CoRR, abs/1608.06315, 2016. URL http://arxiv.org/
  abs/1608.06315.
Hao Tan and Mohit Bansal. LXMERT: learning cross-modality encoder representations from trans-
  formers. CoRR, abs/1908.07490, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1908.07490.
Wilson Truccolo, Uri T Eden, Matthew R Fellows, John P Donoghue, and Emery N Brown. A point
 process framework for relating neural spiking activity to spiking history, neural ensemble, and
 extrinsic covariate effects. J Neurophysiol, 93(2):1074–1089, Feb 2005. ISSN 0022-3077 (Print);
 0022-3077 (Linking). doi: 10.1152/jn.00697.2004.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc
  Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models,
  2023.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


James C. R. Whittington, Joseph Warren, and Timothy E. J. Behrens. Relating transformers
  to models and neural representations of the hippocampal formation, 2021. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2112.04035.
Daniel L K Yamins and James J DiCarlo. Using goal-driven deep learning models to understand
  sensory cortex. Nature Neuroscience, 19(3):356–365, March 2016.
Daniel L. K. Yamins, Ha Hong, Charles F. Cadieu, Ethan A. Solomon, Darren Seibert, and James J.
  DiCarlo. Performance-optimized hierarchical models predict neural responses in higher visual
  cortex. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111(23):8619–8624, 2014. doi:
  10.1073/pnas.1403112111. URL https://www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.
  1403112111.
Joel Ye and Chethan Pandarinath. Representation learning for neural population activity with neural
  data transformers, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.01210.
Jason Yosinski, Jeff Clune, Yoshua Bengio, and Hod Lipson. How transferable are features in deep
  neural networks?, 2014.
Che-Hang Yu, Jeffrey N Stirman, Yiyi Yu, Riichiro Hira, and Spencer L Smith. Diesel2p mesoscope
  with dual independent scan engines for flexible capture of dynamics in distributed neural circuitry.
  Nature communications, 12(1):6639, 2021.
Yiyi Yu, Jeffrey N Stirman, Christopher R Dorsett, and Spencer L Smith. Selective representations
  of texture and motion in mouse higher visual areas. Current Biology, 32(13):2810–2820, 2022.
Rowan Zellers, Ximing Lu, Jack Hessel, Youngjae Yu, Jae Sung Park, Jize Cao, Ali Farhadi,
  and Yejin Choi. Merlot: Multimodal neural script knowledge models, 2021. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2106.02636.
Yuan Zhao and Il Memming Park. Variational latent gaussian process for recovering single-trial
  dynamics from population spike trains. Neural Computation, 29(5):1293–1316, may 2017. doi:
  10.1162/neco a 00953. URL https://doi.org/10.1162%2Fneco_a_00953.
Ding Zhou and Xue-Xin Wei. Learning identifiable and interpretable latent models of high-
  dimensional neural activity using pi-vae. 2020. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2011.04798. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.04798.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S UPPLEMENTARY M ATERIALS

A    L IMITATIONS
In preliminary experiments, the Neuroformer was trained on simulated data, revealing potential in
identifying hub network connectivity. However, its reliability varied across datasets. For instance,
in a multi-channel simulation, neuron attention sometimes accurately identified the correct channel,
but at other times was noisy. In another test with neurons responding to a naturalistic video via 3D
gabor filters, the method’s reliability in uncovering receptive fields was inconsistent. We think this
technique could benefit from more advanced methods for calculating the attention like Grad-CAM.
Our model, the first of its kind using an auto-regressive decoder-based generative pre-training ap-
proach, contrasts with encoder-based methods like LFADS or CEBRA. While these methods explic-
itly exploit the intrinsic dimensionality of neuronal populations, the Neuroformer, inspired by the
GPT objective, takes a different approach. Out attempts to use our data with representation learning
approaches yielded poor results (see Fig. 10). These methods are more typically applied to motor
control tasks for BCI applications. Direct comparisons with methods like LFADS are needed, as
they might currently offer better representation learning due to explicit low-dimensional constraints.
In contrast, our method is more akin to an in-silico model of the brain.
While transformers, like the Neuroformer, offer advantages like being modality-agnostic and con-
textualizing information over extended sequences, traditional methods like the GLM and CNNs have
their merits. They are grounded in neuroscientific assumptions, offering interpretability. Although
the Neuroformer showed promise in decoding tasks, the reasons for its performance advantages
remain unclear. Factors like overparameterization, ability to model non-linearities, and effective
representation learning might contribute.
Our aim with the Neuroformer was two-fold: 1) to introduce a tool for neuroscience to flexibly
incorporate data from increasingly diverse and complex experimental settings and 2) to explore
generative pre-training for such data. The true potential of this method might be realized with
increased scale, given the vast data available in systems neuroscience. The Neuroformer marks a
step towards this, but challenges persist. We’re keen on scaling these methods and finding synergies
between large language and neuroscience models.

B    E THICAL S TATEMENT
This project involves data from mouse experiments. Our AAALAC (Association for Assessment and
Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care)-accredited institution is committed to the humane care
and use of animals in research and education. Our Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee
(IACUC) oversees animal care and use, facilities, and procedures. The attending veterinarian and
IACUC ensure that research activities involving mice meet the ethical and legal requirements as set
by relevant policies and guidelines.


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP


     Figure 7: Neuroformer can incorporate a diverse range of modalities that are recorded in
large-scale systems neuroscience experiments. Here, we show some of the modalities collected in
                    the visual navigation experiment used to train our model.


                                               16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D     H YPERPARAMETERS
D.1     N EUROFORMER

        Hyperparameter                                 Symbol                   V1+AL       Visnav
        Video resolution (s)                           dtframes                 0.05        0.05
        dt token resolution (s)                        dt                       0.01        0.005
        Behavior feature resolution (s)                dtbehavior               -           0.05
        Dropout (p)                                    p                        0.35        0.35
        Behavior Dropout (p)                           pbehavior                -           0.45
        Contrastive Learning Temperature               τclip                    0.25        0.25
        Contrastive Learning Latent Dimension (n)      Eclip                    1024        1024
        Embedding Dimension (n)                        E                        512         512
        Window current state (s)                       wc                       0.05        0.05
        Window past state (s)                          wp                       0.25        0.15
        Window frames (s)                              wframes                  0.3         0.2
        Window behavior (s) ∗                          wbehavior                -           0.05
        3D Convolution Kernel Size                     ckernel                  (6, 8, 8)   (4, 5, 5)
        3D Convolution Stride Size                     cstride                  (6, 8, 8)   (2, 5, 5)
        Number of state layers (n)                     nstate layers            8           8
        Number of state stimulus layers (n)            nstate stimulus layers   8           8
        Number of self-attention layers (n)            nself attention layers   8           8
        Number of behavior layers (n)                  nbehavior layers         -           8
        Number of heads (n)                            nhead                    8           8

Table 2: Hyperparameters used for training models on V1+AL and Visnav datasets. The units are
added in the Hyperparameter column where applicable: s for seconds, n for number (count), and
probability for dropout rates.


E     C OMPARISON M ODEL D ETAILS
E.1     P OPULATION R ESPONSE

E.1.1    GLM
A generalized linear model (GLM) for neuron data was adapted from (Pillow et al., 2008a). The
instant firing rate (ri (t)) of individual neurons was modeled by a linear-nonlinear cascade, including
linear stimulus components (k ∗ x) and spike history components (h ∗ y) followed by an exponential
nonlinearity. µ represents the baseline firing rate of the neuron. The stimulus kernel (k) and history
kernel (h) are modeled by cosine bases. The parameters are optimized by minimizing the log-
likelihood for spike prediction.

                                  ri (t) = exp(k ∗ x + h ∗ y + µ)                                       (5)

E.2     B EHAVIOR D ECODING

E.2.1    MLP
The MLP used for the behavior comparisons was comprised of 5 stacked MLP layers, with a hidden
state of (h = 1024), GeLU non-linearity, dropout p = 0.01, layer-normalization between each of
the MLPs. No improvement was observed upon adding more layers.

E.2.2    GRU
The GRU model used for the behavior comparisons had the following architecture: 5 Bi-directional
GRU layers with dropout p = 0.01, layer-normalization, and tapering t=0.5 for each consecutive
hidden state. Tapering allowed us to stack more GRU layers without undergoing collapse. More
layers resulted in a decrease in performance and eventual collapse. The first hidden state of the


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


model was initialized as the neural past state as defined in the paper, allowing the model to integrate
past information. We employed Neuroformer-style tokenization which shortened the sequence of
spikes and resulted in better performance.


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                         Populate Next
                         Interval(n)                     Block Index…                 Interval(n +1)
         SOS   ID24 ID69 ID200 EOS     PAD   PAD   PAD                   SOS    PAD   PAD   PAD   PAD   PAD   PAD


                                                                  T1
    T1


                                                                  T2
    T2


                                                                  T3
    T3


                                                                  T4
    T4


                                                                  T5
    T5


                                                                  T6
    T6


                                                                  T7
    T7


                                                                  TN
    TN


EOS Reached, Send to Buﬀer       Start Next Interval
                                                                       Masked/Pad Token           ID Token


Figure 8: Current State causal block masking and padding. During training, the block is populated
with all Current State spikes, and causally masked. To retain the same length of block, (and enable
batched training) we right-pad the remaining sequence, and zero-out the loss corresponding from the
PAD positions. During Inference, a new Current State is initiated, and all corresponding modalities
(e.g., video frames) are passed into the model. The block is autoregressively populated starting from
the SOS position with ID tokens, until EOS is reached. The predicted spikes are then fed into the
buffer, so they can be incorporated into the Past State.


F        B LOCK -S PARSE C AUSAL M ASKING
To precisely align the corresponding neural features with all other modalities, we broke our state
features into a Current State wc and a Past State wp according to specified temporal windows (see
Table 2).
Because of this, we cannot simply model the neural features as a continuous string of spikes (or
the equivalent language tokens) as in the case of a standard GPT model (Radford et al., 2019). The
unique challenge of arranging our data in this way is that each of these intervals contains a different
number of spikes. Our situation is similar to (Ramesh et al., 2021), where during inference time, the
block is autoregressively populated by the predicted tokens. The difference in our case is that each
resulting ”block” is of a different size. We therefore employ right-masking and padding to enable
efficient training and causal inference (see Fig. 8).
Note that by just masking our Current State and projecting from the Tn row of the block during in-
ference time, we are able to fuse with any other non-masked features, while preventing any backflow
of information, and retaining the causal aspect of our model.


                                                            19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G                        C ALCULATING C ONNECTIVITY W ITH OTHER M ETHODS

                         Partial Correlation                                        Granger Causality                                              Attention                                              Ground Truth

                                                     0.6                                                                                                                 0.12
                                                                                                              1000                                                                                                          0.8
                                                     0.5                                                                                                                 0.1
Target Neuron ID


                                                           Target Neuron ID


                                                                                                                       Target Neuron ID


                                                                                                                                                                                Target Neuron ID
                   100                                                        100                             800                         100                                                      100                      0.6
                                                     0.4                                                                                                                 0.08
                                                                                                              600                                                                                                           0.4
                                                     0.3                                                                                                                 0.06

                   200                               0.2                      200                             400                         200                            0.04                      200                      0.2


                                                     0.1                                                      200                                                        0.02                                               0

                   300                               0                        300                             0                           300                                                      300                      -0.2
                           100        200      300                                   100       200      300                                      100       200     300                                    100       200
                          Source Neuron ID                                          Source Neuron ID                                            Source Neuron ID                                         Source Neuron ID


Figure 9: Comparing derived connectivity with other methods. In addition to Pearson correlation,
we compared the connectivity from attention to that derived from partial correlation and Granger
causality. The square root of the sum of the absolute squares of elements of the attention matrix
was 140.4, for Granger causality it was 138.1, and for partial correlation, it was 156.9. These values
indicate how each method compares in terms of similarity to the ground-truth connectivity matrix,
with lower values suggesting a closer resemblance.


                                                                                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H    C APTURING T RIAL - TO -T RIAL VARIABILITY
When investigating the performance of the model as we progressively incorporated each module,
we examined F1 scores, and the ability of the model to capture the trial-to-trial variation across the
data sets.
To do this, we computed the correlation across trial-averaged spikes for each neuron across groups
of four trials. We compared a holdout group to the corresponding set generated by the Neuroformer,
and to another corresponding group of trials from the data set. We observed a steady improvement
in the distribution of correlations when compared to the ground-truth (Fig. 10), with the full model’s
predictions closely matching those of the ground-truth sets.


           Current State            + Past State              + Stimulus              + Contrastive


Figure 10: Trial-averaged correlations between groups of 4 trials. The trials generated by the model
progressively converged to the correlation distribution of the ground-truth trials as we added com-
ponents. The model configurations were: Current State, Current State + Past State, Current State +
Past State + Stimulus, Current State + Past State + Contrastive.


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


I               P RECISE B EHAVIOR P REDICTIONS
An advantage of the Neuroformer architecture, is that modalities can be flexibly incorporated as
an input or label. In the case of labels, variables can be modeled as both classes as in multi-class
logistic regression using a cross-entropy objective (Fig. 11), or raw values as a linear regression
using mean-squared error (Fig. 12). Our model vastly outperformed other baselines, and performed
reliably across datasets and objectives, as opposed to other methods, whose performance fluctuated.

                         Lasso Reg.                                                     GLM                                                                 MLP                                         Bi-Directional GRU                                     Neuroformer
    1.5                                                    100                                                                100                                                     100                                                 100                                                               100
                r = 0.42                                                 r = 0.81                                                         r = 0.82                                                r = 0.86                                            r = 0.96
    1.0         p < 0.001                                                p < 0.001                                                        p < 0.001                                               p < 0.001                                           p < 0.001
                                                           80                                                                 80                                                      80                                                  80                                                                80
    0.5
                                                           60                                                                 60                                                      60                                                  60                                                                60
    0.0
                                                           40                                                                 40                                                      40                                                  40                                                                40
    0.5

    1.0                                                    20                                                                 20                                                      20                                                  20                                                                20

    1.5                                                    0                                                                  0                                                       0                                                   0                                                                 0
          1.5     1.0   0.5 0.0 0.5         1.0    1.5             1.5       1.0    0.5 0.0 0.5               1.0     1.5           1.5         1.0     0.5 0.0    0.5    1.0   1.5         1.5     1.0   0.5 0.0     0.5    1.0   1.5          1.5         1.0     0.5 0.0      0.5    1.0     1.5
                        Visnav, Medial                                              Visnav, Lateral
                         Lasso Reg.                                                     GLM                                                                 MLP                                         Bi-Directional GRU                                          Neuroformer
    1.5                                                    100                                                                100                                                     100                                                 100                                                               100
                r = 0.56                                                 r = 0.69                                                         r = 0.76                                                r = 0.82                                            r = 0.97
    1.0         p < 0.001                                                p < 0.001                                                        p < 0.001                                               p < 0.001                                           p < 0.001
                                                           80                                                                 80                                                      80                                                  80                                                                80
    0.5
                                                           60                                                                 60                                                      60                                                  60                                                                60
    0.0
                                                           40                                                                 40                                                      40                                                  40                                                                40
    0.5

    1.0                                                    20                                                                 20                                                      20                                                  20                                                                20

    1.5                                                    0                                                                  0                                                       0                                                   0                                                                 0
          1.5     1.0   0.5 0.0      0.5    1.0    1.5             1.5       1.0    0.5 0.0       0.5         1.0     1.5           1.5         1.0     0.5 0.0    0.5    1.0   1.5         1.5     1.0   0.5 0.0     0.5    1.0   1.5          1.5         1.0     0.5 0.0      0.5    1.0     1.5



Figure 11: Speed Predictions, Classification. The speed variable was broken into 25 discrete classes
and optimized with a multi-class crossentropy loss.


                            Lasso Reg.                                                      GLM                                                                   MLP                                        Bi-directional GRU                                               Neuroformer
    1.5                                                          1.5                                                                1.5                                                      1.5                                                      1.5
            r = 0.73                                                     r = 0.45                                                           r = 0.85                                                  r = 0.88                                                    r = 0.97
    1.0     p < 0.001                                            1.0     p < 0.001                                                  1.0     p < 0.001                                        1.0      p < 0.001                                       1.0         p < 0.001
    0.5                                                          0.5                                                                0.5                                                      0.5                                                      0.5

    0.0                                                          0.0                                                                0.0                                                      0.0                                                      0.0

    0.5                                                          0.5                                                                0.5                                                      0.5                                                      0.5

    1.0                                                          1.0                                                                1.0                                                      1.0                                                      1.0

    1.5                                                          1.5                                                                1.5                                                      1.5                                                      1.5
          1.5     1.0   0.5    0.0    0.5    1.0     1.5               1.5    1.0     0.5   0.0         0.5         1.0     1.5           1.5         1.0   0.5   0.0    0.5    1.0   1.5          1.5    1.0   0.5   0.0    0.5    1.0   1.5               1.5      1.0   0.5    0.0     0.5         1.0        1.5
                            Lasso Reg.                                                      GLM                                                                   MLP                                   Bi-directional GRU                                                    Neuroformer
    1.5                                                          1.5                                                                1.5                                                      1.5                                                      1.5
            r = 0.62                                                     r = 0.26                                                           r = 0.83                                             r = 0.83                                                         r = 0.97
    1.0     p < 0.001                                            1.0     p < 0.001                                                  1.0     p < 0.001                                        1.0 p < 0.001                                            1.0         p < 0.001
    0.5                                                          0.5                                                                0.5                                                      0.5                                                      0.5

    0.0                                                          0.0                                                                0.0                                                      0.0                                                      0.0

    0.5                                                          0.5                                                                0.5                                                      0.5                                                      0.5

    1.0                                                          1.0                                                                1.0                                                      1.0                                                      1.0

    1.5                                                          1.5                                                                1.5                                                      1.5                                                      1.5
          1.5     1.0   0.5    0.0    0.5    1.0     1.5               1.5    1.0     0.5   0.0         0.5         1.0     1.5           1.5         1.0   0.5   0.0    0.5    1.0   1.5          1.5    1.0   0.5   0.0    0.5    1.0   1.5               1.5      1.0   0.5    0.0     0.5         1.0        1.5



                        Figure 12: Speed Predictions, Regression. We used MSE loss to optimize the models.


                                                                                                                                                              22
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


   J               MULTITASK D ECODING

   In addition to speed, Neuroformer is able to jointly predict many other variables. Here we show
   that the model could effectively predict the eye position of the mouse - even in the absence of input
   stimulus. We used a single model checkpoint to decode all three variables. Speed and longitudinal
   + latitudinal angle for eye position.

                                                   Visnav lateral Multitask Decoding - Speed + Eye Gaze (phi, th)
                  2.5
                  2.0
                      r = 0.93                                                                r = 0.84                               5   r = 0.92
                  1.5
                      p < 0.001                                                           2   p < 0.001                              4   p < 0.001
Predicted speed


                                                                          Predicted phi
                                                                                                                                     3


                                                                                                                      Predicted th
                  1.0                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                     2
                  0.5
                                                                                          2                                          1
                  0.0
                                                                                                                                     0
                  0.5
                                                                                          4                                          1
                  1.0
                                                                                                                                     2
                  1.5                                                                     6
                                                                                                                                     3
                        1.5    1.0   0.5   0.0    0.5   1.0   1.5   2.0                          4        2   0   2                       2   1   0     1   2   3   4   5
                                      True speed                                                      True phi                                        True th
                                                 Figure 13: Decoding Speed (m/s) and Eye position phi, th (◦ ).


   K                    M ULTIMODAL L ATENT VARIABLES
   The contrastive part of Neuroformer, enables us to align any of the corresponding auxilliary modali-
   ties with our neural data, including visual features, behavioral features or reward. Here we show the
   raw features extracted from the contrastive stage that was trained to align speed with neural features.
   No dimensionality reduction method (like T-SNE) was used for this visualization. These are the raw
   features, extracted from our contrastive alignment module, by setting Eclip = 3.


                                                                                                                           ms

                              Figure 14: Contrastive Latents: Neural Features Separate According to their Speed.


                                                                                                      23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


L     A NALYSIS OF I NTERMEDIATE F EATURES AND P ROBING S PEED
L.1   I NTERMEDIATE F EATURES

The features represented in Figure 14 were derived from the contrastive alignment module by setting
the Eclip to 3, effectively projecting the features to 3 dimensions for alignment during training, as
detailed in Hyperparameters 2. Our initial hypothesis posited the need for two dimensions for direc-
tion—considering movement occurs on a 2D plane—and one dimension for magnitude. Although
we did not expect intermediate representations to fully segregate according to speed without explicit
supervision, the process proved beneficial for analytical purposes. As indicated by the toy model
experiment in Figure 2, a convergence towards speed-based separation was observed. Additional in-
termediate representations were extracted from transformer blocks of a model not trained on speed,
and a linear regression was performed to map these to speed. These were compared against random
arrays of identical shape as a control. supplementary material. As more modalities are fused, the
resulting representation becomes more linearly separable in terms of speed.

L.2   L INEARLY P ROBING S PEED

                          Feature                                    R2
                          Random                                   0.0521
                          Past State                               0.2299
                          Past State + Stimulus                    0.5341
                          Past State + Stimulus + Current State    0.6357

Table 3: Linear regression R2 values for different features when probing for speed. Colors coded
according to model architecture (Fig. 1.)


                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


M    CEBRA B EHAVIOR R ESULTS
We also attempted to compare Neuroformer behavior predictions with the SOTA in representation
learning methods, CEBRA (Schneider et al., 2022). Despite attempting an extensive hyperparameter
search accross batch size, temperature, learning rate, offset, and decoding method (KNN and Lasso
Reg.) we were unable to get the model to generalize, and typically observed heavy overfitting as
seen in Fig. 15.

                       Training                                   Evaluation (+KNN decoding)
                                     100 training iterations



                                                         decoding r = -0.02


                                     5000 training iterations


                                                         decoding r = 0.51


                                      10000 training iterations


                                                          decoding r = 0.36


Figure 15: CEBRA decoding. The visualization depicts the latent features produced, colored by
speed.


                                                    25
