Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


T HE T RIFECTA :T HREE SIMPLE TECHNIQUES FOR
TRAINING DEEPER F ORWARD -F ORWARD NETWORKS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Modern machine learning models are able to outperform humans on a variety of
         non-trivial tasks. However, as the complexity of the models increases, they con-
         sume significant amounts of power and still struggle to generalize effectively to
         unseen data. Local learning, which focuses on updating subsets of a model’s pa-
         rameters at a time, has emerged as a promising technique to address these issues.
         Recently, a novel local learning algorithm, called Forward-Forward, has received
         widespread attention due to its innovative approach to learning. Unfortunately, its
         application has been limited to smaller datasets due to scalability issues. To this
         end, we propose The Trifecta, a collection of three simple techniques that syner-
         gize exceptionally well and drastically improve the Forward-Forward algorithm
         on deeper networks. Our experiments demonstrate that our models are on par
         with similarly structured, backpropagation-based models in both training speed
         and test accuracy on simple datasets. This is achieved by the ability to learn rep-
         resentations that are informative locally, on a layer-by-layer basis, and retain their
         informativeness when propagated to deeper layers in the architecture. This leads
         to around 84% accuracy on CIFAR-10, a notable improvement (25%) over the
         original FF algorithm. These results highlight the potential of Forward-Forward
         as a genuine competitor to backpropagation and as a promising research avenue.



1   I NTRODUCTION

Despite its pervasiveness, backpropagation is not flawless, it has inherent challenges that have puz-
zled researchers for decades. One such challenge is overfitting, which occurs when these models
memorize the training set and fail to generalize to unseen data (Erhan et al., 2010). Over the years,
researchers have found ways to mitigate the issue by introducing dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014)
or simply increasing the dataset size through augmentation techniques or by collecting more data.
However, with modern datasets reaching near-internet size (Gao et al., 2020; Schuhmann et al.,
2022), this provisional solution cannot be scaled further. Moreover, contemporary models are tricky
to scale both locally (Nagel et al., 2021) due to memory issues and across machines (Huang et al.,
2019) due to communication overhead. The need for sequential forward and backward passes leads
to the phenomenon known as backward locking, hampering the efficient distribution of computation
(Huo et al., 2018). Lastly, backpropagation struggles with vanishing or exploding gradients, which
affect learning and stability, especially in deeper networks (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997; Glorot
& Bengio, 2010; Bengio et al., 1994). Research has unveiled several mitigations (He et al., 2015b;
Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015; He et al., 2015a; Glorot & Bengio, 2010) but this still remains an issue in
large models (Chowdhery et al., 2022).
The combination of these systematic issues and the biological implausibility of backpropagation
(Lillicrap et al., 2014) has prompted the machine-learning community to explore alternative learning
algorithms. One such approach is local learning (Bengio et al., 2006; Hinton et al., 2006; Belilovsky
et al., 2019; Nøkland & Eidnes, 2019), which learns from nearby information, instead of a full error
signal. Limiting the information flow in the full network restricts the network’s ability to memorize
inputs and helps to regularize gradient computations. Further, the reduced communication facilitates
the efficient deployment of these networks across several accelerator units (Gomez et al., 2022;
Laskin et al., 2021).


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Layer-wise or greedy learning is a popular family of local algorithms, that aims to learn each layer
in a neural network independently (Bengio et al., 2006; Belilovsky et al., 2019). It avoids global
update locking during training and enables non-differentiable operations in the forward process.
However, it often requires auxiliary classification heads or involves expensive mathematical opera-
tions (Belilovsky et al., 2019; Löwe et al., 2020; Nøkland & Eidnes, 2019). Recently, a new local
learning algorithm called Forward-Forward (FF) (Hinton, 2022) has sparked interest in the machine
learning community. FF learns by maximizing or minimizing goodness from the activations of each
layer for positive (genuine) and negative (bogus) samples respectively. However, initial experiments
show that this algorithm is unable to scale beyond the simplest of datasets. Therefore, in this paper,
we aim to address this issue by pointing out three weak points of the algorithm and remedying them.
The Loss Function. In line with recent work (Lee & Song, 2023), we find that the proposed loss
function from Hinton (2022) has several weaknesses. Primarily, due to asymmetries in the loss
landscape, convergence is severely hindered. Moreover, the original loss function has a threshold
parameter, which determines around which value of goodness the separation of positive and negative
samples should occur. Our experiments show that this hyperparameter has a large impact on the final
accuracy of the network, which is undesirable.
Normalization Function. The objective function of each layer is to separate positive and negative
samples as much as possible. This can cause an issue where layers can simply retain or scale prior
features to achieve high separation without learning anything useful, as noted by Hinton (2022).
Their proposed solution is to normalize the features length-wise at the start of each layer such that
any information about the previous prediction is removed. This work confirms the occurrence of this
issue but claims that the solution suffers from several flaws such as information loss and instability.
Lack of Error Signals. A drawback of many greedy or local learning algorithms is the lack of
backward or error signals. This means that a layer may learn features that are useful for its local
objective but not necessarily for the next layer. Consider the extreme case where a layer generates
a uniform feature vector (k · 1) above or below the threshold according to the belief of the layer.
Locally, the objective will be fulfilled, but subsequent layers will not acquire useful information that
can help separate the data further. Consequently, the local objective must be suitable, or such models
are not able to scale to complex tasks.
Contributions.

       • We propose a combination of techniques, termed The Trifecta, that matches the accuracy of
         our backpropagation baseline on several datasets by addressing the mentioned weaknesses.
       • We achieve around 84% accuracy on CIFAR-10, demonstrating that FF is able to scale to
         more complex datasets.
       • We perform an analysis on two different loss functions (original and new) for FF and dis-
         cuss their differences in training stability.
       • We conduct a thorough investigation into different normalization functions in the FF algo-
         rithm and its impact on accuracy.
       • We provide an implementation of The Trifecta (currently in the supplementary material).

2   R ELATED W ORK
Before the advent of end-to-end backpropagation (E2EBP) (Krizhevsky et al., 2012), often simply
called backpropagation (BP), the investigation into algorithms to train neural networks was prevalent
in machine learning research (Hinton & Sejnowski, 1983; Hinton et al., 2006). Since the backprop-
agation breakthrough, research has mostly shifted to improving this algorithm. Recently, however,
there has been a resurgence of interest in alternate learning methods due to the limitations of back-
propagation (Jaderberg et al., 2017; Nøkland & Eidnes, 2019; Huo et al., 2018; Löwe et al., 2020).
An early example of a localized approach in deep networks is the Inception Net (Szegedy et al.,
2014), which incorporates multiple classification heads on intermediary layers throughout the net-
work. Although the network still employs backpropagation, the intermediate heads aid gradient flow,
enabling the training of deeper networks. Several years ago, a research wave focused on truly lo-
cal algorithms began with the introduction of Decoupled Neural Interfaces (DNIs) (Jaderberg et al.,
2017). DNIs employ independent sub-networks, called modules, allowing straightforward forward


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


passes by sequentially passing inputs through all modules. The backward pass updates weights us-
ing synthetic gradients approximated using an auxiliary network trained offline with true gradients.
This decoupling of gradient flow permits asynchronous forward and backward passes. However, the
drawback of this approach is diminished accuracy, even on small datasets. Concurrently, increas-
ingly biologically inspired methods have emerged, starting with feedback alignment (FA) (Lillicrap
et al., 2014) that proposes to use random feedback matrices to resolve the implausibility of synaptic
symmetry within backpropagation. Nøkland (2016) alters this approach by using random matrices
to directly update each layer, partly resolving the update locking issue. Lastly, PEPITA (Dellaferrera
& Kreiman, 2023) uses two forward passes to learn: a standard pass and a modulated pass. The first
pass is comparable to an ordinary forward pass in backpropagation and computes the network error
for a given input. The original input is then perturbed by this error and used by the second pass to
directly update the weight in a forward manner.
The Forward-Forward algorithm (Hinton, 2022) has been proposed as a novel approach to deep
learning. The FF algorithm aims to overcome several limitations tied to backpropagation and pro-
vide a biologically plausible learning algorithm. This is achieved by adopting contrastive learning
principles to separate positive and negative samples based on network activations. The lack of er-
ror signals and the generic objective make the algorithm very flexible in many scenarios where
backpropagation is not feasible. Unfortunately, this approach often results in reduced accuracy on
complex datasets. Some work has been done to improve the scaling characteristics of the FF algo-
rithm. Specifically, the original loss function exhibits conditioning issues due to its suboptimal loss
landscape, resulting in difficult optimization. To mitigate this, a modified loss function known as
SymBa directly utilizes the separation instead of the distance to a threshold. This leads to improved
properties and significantly enhanced performance (Lee & Song, 2023).
This work explores and improves the Forward-Forward algorithm in an image classification context.
We achieve this by proposing three minor modifications to the algorithm, including using the SymBa
loss function (Lee & Song, 2023), batch normalization (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015), and overlapped
local updates (Laskin et al., 2021). To our knowledge, we are the first to investigate the effect of
the latter two in a Forward-Forward context. Further, we do not specifically focus on the biological
plausibility, but attempt to stay as close to the nature of the algorithm as possible. For instance, we
employ convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (LeCun et al., 1989) due to their ubiquity in image
processing, even though weight sharing is not biologically plausible (Grossberg, 1987).



3   BACKGROUND

The Forward-Forward algorithm only varies from backprop in two aspects: the way weights are
updated and how the network is used for evaluation. The neural network structure used in FF is
identical to backpropagation. Each layer modifies the incoming features according to its weights
and forwards the result to the next layer.
Weight Updates. Instead of minimizing the cross-entropy between the last layer and a one-hot
encoding of labels, the main objective of the FF training process is to correctly separate positive
(real) and negative (bogus) samples at each layer. This separation is measured by the difference
in the sum of squares of the activations, called the goodness, between positive and negative sam-
ples. Rather than performing a forward prediction step followed by a backward update step, two
forward prediction steps are performed on positive and negative data. Each layer updates itself lo-
cally (without receiving gradients)
                                P based on the generated  goodness with the following loss function
                        pos                        neg
                                                       − τ )) where g pos and g neg refer to the vec-
P
   i log(1 + exp(τ − gi )) +        i log(1 + exp(gi
tor of the goodness values of the positive and negative samples in each batch respectively and τ is
the threshold. This function will produce low loss values if both the goodness of positive samples
is well above the threshold and well below the same threshold for negative samples. The original
work (Hinton, 2022) proposes two strategies to construct these samples for effective training: un-
supervised and supervised. The unsupervised approach works by using the original dataset as the
positive samples and generating modified samples as negative data. These modified samples can be
created by merging, altering, or using the network itself to generate them. In contrast, the super-
vised approach constructs its positive samples by concatenating a sample from the dataset with its
corresponding label and the negative samples by concatenating a random label.


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Evaluation. During evaluation, the goodness across one or multiple layers determines the certainty
in the prediction of the provided sample. In the supervised setting, a forward pass with each label
must be performed to attain the logits of the n-way classification. This can be inefficient, especially
in scenarios with numerous classes, such as ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009). Alternatively, the features
of the last layer in the network can be used to train a classifier, this mitigates the linear complexity
of n-way classification 1 . Due to the novelty of the algorithm, different training and evaluation
strategies are largely unexplored. Consequently, FF often exhibits lower accuracy and performance
compared to other local learning techniques. Nevertheless, this presents a promising avenue for
investigating learning algorithms and gaining insights into the learning process of deep networks in
general. Appendix H discusses some experiments and ideas in this area.

4       T HE T RIFECTA
The main contribution of this work is The Trifecta, which aims to solve three observed weaknesses
in the Forward-Forward algorithm: the loss function, the normalization, and the lack of error sig-
nals. As our experimentation reveals, there is a positive synergy between the three components;
combining the three yields higher gains than their separate improvements.
Symmetric Loss Function. Consistent with (Lee & Song, 2023), we find that the proposed loss
function in FF does not treat false positives and false negatives equally, leading to gradients that do
not directly point toward the minimum loss. Additionally, it is not possible to have negative good-
ness which means the separation of the negative goodness is limited for many threshold values. The
original paper (Hinton, 2022) noted that minimizing goodness, instead of maximizing it for positive
samples, yields higher accuracy. This suggests that it is easier for the network to distinguish neg-
ative examples very well according to how bogus they are. Appendix C provides a comprehensive
mathematical analysis of these issues.
To address these issues Lee & Song (2023) proposes the SymBa     P loss function without a threshold,
and instead relies on directly optimizing for the separation gap i log(1 + exp(gipos − gineg )). This
resolves the aforementioned issue. This approach works best when the positive and negative samples
are highly correlated, which is the case with the supervised approach. Additionally, this function can
be improved by scaling the separation with a constant term α, this penalizes wrong classifications
further, akin to focal loss (Lin et al., 2018). Our work, therefore, opts to employ this loss function.
However, this loss function has an inherent mathematical flaw resulting in uncontrollably growing
weights within each layer. Concretely, given a layer that can separate the dataset, there are two ways
to minimize the loss for subsequent layers: genuinely improve the separation of the positive and
negative samples or simply uniformly scale up all weights. The second case does not improve the
actual accuracy and may lead to instability. However, in Appendix D we demonstrate this behavior
not to occur using our setup.
Batch Normalization. Prior to each layer, Hinton (2022) suggests normalizing the length of the
activations, akin to a simplified form of layer normalization (LN) 2 . This serves two purposes: it
prevents prediction information from leaking into the next layer and forces the network to learn
completely new features at each layer. By scaling the network depth-wise, each layer has an alternate
insight into the data which is used by the final prediction.
However, we find this not to be the case in the original version of FF; deeper layers do not produce
features that lead to higher accuracy. Instead, the accuracy plateaus or even declines by scaling
the depth (Figure 1). We argue that this stems from the combination of the normalization and the
lack of error signals. This disruptive normalization that removes all previous prediction information
prohibits the network from creating incrementally useful and specific features, as in hierarchical
learning observed in backpropagated networks. In combination with the fact that there are no global
error signals, the network is unable to optimize across layer boundaries and therefore cannot improve
downstream accuracy. In essence, each layer has to fully re-separate the provided features, leading
    1
     In the supervised approach, a label must still be provided during evaluation. The original work (Hinton,
2022) uses a ’neutral’ label which is an average of all labels. Limited experiments show that simply using a
random label works slightly better in practice.
   2
     In this work we refer to this reduced form of normalization that does not subtract the mean simply as
layernorm. All experiments in this regard are verified to hold for both this reduced version and the standard
PyTorch layernorm implementation (PyTorch Contributors, 2023).


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


to a collection of single-layer classifiers with shallow insight. This stack of classifiers operating on
the output of their predecessor leads to high instability, especially at later layers, shown in Figure 2.
Intuitively, we seek a transformation that strikes the balance between doing nothing, which leads
to recycling features, and discarding all prediction information which leads to each layer having to
re-separate all features. To this end, we propose to use batch normalization (BN) (Ioffe & Szegedy,
2015). Batch Normalization normalizes features within each batch without removing the informa-
tion regarding the previous prediction. Further, as this normalization is dependent on batch statistics,
which are not available to any single sample, any subsequent layer cannot exactly reconstruct the
original features. Additionally, directly using batch-normalized features most likely will not lead to
high goodness, especially if these lead to a wrong prediction. This forces new features or insights
to be created at each layer, which is empirically demonstrated on the right of Figure 1. In essence,
each layer has the ability to alter features instead of separating them again. This leads to lower
weights Figure 10, drastically stabler gradients Figure 2, and therefore better generalization. This is
discussed more rigorously and intuitively in Appendix E.


Figure 1: Layerwise test accuracies for both normalization schemes. Both experiments use SymBa,
but not overlapped local updates on the shallow CNN network (VFF+SymBa/s) on CIFAR-10.


Figure 2: ℓ2 norm of the gradients of layers 1 and 6 at each step during training using the FCN
network (VFF+SymBa/f) on CIFAR-10. OLU is not used due to its potential influence on the results.

Overlapping Local Updates. As a means to introduce error signals into FF, the original work
(Hinton, 2022) proposes a recurrent network that uses the goodness of the subsequent and previous
layers. However, for simple classification, this requires the network to be evaluated several times.
Therefore, we propose using another technique from recent research (Huo et al., 2018; Laskin et al.,
2021) that uses semi-local error signals within the context of backpropagation. This approach in-
volves training layers in groups in an alternating and overlapping pattern. Using group size 1 simply
results in greedy learning while using group size 2 leads to Overlapping Local Updates (OLU). A
more thorough explanation and further implementation details can be found in Appendix F.
In essence, this technique optimizes each layer with two alternating objectives. When the layer is
last in the group, it is updated to satisfy the local objective: maximizing goodness. Conversely,


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


when it is first in the group it is updated to better satisfy the objective of the subsequent layer: help
the subsequent layer maximize goodness. Intuitively, the former promotes local understanding of
the data and the latter prompts the layer to increase the usefulness of its representations for the next
layer. In essence, in accordance with the original idea of Hinton (2022), local weights are updated
according to the beliefs of the subsequent layer. Many alternate techniques exist to incorporate error
signals into local networks (Ororbia & Mali, 2023; Lillicrap et al., 2014) in a more biologically
plausible manner, however, exploring these is deferred to future work.


5    E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Conforming to Hinton (2022), all experimentation in this work concentrates on image classification
to measure the capabilities of the Forward-Forward algorithm, specifically on the MNIST, Fashion-
MNIST, SVHN, CIFAR-10, and CIFAR-100 datasets (LeCun & Cortes, 2010; Xiao et al., 2017;
Netzer et al., 2011; Krizhevsky, 2009). These datasets provide a good difficulty mix to assess the
behavior of the algorithm in different scenarios.
Training and Encoding. In this work, we opt to exclusively employ the supervised approach to the
Forward-Forward algorithm as described in Hinton (2022). Further, we opt to use CNNs due to their
ubiquitous nature in image classification. This combination poses some problems as the one-hot
label encoding (1D) cannot be trivially concatenated to an image (3D). Additionally, the encoding
must be concatenated in such a way that a majority of convolutions can differentiate the labels 3 . To
this end, this work encodes the label into an additional channel of identical size as the images, this
encoding is achieved through a learned matrix in the case of OLU and a random one without. In the
case of CIFAR-10, the one-hot vector is multiplied by a 10 × 1024 matrix, this result is transformed
into a 32 × 32 matrix and concatenated as a fourth input channel. In practice we found this to work
well.
Architecture. Selecting the appropriate architecture is a crucial consideration in deep learning.
However, most design principles and architectural rules of thumb stem from backpropagation and
are not blindly applicable to unexplored learning algorithms. For instance, in a local learning set-
ting, bottleneck layers most often result in information loss rather than compact representations in
our experience. Currently, the Forward-Forward algorithm has only been used to train small fully-
connected networks and non-weight-sharing local receptive fields. In line with other work within
local learning (Nøkland & Eidnes, 2019; Belilovsky et al., 2019), this work employs VGG-like
CNNs (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2015). However, some specific changes are made to adapt it to
Forward-Forward. First, we omit the (linear) classification head because goodness is simply deter-
mined from an aggregation of activations, no matter the dimensionality 4 . Second, we use a different
ordering of operations within each layer. Specifically, we first perform normalization, followed by
the convolution, the non-linearity, and finally an optional maxpool 5 . This is simply an extension
of Hinton (2022) and permutations of this have not been explored further in this work 6 . This work
studies three architectures: two CNNs consisting of 6 and 12 layers and an FCN with 6 layers. These
networks respectively consist of 2.8 million, 8.5 million, and 25.1 million parameters (depending on
the input). The CNN architectures are depicted in Figure 12. The FCN is simply a stack of hidden
layers with a dimension of 2048.
Evaluation Metrics. The Forward-Forward algorithm allows for more fine-grained metrics to eval-
uate any given network compared to backpropagation. In essence, each layer has the same objective,
in contrast to backpropagation where only the last layer has an objective, which can be used to exam-
ine the relations between layers. For instance, it is possible to inspect how well a single layer is able
to classify based solely on its own goodness. We expect this accuracy to increase with depth, and
failure to do so may indicate an issue with the previous layers. The same principle can be applied to
    3
      Consider the case where the first ten pixels of the image are used to encode the label. The majority of output
neurons have no information about the label, leaving them incapable of separating positive from negative.
    4
      Preliminary experiments in this work have shown that the goodness mechanism, in general, does not oper-
ate well when using very few features, such as in a classification head.
    5
      Experiments with dropout yielded subpar results using TFF. The learning speed is slower and the final
accuracy is identical.
    6
      For simplicity, we do not apply any techniques such as the peer-normalization proposed in Hinton (2022)
in all networks.


                                                         6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


any per-layer metric, such as the separation, loss, or gradient stability to gain insight into the behav-
ior of the model. An important metric in evaluating learning algorithms is training accuracy. This
indicates whether the algorithm is overfitting or simply fails to represent the dataset. However, in
the supervised setting, this is impossible to determine efficiently without sampling all labels, which
would slow down training time by the number of labels.
Accuracy. To measure the actual accuracy of the network, Hinton (2022) reports that taking the
average goodness of all layers except the first leads to the highest accuracy. Our experiments show
this to be true in tiny networks trained with the original algorithm but when using The Trifecta on
deeper networks, accuracy drastically degrades. We hypothesize these generic features or goodness
impact the stability of the ensemble, leading to the observed behavior 7 . Therefore, all reported
single-valued accuracies (Table 1, Table 2) are simply based on the goodness of the last layer. Nev-
ertheless, in deep networks, aggregating the last few layers can be fruitful. By aggregating the last
3 layers for goodness-based classification, we can improve test accuracy by a few decimal points.
More information about evaluation can be found in Appendix H.


6    R ESULTS

We perform and study two series of experiments to evaluate the effectiveness of The Trifecta. The
first is an ablation of the three components of The Trifecta. The second is a study into the impact
of the architecture and training time. Where possible, we compare results to the vanilla (origi-
nal) Forward-Forward algorithm (Hinton, 2022), and a backpropagation baseline. This baseline is
trained on the deep architecture with an altered layer structure to accommodate backpropagation 8 .
Further, a linear classification head is appended. Note that this simply serves as a baseline and is far
from SOTA. The same hyperparameters and architecture are used on all datasets for fair compari-
son. We describe each model with the shorthand notation [algorithm]/[architecture]. The employed
algorithms consist of Vanilla FF (VFF), Trifecta FF (TFF), feedback alignment (FA) (Lillicrap et al.,
2014), PEPITA (PEP) (Dellaferrera & Kreiman, 2023), and backpropagation (BP). The architectures
are the shallow CNN (s), the deep CNN (d), the FCN (f), and finally a tiny network consisting of 3 or
fewer layers (t). For instance, VFF/s denotes the original FF algorithm on the shallow architecture.
Ablation of Trifecta Components. Table 1 shows the accuracies achieved by multiple interplays of
The Trifecta components. We perform this ablation with the shallow architecture on the CIFAR-10
dataset as it is the most challenging and therefore differentiates the algorithms best. The first row
illustrates the importance of the loss function in our recreation of the original FF algorithm. This
highlights the importance of τ as a hyperparameter. The value τ = 2 is chosen in line with other
implementations (Lee & Song, 2023; Pezeshki, 2023) and τ = 10 is an optimized value we found
for our network on CIFAR-10. Additionally, utilizing the improved loss function further improves
the accuracy and establishes this component as the most crucial part of the Trifecta. The next rows
show that the addition of each component yields significant gains to the final accuracy. The full
Trifecta (the bottom right entry) achieves the highest accuracy by a significant margin. The last
column shows that the combination of all techniques outperforms the sum of parts, the differences
compared to only SymBa are 6.60% for OLU, 9.29% for BN, and their combination is 16.01%.
Convergence Properties. We train the TFF/s and the TFF/d architectures for 200 and 500 iterations
respectively on four image classification datasets (Table 2). We compare our results at several stages
of training to the available results from Hinton (2022) and a backpropagation baseline. When using
backpropagation to fit trivial datasets, such as MNIST, unnecessarily deep networks are inadvisable
as they lead to slower convergence and instability. Our experiments confirm this observation as
the deep model (99.58%) only slightly outperforms the shallow model (99.53%). A similar trend
can be observed for the f-MNIST and SVHN datasets. On the other hand, the more challenging
CIFAR-10 dataset exhibits the same behavior up to 100 epochs, where the shallow model (75.23%)
convincingly outperforms the deep model (71.12%). However, the longer training time allows the
deep model (83.51%) to surpass the shallow model (80.01%). A more detailed explanation of this
    7
      This may indicate a form of hierarchical learning, demonstrating that the features in a network evolve from
generic to specialized throughout layers.
    8
      Backpropagation, trained on the shallow architecture, shows slightly worse convergence properties and is
therefore not shown. Further, on our setup, backpropagation converges after 100 epochs, showing no further
improvement on longer training.


                                                       7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Test accuracy ablation with only specific components of The Trifecta using the shallow
network on CIFAR-10 after 100 epochs over 3 runs. Referring to the original loss, the shorthand
FTL (Fixed Threshold Loss) is used in this table.

                                FTL (tau=2)     FTL (tau=10)      SymBa (alpha=4)
                   None         29.27 ± 2.49     44.28 ± 1.28       59.22 ± 0.49
                    BN          41.02 ± 1.89     37.31 ± 3.01       68.51 ± 0.27
                   OLU          48.18 ± 1.87     50.85 ± 0.63       65.82 ± 0.78
                  OLU+BN        57.92 ± 1.11     58.99 ± 0.84       75.23 ± 0.65


Table 2: Test accuracy comparison between learning algorithms on several datasets at certain epochs.
We show the mean and standard deviation of 3 runs. Note that these are the accuracies for the last
layer alone, we achieve our best results by combining the last three layers as outlined in Appendix H.
The VFF/t and PEP/t results are from Hinton (2022) and Dellaferrera & Kreiman (2023) respectively.

    model     epochs      MNIST         F-MNIST          SVHN         CIFAR-10       CIFAR-100
     FA/f      100       98.60 ± 0.08   85.87 ± 0.19   71.11 ± 0.66   53.39 ± 0.24   23.00 ± 0.28
    PEP/t      100       98.29 ± 0.13                                 56.33 ± 1.35   27.56 ± 0.60
    VFF/t       60          98.6
    VFF/t      500          99.4                                          59
    TFF/s       10       97.44 ± 0.49   76.81 ± 2.37   84.62 ± 1.34   50.32 ± 0.32    11.32 ± 1.57
    TFF/s      100       99.23 ± 0.11   88.00 ± 0.67   92.57 ± 0.67   75.23 ± 0.65    28.71 ± 0.42
    TFF/s      200       99.53 ± 0.04   91.38 ± 0.38   94.25 ± 0.54   80.01 ± 0.60    35.79 ± 0.17
    TFF/d      100       99.32 ± 0.11   85.62 ± 0.53   91.49 ± 0.34   71.12 ± 0.77    24.42 ± 0.55
    TFF/d      200       99.28 ± 0.03   87.90 ± 0.42   92.60 ± 0.27   78.99 ± 1.16    28.88 ± 0.80
    TFF/d      500       99.58 ± 0.06   91.44 ± 0.49   94.31 ± 0.07   83.51 ± 0.78    35.26 ± 0.23
    BP/d       100       99.07 ± 0.10   93.61 ± 0.11   94.01 ± 0.20   89.32 ± 0.45    59.64 ± 0.46



phenomenon can be found in Appendix G. Lastly, the learning speed of our algorithm is very com-
petitive, which can be seen on the row depicting accuracy after 10 epochs. These results highlight
the potential of The Trifecta on the Forward-Forward algorithm. Three slight changes have dras-
tically improved the accuracies of the learning algorithm for all datasets: on simple datasets, our
algorithm is only slightly behind our backpropagation baseline, and on more complex datasets, we
still get very competitive accuracies compared to other approaches.


7   D ISCUSSION AND F UTURE W ORK

We can split the empirical impact of The Trifecta on the Forward-Forward algorithm into two cat-
egories. First, the progressive improvement is the amount by which each layer improves compared
to its predecessor. Ideally, appending additional layers continues to improve accuracy. Second, the
learning speed is the amount by which each layer improves over time. Trivially, the improvement of
each layer must be as quick as possible to reduce training time.
Progressive Improvement. The primary advantage of The Trifecta lies in its ability to improve the
accuracy upon going deeper into the network. In contrast to the original FF, which is unable to learn
further than a few layers, especially when using CNNs (Figure 4). In this work, we were able to
scale to 12 layers on multiple datasets with considerable gains per layer. Above this threshold, our
experiments did not show worthwhile improvement. The progressive improvement of later layers is
closely related to the learning rate. Figure 3 illustrates the accuracy and the separation throughout
training. These plots reveal the impact of a lower learning rate on the separation and stability of the
later layers, as can be seen at epochs 200 and 400 when the learning rate schedule changes. This is
also reflected in the accuracy (although difficult to see on the plot), as the difference between layers
6 and 12 at epoch 200 is 2.6% and 3.7% at epoch 500. This work has only scratched the surface
in terms of exploring the impact of learning rate schedules. More exotic learning schedules, which
may involve freezing certain layers, may be highly fruitful to further improve accuracy.


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Learning Speed. Another strength of The Trifecta is its ability to learn more quickly. Each compo-
nent in The Trifecta not only impacts the final accuracy of the model but also the speed at which this
accuracy is achieved. All components contribute to this in their own way, leading to the strong syn-
ergy within The Trifecta. Specifically, our shallow CNN model is able to cross the cape of 97% on
MNIST and 50% on CIFAR-10 in less than 10 epochs. Again, the learning speed is closely related
to the learning rate of the layers. We are confident that finding techniques to increase the learning
rate, will further improve the speed of FF.


Figure 3: The evolution of test accuracy (left) and separation (right) throughout the training of the
best-performing CIFAR-10 TFF/d model presented in Table 2.


The focus of this work is to improve the accuracy of the FF algorithm in a supervised image classifi-
cation setting using slight modifications. However, outside of The Trifecta and the original Forward-
Forward paper (Hinton, 2022), not much has yet been explored and several ideas for improving the
algorithm still remain untried and await further investigation. We strongly believe that future work
in the following two areas is most important for the future of FF: finding better evaluation strategies
and improving general understanding of the learning characteristics.
Evaluation Strategies. Ultimately, FF is still held back due to several issues. In particular, per-
forming non-binary classification using this algorithm is prohibitively slow as each class needs to
be sampled separately to achieve high accuracy. Using FF for tasks with many classes, such as
classifying ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009), is therefore strongly inadvisable. Nonetheless, alternate
classification techniques that avoid sampling all classes separately by using candidate lists or one-
pass classification (Hinton, 2022) seem promising but currently lead to lower accuracy and higher
instability respectively. Solving this would be a huge boost toward the viability of Forward-Forward
in more tasks.
General Understanding. There are several gaps in knowledge about FF which we believe to be
nontransferable from backpropagation. For instance, performing a thorough architecture search to
determine which patterns and blocks work best. Bottleneck layers are not suitable for Forward-
Forward but inverted bottlenecks (Sandler et al., 2019) may be. Additionally, techniques such as
residual connections (He et al., 2015b) remain an intriguing avenue of research that may push the
algorithm to scale to increasingly complex tasks. Further, an investigation using well-established
visual explanation techniques such as (Selvaraju et al., 2019) is sure to reveal interesting properties
about FF. Interestingly, these methods can be performed layer-wise to ascertain additional insight
into the model behavior.


8   C LOSING R EMARKS

We note that, within our proposed improvements, there remain several open questions. We encour-
age further research to scrutinize our findings as well as explore how to further improve the FF
algorithm. Continued research into alternate learning algorithms may reveal generally applicable
knowledge that will aid our understanding of machine learning and intelligence itself.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Eugene Belilovsky, Michael Eickenberg, and Edouard Oyallon. Greedy layerwise learning can scale
  to imagenet, 2019.
Y. Bengio, P. Simard, and P. Frasconi. Learning long-term dependencies with gradient descent is
  difficult. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 5(2):157–166, 1994. doi: 10.1109/72.279181.
Yoshua Bengio, Pascal Lamblin, Dan Popovici, and Hugo Larochelle.     Greedy layer-
  wise training of deep networks.      In B. Schölkopf, J. Platt, and T. Hoffman
  (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 19. MIT Press,
  2006. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2006/
  file/5da713a690c067105aeb2fae32403405-Paper.pdf.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh,
  Kensen Shi, Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek Rao, Parker Barnes, Yi Tay, Noam
  Shazeer, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Ben Hutchinson, Reiner Pope, James
  Bradbury, Jacob Austin, Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin, Toju Duke, Anselm Lev-
  skaya, Sanjay Ghemawat, Sunipa Dev, Henryk Michalewski, Xavier Garcia, Vedant Misra, Kevin
  Robinson, Liam Fedus, Denny Zhou, Daphne Ippolito, David Luan, Hyeontaek Lim, Barret
  Zoph, Alexander Spiridonov, Ryan Sepassi, David Dohan, Shivani Agrawal, Mark Omernick,
  Andrew M. Dai, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Marie Pellat, Aitor Lewkowycz, Erica
  Moreira, Rewon Child, Oleksandr Polozov, Katherine Lee, Zongwei Zhou, Xuezhi Wang, Bren-
  nan Saeta, Mark Diaz, Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason Wei, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Douglas
  Eck, Jeff Dean, Slav Petrov, and Noah Fiedel. Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways,
  2022.
Giorgia Dellaferrera and Gabriel Kreiman. Error-driven input modulation: Solving the credit as-
  signment problem without a backward pass, 2023.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hier-
   archical image database. In 2009 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
   pp. 248–255, 2009. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2009.5206848.
Dumitru Erhan, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, Pierre-Antoine Manzagol, Pascal Vincent, and
  Samy Bengio. Why does unsupervised pre-training help deep learning?       Journal of Ma-
  chine Learning Research, 11(19):625–660, 2010. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v11/
  erhan10a.html.
Leo Gao, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Laurence Golding, Travis Hoppe, Charles Foster, Jason
  Phang, Horace He, Anish Thite, Noa Nabeshima, Shawn Presser, and Connor Leahy. The pile:
  An 800gb dataset of diverse text for language modeling, 2020.
Xavier Glorot and Yoshua Bengio. Understanding the difficulty of training deep feedforward neural
  networks. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2010.
Aidan N. Gomez, Oscar Key, Kuba Perlin, Stephen Gou, Nick Frosst, Jeff Dean, and Yarin Gal.
  Interlocking backpropagation: Improving depthwise model-parallelism, 2022.
Stephen Grossberg.   Competitive learning: From interactive activation to adaptive reso-
  nance. Cognitive Science, 11(1):23–63, 1987. ISSN 0364-0213. doi: https://doi.org/10.
  1016/S0364-0213(87)80025-3. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
  article/pii/S0364021387800253.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Delving deep into rectifiers: Surpassing
  human-level performance on imagenet classification, 2015a.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition, 2015b.
Geoffrey Hinton. The forward-forward algorithm: Some preliminary investigations, 2022.
Geoffrey Hinton and Terrence Sejnowski. Optimal perceptual inference. pp. 448–453, 01 1983.

                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Geoffrey E Hinton, Simon Osindero, and Yee-Whye Teh. A fast learning algorithm for deep belief
  nets. Neural Comput., 18(7):1527–1554, July 2006.
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural computation, 9:1735–
  80, 12 1997. doi: 10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.1735.
Yanping Huang, Youlong Cheng, Ankur Bapna, Orhan Firat, Mia Xu Chen, Dehao Chen, Hy-
  oukJoong Lee, Jiquan Ngiam, Quoc V. Le, Yonghui Wu, and Zhifeng Chen. Gpipe: Efficient
  training of giant neural networks using pipeline parallelism, 2019.
Zhouyuan Huo, Bin Gu, Qian Yang, and Heng Huang. Decoupled parallel backpropagation with
  convergence guarantee, 2018.
Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by
  reducing internal covariate shift, 2015.
Max Jaderberg, Wojciech Marian Czarnecki, Simon Osindero, Oriol Vinyals, Alex Graves, David
 Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Decoupled neural interfaces using synthetic gradients, 2017.
Alex Krizhevsky. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. pp. 32–33, 2009. URL
  https://www.cs.toronto.edu/˜kriz/learning-features-2009-TR.pdf.
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep
  convolutional neural networks. In F. Pereira, C.J. Burges, L. Bottou, and K.Q. Weinberger
  (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 25. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2012. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2012/
  file/c399862d3b9d6b76c8436e924a68c45b-Paper.pdf.
Michael Laskin, Luke Metz, Seth Nabarro, Mark Saroufim, Badreddine Noune, Carlo Luschi, Jascha
 Sohl-Dickstein, and Pieter Abbeel. Parallel training of deep networks with local updates, 2021.
Yann LeCun and Corinna Cortes. MNIST handwritten digit database. 2010. URL http://yann.
  lecun.com/exdb/mnist/.
Yann LeCun, Bernhard Boser, John Denker, Donnie Henderson, R. Howard, Wayne Hubbard,
  and Lawrence Jackel. Handwritten digit recognition with a back-propagation network. In
  D. Touretzky (ed.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 2. Morgan-
  Kaufmann, 1989. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
  1989/file/53c3bce66e43be4f209556518c2fcb54-Paper.pdf.
Heung-Chang Lee and Jeonggeun Song. Symba: Symmetric backpropagation-free contrastive learn-
  ing with forward-forward algorithm for optimizing convergence, 2023.
Timothy P. Lillicrap, Daniel Cownden, Douglas B. Tweed, and Colin J. Akerman. Random feedback
  weights support learning in deep neural networks, 2014.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Priya Goyal, Ross Girshick, Kaiming He, and Piotr Dollár. Focal loss for dense object
  detection, 2018.
S Lowe. Reimplementation of the forward-forward algorithm.             https://github.com/
  loeweX/Forward-Forward, 2023.
Sindy Löwe, Peter O’Connor, and Bastiaan S. Veeling. Putting an end to end-to-end: Gradient-
  isolated learning of representations, 2020.
Markus Nagel, Marios Fournarakis, Rana Ali Amjad, Yelysei Bondarenko, Mart van Baalen, and
 Tijmen Blankevoort. A white paper on neural network quantization, 2021.
Yuval Netzer, Tao Wang, Adam Coates, Alessandro Bissacco, Bo Wu, and Andrew Ng. Reading
  digits in natural images with unsupervised feature learning. NIPS, 01 2011.
Arild Nøkland. Direct feedback alignment provides learning in deep neural networks, 2016.
Arild Nøkland and Lars Hiller Eidnes. Training neural networks with local error signals, 2019.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alexander Ororbia and Ankur Mali. The predictive forward-forward algorithm, 2023.

M Pezeshki. pytorch-forward-forward. https://github.com/mohammadpz/pytorch_
 forward_forward, 2023.

PyTorch Contributors. Pytorch layernorm documentation. https://pytorch.org/docs/2.
  0/generated/torch.nn.LayerNorm.html, 2023.

David E. Rumelhart and James L. McClelland. Learning Internal Representations by Error Propa-
  gation, pp. 318–362. 1987.

Mark Sandler, Andrew Howard, Menglong Zhu, Andrey Zhmoginov, and Liang-Chieh Chen. Mo-
 bilenetv2: Inverted residuals and linear bottlenecks, 2019.

Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade Gordon, Ross Wightman, Mehdi
  Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, Patrick Schramowski,
  Srivatsa Kundurthy, Katherine Crowson, Ludwig Schmidt, Robert Kaczmarczyk, and Jenia Jitsev.
  Laion-5b: An open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models, 2022.

Ramprasaath R. Selvaraju, Michael Cogswell, Abhishek Das, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Devi Parikh,
  and Dhruv Batra. Grad-CAM: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based lo-
  calization. International Journal of Computer Vision, 128(2):336–359, oct 2019. doi: 10.1007/
  s11263-019-01228-7. URL https://doi.org/10.1007%2Fs11263-019-01228-7.

Ravid Shwartz-Ziv and Naftali Tishby. Opening the black box of deep neural networks via informa-
  tion, 2017.

Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
  recognition, 2015.

Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov.
  Dropout: A simple way to prevent neural networks from overfitting. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 15(56):1929–1958, 2014. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v15/
  srivastava14a.html.

Christian Szegedy, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, Pierre Sermanet, Scott Reed, Dragomir Anguelov, Du-
  mitru Erhan, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Andrew Rabinovich. Going deeper with convolutions,
  2014.

Han Xiao, Kashif Rasul, and Roland Vollgraf. Fashion-mnist: a novel image dataset for benchmark-
  ing machine learning algorithms, 2017.


A    N OTATION

Throughout the appendices, some notational shorthands are used that will be outlined here. Ad-
ditionally, for simplicity, we will be analyzing the case of a single positive and negative example,
instead of full batches.
First, we define a shorthand for the main component of the loss function, which is called softplus.

                             ζ(x) = sof tplus(x) = log(1 + exp(x))

Many functions can be used to calculate goodness, in line with the original work, we stick with the
mean of squares, which can also be denoted as the square ℓ2 norm. positive and negative refer to
the feature vectors from a positive and negative sample respectively.

                           g pos = ||positive||22    g neg = ||negative||22

Often, we wish to examine the separation to the threshold, both for positive and negative examples.


                                                    12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                 δ pos = g pos − τ       δ neg = τ − g neg

In the same spirit, the overall separation between positive and negative is also useful.

                                   δ = δ pos + δ neg = g pos − g neg

B    H YPERPARAMETER D ISCUSSION .
Similar to backpropagation, training deeper networks requires more epochs. Specifically, we opted
for 200 epochs for the shallow network and 500 for the deep network. Further, in line with Pezeshki
(2023); Lowe (2023), we found the Forward-Forward algorithm is quite sensitive to the learning rate.
Specifically, higher learning rates tend to lead to instability, and lower learning rates simply lead to
slow convergence. We have found 10−3 to be a sensible default. For optimal results, however, we
found a learning rate schedule to be highly beneficial. In our experiments, we train the deep network
with a learning rate of 10−3 for the first 200 epochs, then 5 · 10−4 for the next 200 epochs and 10−4
for the last 100. The shallow network uses 10−3 for the first 150 epochs and 10−4 during the last
50. In terms of batch size, we found 1024 (512 positive and 512 negative) to work well but changing
this slightly does not seem to noticeably influence accuracy. Further, both discussed loss functions
have a hyperparameter. For the original loss function, we mention the value of τ in each experiment
explicitly. The SymBa loss has a scaling parameter that penalizes incorrect classification, we use a
scale of 4 as recommended by Lee & Song (2023). We find that values in the range [2; 8] for this
parameter do not impact accuracy, only the separation. In terms of data augmentation, a random
rotation and random crop are performed. Lastly, all networks are initialized using uniform Kaiming
initialization He et al. (2015a).

C    I SSUES W ITH THE O RIGINAL L OSS F UNCTION
In this section of the appendix, following the previously introduced notation, we more formally
indicate the issues with the original loss function. For convenience, the original loss function is
repeated.

                           LF F (g pos , g neg ) ≜ ζ(τ − g pos ) + ζ(g neg − τ )                    (1)

This study inspects whether the loss function handles positive and negative samples equally. As
stated earlier, in reality, the loss function is computed for a batch of positive and negative samples
(shown in Section 3) but we will use g pos and g neg as the goodness of a single positive and negative
sample respectively.
1. Symmetry: False positives and false negatives have an equal loss.

                                                     ?
                       LF F (τ + δ pos , τ + δ neg ) = LF F (τ − δ pos , τ − δ neg )                (2)

Intuitively, the left-hand side corresponds to the loss of correctly classifying a positive sample and
wrongly classifying the negative one (false positive). The right-hand side represents the inverse,
where the positive sample is misclassified (false negative). As the respective errors are the same, we
expect the loss function to be the same. When filling in Equation 2 with Equation 1, we attain the
following.

       ζ(τ − (τ + δ pos )) + ζ((τ + δ neg ) − τ ) = ζ(τ − (τ − δ pos )) + ζ((τ − δ neg ) − τ ))     (3)


                             ζ(−δ pos ) + ζ(δ neg ) = ζ(δ pos ) + ζ(−δ neg )                        (4)

We can see that this is the case iff δ pos = δ neg . i.e. when positive and negative samples are equally
separated from the threshold.


                                                     13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2. Equal Gradients: Negative and positive samples are equally pushed away from the threshold.

                   ∂                                  ?   ∂
                        LF F (τ + δ pos , τ + δ neg ) = pos LF F (τ − δ pos , τ − δ neg )             (5)
                 ∂δ neg                                 ∂δ
In essence, the first part computes what the partial derivative of the negative goodness is upon a false
positive. The second computes the same but for the positive goodness upon a false negative. If any
one of these is misclassified, derivatives of equal value are desired. To verify whether this holds for
the loss function, the partial derivatives need to be computed first.

                          ∂                            ∂
                           neg
                               ζ((τ + δ neg ) − τ ) = pos ζ(τ − (τ − δ pos ))                         (6)
                        ∂δ                           ∂δ

                                      ∂                 ∂
                                           ζ(δ neg ) = pos ζ(δ pos )                                  (7)
                                    ∂δ neg            ∂δ

                                     exp(δ neg )       exp(δ pos )
                                                   =                                                  (8)
                                   exp(δ neg ) + 1   exp(δ pos ) + 1

Again, this is the case iff δ pos = δ neg , when positive and negative samples are equally separated
from the threshold.
Consequences. The loss function only satisfies our two criteria given a very specific condition:
when δ pos = δ neg . Intuitively, one would expect this to hold. However, if δ pos increases, so
           pos
does, exp(δ )/1 + exp(δpos ) and similarly for δ neg , especially for small δ, which occurs most of the
time. Therefore, if the separation of either positive or negative increases, that derivative will start to
dominate the gradient, leading to an unstable equilibrium.
Such imbalance can occur simply due to the variance in batches or due to it being simpler to gen-
erate high or low goodness for the optimizer. Another factor that can cause this imbalance is that
goodness must be positive. This sets a hard limit for the separation of negative samples, namely
δ neg ≤ τ . In reality, this limit is never even reached due to the optimization process. Achieving low
goodness values necessitates a delicate equilibrium, rendering the network highly responsive to any
minor alteration. Since the loss function’s constituent terms are aggregated, the gradients stemming
from positive samples severely disturb this balance. Conversely, this is not an issue for the positive
samples as small disturbances from the negative gradients will not impact them as much. Scaling
the threshold to be high enough to circumvent this behavior is not possible without repercussions; a
high threshold will induce lots of instability in the network as all weights need to be higher, in some
cases this may even lead to the inability to converge at all.
This issue is exacerbated in weight-sharing architectures such as CNNs given that it is more difficult
to control the exact output of multiple neurons given a single weight change. This can be observed
in the following experiment where we simply employ the shallow CNN in combination with an
unaltered version of FF (VFF/s). Figure 4 clearly shows that the accuracy declines upon going
deeper into the network, which is a large issue in many cases.
Finally, due to the abovementioned issues, finding a correct value for τ is complicated. In limited
experiments, we found the value that achieves the highest accuracy to be highly dependent on the
architecture and dataset. However, all statements made or observed trends for a given τ (such as
Figure 4) are verified to hold within the range [1;10].

D    E XPLORING THE N EW L OSS F UNCTION

This section of the appendix discusses the properties of the new loss function and their impact on
the accuracy and stability of Forward-Forward. We conclude by outlining some alternatives and
extensions to our approach. For convenience, the new loss function is repeated.

                                  LSB (g pos , g neg ) ≜ ζ(g pos − g neg )                            (9)


                                                    14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 4: Layerwise accuracy of the best-performing VFF/s using the original loss function (τ = 2)
(Table 1). The experiment is performed on CIFAR-10.


This function suffers from a flaw that makes it possible to lower the loss function without learning
new features. As the loss is simply calculated by the separation, scaling all parameters uniformly
(given an already existing separation) will lower the loss, not by learning but by simply amplifying
the features. Mathematically, we can note the following.


                      δ = ReLU (Fi (x, θi )) =⇒ α · δ = ReLU (Fi (x, α · θi ))                        (10)

This simply denotes that if the parameters of a layer θi are able to achieve a separation δ, an arbitrary
separation can be achieved by choosing α accordingly. Notice this only holds, if Fi is a linear
operation, which is the case for a convolutional or a dense layer. Moreover, ReLU only disregards
negative features which has no impact on scaling the positive features (like sigmoid would).
In theory, this uncontrolled scaling can have devastating effects on the stability of a network. How-
ever, empirically, we find that this behavior is negligible in all experiments performed. We verify this
using the three experiments listed below. To ensure the conjectured behavior has the highest chance
to be observed, we perform these experiments on the model that achieves the highest accuracy on
CIFAR-10, shown in Figure 3. This model has the most layers and is trained the longest.
Plot the Mean of Positive and Negative Goodness Throughout Training for Each Layer. This
experiment provides a comprehensive view of the evolution of the goodness which can be used to
indirectly assess the stability of specific layers through training. Figure 5 shows that some layers
have significantly higher goodness than others, especially the second layer. Regardless, knowing
that this is the squared sum of thousands of features, all values remain within the expected range for
neural networks and do not demonstrate this uncontrolled scaling.
Measure the Maximal Weight for Each Layer After Training. The magnitude of weights is
only an indirect indication of stability or other common metrics. Nevertheless, low maximal weight
ensures that the network suffers less from phenomena such as overfitting or instability. This exper-
iment, depicted in Figure 6, reveals that the highest weight has a value of 0.3 which occurs in the
first layer. After the second layer, there is no layer with a weight larger than 0.2. After more epochs,
there is no significant difference in maximal weight. This further refutes the notion that the network
is simply scaling its weights to achieve higher separation.
Measure the Maximal Goodness Value at Test Time. The first experiment examined the mean
values of goodness at training time to assess the stability of the network. However, simply exam-
ining the mean does not provide information about outliers, which may exclusively cause the issue.
Comparably, examining training samples is inadequate as the model may exclusively become un-
stable outside of the training distribution. Therefore, this experiment studies the ’worst case’ of the
model; the maximal goodness at test time. We measure a maximal goodness of about 160 in the first
three layers, then regressing to a maximum of 90 in the later layers, depicted in Figure 6. This, again,
is within the realm of reason. Generally, longer training times do not severely impact the maximal
activations except for the last layer. This effect can be seen to a lesser extent in Figure 5 (green line).
We suspect this phenomenon is specific to this exact architecture (as it was not observed elsewhere)


                                                    15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and therefore do not draw conclusions about its origins. Lastly, the peak at the second layer seems
to be simply incidental and does not occur for different networks/datasets.


Figure 5: The evolution of positive (left) and negative (right) goodness during training for the best-
performing CIFAR-10 TFF/d model presented in Table 2.


Figure 6: Layerwise maximal goodness (left) and maximal weight (right) at three different epochs
for the best-performing CIFAR-10 TFF/d model presented in Table 2.

Consequences. We hypothesize that the explosion of weights practically does not occur due to
variance in the network, known as Internal Covariate Shift (ICS) (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015). In effect,
it seems to be better to learn robust features instead of scaling highly specific ones to achieve the best
separation. As the first two layers are barely subject to such variance, the optimization is more prone
to increase their weights and therefore goodness. However, no further experimentation is performed
to fully back up this hypothesis.
The only adaptation this work has made to avoid issues related to high values is the method
of calculating the loss itself. Namely, the term exp(g pos − g neg ) can lead to numeric instabil-
ity, especially when working with half-width floating point values. Therefore, we approximate
log(1 + exp(g pos − g neg )) with simply g pos − g neg after a specific point 9 .
Alternatives. A possible remedy is to find a loss function L that satisfies the condition ∀α :
L(pos, neg) = L(α · pos, α · neg). If the loss remained identical regardless of any α, there would
no longer be an incentive to scale up all parameters. However, consider the case where α = 0, this
would imply ∀x, y : L(0, 0) = L(x, y) which only a constant function satisfies. Consequently, it is
not feasible to achieve such behavior given the current approach.
Alternatively, a possible constraint can be put on the growth of weights by imposing weight decay.
Limited experiments were performed with decay values ranging from 10−4 to 10−6 without success.
In all cases, accuracy was significantly lower.
   9
       The PyTorch SoftPlus function has this functionality built-in by default with a threshold of 20.


                                                         16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E    N ORMALIZATION D EEP D IVE

This appendix accompanies Section 4 and provides additional plots and insights about the impact of
normalization. Specifically, the statements made in that section will be substantiated further here.
In contrast to the majority of other experiments in this work, this section uses the FCN architecture
consisting of 6 layers that all have a hidden dimension of 2048. This choice is made to ensure that
any trends throughout layers are the product of the learning algorithm and not the architecture (for
example side effects of a maxpool). The observations made in this section are also verified to hold
for CNNs, but not shown.
No Normalization Leads to Feature Recycling. We empirically demonstrate the feature recycling
phenomenon as denoted in (Hinton, 2022). The recycling behavior stems from the reuse of fea-
tures that already produce high/low goodness depending on the sample. Any subsequent layer can
therefore simply perform an identity operation or even a permutation and produce low loss without
learning anything new.
The following plots (Figure 7) demonstrate that networks trained without normalization, have sub-
stantially lower gradients, especially after a few layers. Compared to the other normalization strate-
gies, the right-hand side of Figure 7 shows that the gradients of the network without normalization
are several orders of magnitude lower. Further, the left-hand side shows that the magnitude of the
gradients decreases throughout layers.


Figure 7: Layerwise gradient ℓ2 norms without normalization on the FCN network (left) and ℓ2
norm of the gradients of layer 6 compared to other normalization schemes (right). Both plots are on
CIFAR-10 with the VFF+SymBa/f model. (The right figure is the same as Figure 2 supplemented
with the no normalization model.)

Layer Normalization Leads to Information Loss. Information loss is often quantified in terms
of mutual information. Specifically, if an embedding has low mutual information with the input,
it is said to have lost information. Informally, mutual information conveys how much information
is shared between two distributions. Or alternatively, how much information does sampling one
distribution reveal about the other and vice-versa. Consider a very narrow (bottleneck) layer that
only has very few features, generally, it will be impossible to redetermine the original input exactly.
However, this phenomenon occurs not only when reducing dimensionality but at many locations.
For instance: a ReLU operation loses all negative information, and numeric approximation (which
occurs at almost every floating point computation) loses information too.
The mutual information between the input and the label is generally low, from the label alone, the
exact input cannot be determined. Therefore, at some point, the network will lose information. It has
been shown that modern networks retain most information until the classification head aggressively
narrows dimensionality (Shwartz-Ziv & Tishby, 2017). This allows later layers to manipulate data
to become even more separable while retaining a holistic picture of the input. In ordinary neural
networks, mutual information is not essential to consider. There is simply one objective and the
entire update is to better satisfy this objective. In this context, it is in the best interest of lower layers
to retain information. In the case of FF however, each local objective has no incentive to retain
information. Therefore, we need to ensure information loss is diminished.


                                                     17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


However, this paper does not focus on the mathematical properties and behavior bounds but rather
takes an empirical approach. We measure the usefulness of representations by appending a multi-
layer classifier on top of each layer separately (Figure 8). The original network is pre-trained with
VFF+SymBa/f and the classifier heads are trained with backpropagation for 100 epochs. Intuitively,
we measure how a well-tested architecture and learning method can use the produced features by
each layer for classification. This reveals that normalization affects the downstream usefulness of
representations quite strongly. Concretely, as depth increases, the usefulness of layer normalization
features quickly decays while no normalization retains them best, batch normalization stays in the
middle. This relates back to finding the balance between forcing the network to learn new features
(layer normalization) and simply reusing features (no normalization).


Figure 8: Layerwise test accuracy of auxiliary backpropagated classifier for layernorm, batchnorm,
and no normalization. The experiment is performed on the VFF+SymBa/f model after 100 epochs
on CIFAR-10.

Batch Normalization Leads to Lower Variance. Figure 2 depicts the ℓ2 norm of the gradients in
each batch. The plots clearly indicate the increased variance of layer normalization in comparison
to batch normalization. As additional evidence, it is possible to examine the weights of the models
themselves. There are a multitude of techniques to visualize the distribution of weights. We opt to
measure the maximal weight at each layer and the maximal goodness for each layer (on the full test
set), depicted respectively in the left and right plots of Figure 9. This reveals that the network with
layer normalization has higher maximal weights at each layer. Additionally, while less noticeable,
the maximal goodness values are more constant throughout the batchnorm network.


Figure 9: Layerwise maximal weight (left) and maximal goodness (right) for layernorm, batchnorm,
and no normalization. The metrics are from the same run as depicted in Figure 8.

Maximal values are good for putting bounds on the variance of a network but give a narrow view
of the distribution. Simply looking at the weights themselves (Figure 10) gives a qualitative insight
into the differences of distribution: batchnorm has drastically less spread out weights.


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 10: A visual representation of the weights at layer 6 of the VFF+SymBa/f model. The y-
axis corresponds to the output neurons and the x-axis to the input neurons. Additionally, the values
are clamped within [-0.3; 0.3] for visual clarity. The metrics are from the same run as depicted in
Figure 8.


Single Sample Training. A notable advantage of layer normalization over batch normalization lies
in the fact that there is no constraint on batch sizes. In a biological setting, which FF endeavors
to resemble, learning by normalizing over a batch of training samples is implausible. However,
comparable to evaluation using batch normalization, this can be solved by using rolling averages for
the full training process. Some preliminary experiments have shown that this does not significantly
degrade accuracy. Specifically, when using the same settings as in Table 1 with the full TFF, the
resulting model achieves an accuracy of 73.3%, only 2% lower than originally.

F    E RROR S IGNALS AND OVERLAPPING U PDATES
This appendix will provide an overview of the role and implementation of Overlapping Local Up-
dates (OLU) within FF. Prior to this, a detailed explanation of OLU is given.
Details of OLU. Intuitively, OLU is a form of truncated backpropagation where two layers are
updated at once. At each step in the learning process, instead of simply updating the current layer
given the local objective function, the previous layer is also updated. In the context of FF, there are
two possible implementations. Both approaches are depicted in Figure 11.

       • Approach 1: Alternatingly update a group of 2 layers each epoch (used in this work).
       • Approach 2: Update both the current and previous layer at each step.

In terms of accuracy, both techniques are equal. The discrepancy lies in their runtime; we found the
first approach to be faster than the second on the setup we used. Therefore, we opted for the first
approach. However, we expect, with some tuning, both techniques can perform equally fast.
Alternatives to OLU. In the case of this work, OLU was inspired by the concept that neurons not
only send signals to other neurons within their layer but also to neighboring neurons, such as the
previous layer. OLU takes the simplest approach from a contemporary research standpoint and
allows a full error signal to be locally propagated. However, more biologically plausible alternatives
exist, in which random synaptic feedback can be used to locally update neurons (Lillicrap et al.,
2014). We encourage future work in this area to explore this technique.

G    A RCHITECTURE D ISCUSSION
The main role of this appendix is to depict and describe the two main architectures used throughout
this work. However, before that, a collection of empirical observations will be provided that led
us toward this design. These observations will be contrasted with backpropagation and outline the
differences and similarities to this algorithm.


                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 11: A visual representation of two possible OLU implementations. The red lines represent
error signals. At even iterations, even objectives are optimized and at uneven iterations, uneven
objectives are optimized.


During the experimentation phase of this work, the viability of training several architectures with FF
was tested. This manual search focussed on simple CNNs, meaning only combining convolutions
and maxpool operations. This exploration entails more ’hyperparameters’ than might be expected.
For instance, technically FF is proposed as a layer-wise learning algorithm. However, it can be used
as a general algorithm to train entire ’blocks’, such as (He et al., 2015b; Szegedy et al., 2014), or
simply a subnetwork. However, this work limits itself to layerwise training and defers this avenue
of research to future work.
When training simple CNNs, two parameters of the network are of importance: the width and the
depth. Varying these parameters directly influences the learning speed (time to reach a threshold
in accuracy) as well as the final accuracy (accuracy convergence after long training). The learning
speed difference between shallow and deep networks is a well-known phenomenon in backpropaga-
tion (especially in non-residual architectures). This stems from the increasing instability of gradients
(He et al., 2015b). In local learning, as no global gradients are used, this issue does not arise.
The accuracy of the local algorithms is mostly determined by the width (the number of features or
channels) of the layers. There exist several architectures that intentionally reduce the number of
features of certain layers, such as autoencoders (Rumelhart & McClelland, 1987). These networks
can be trained with backpropagation which will result in these narrow layers containing a com-
pressed representation of the input. However, in local learning regimes, this bottleneck simply leads
to information loss as the local objective struggles to retain useful downstream information. Con-
versely, scaling the width of a layer severely impacts the learning speed, intuitively, more features
lead to a more challenging optimization process as local minima are harder to find. Therefore, the
dimensionality of the features after each block is of paramount importance to the final accuracy.
When using local learning on CNNs, this balance in network width can be balanced through lossy
operations such as maxpool operations. Therefore, their locations severely impact the learning char-
acteristics of the network. This disparity causes a large difference between the shallow and deep
networks used in this work. As can be seen on Figure 12, the shallow network is not simply a sub-
set of the deep network. Empirically, as discussed in Section 6, we confirm the expected tradeoff
between learning speed and final accuracy between these architectures.
As explained in Section 5, each layer of our architecture deviates from the ordinary order of oper-
ations. Particularly, each layer first normalizes, followed by the convolution and the non-linearity.
Lastly, an optional max pool is performed before the calculation of the goodness, which is explicitly
shown in Figure 12. This figure shows the progression of channels through the architecture, where
C is the number of input channels.


                                                  20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Figure 12: The two CNN architectures used throughout this work. The shallow network (left) has
2.8 million parameters and the deep network (right) has 8.5 million parameters.



H    E VALUATION S TRATEGIES

As originally discussed in Section 3, there are several methods to evaluate with a network trained in
a supervised FF setting. This appendix explores some such methods and compares their effect on
the final accuracy.
Goodness-Based Classification. This evaluation method stands out as the prominent classification
technique to achieve the highest possible accuracy with FF (Hinton, 2022). This stems from the fact
that this technique leverages the exact purpose the network was trained for. It evaluates the unseen
example with all possible labels in the dataset and selects the label with the highest goodness, as this
is the most positive. The main disadvantage, however, is that it requires an evaluation of the network
for each possible label, which is prohibitively expensive in most cases.
Feature-Based Classification. This method does not necessitate sampling each class individually.
Instead, it utilizes a neutral label, which is the average of all class labels, to generate features that
represent all classes. These features are then used by an auxiliary network to make a single predic-
tion encompassing all classes. In line with (Hinton, 2022), we find that this method generally suffers
from instability and therefore does not achieve the accuracy of the aforementioned technique. We
have performed several experiments to remedy this without success: freeze the whole network ex-
cept the auxiliary head, use normal negative labels instead of neutral ones, use very low learning
rates, and use a classifier consisting of multiple layers.
Ensemble Classification. The fact that the objective of each layer is the same can be leveraged
in both aforementioned techniques. Unlike ordinary backpropagated networks, which only use the
last layer to generate a prediction, any layer or combination of layers of the network can be used
for evaluation. In essence, the goodness or features from multiple layers can be aggregated into an
ensemble that is more resilient to noise and generally achieves higher accuracy. This aggregation
can be a straightforward average or even a small classifier of any kind. This is depicted in Figure 13.
In this work, we use the average of the goodness to make the prediction. With this technique, we are
able to augment the test accuracy of all our deep models by a few decimals, shown in Table 3. The


                                                   21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 3: Comparison of two proposed evaluation strategies on the test accuracy. The shown models
are the same as the TFF/d models at 500 epochs from Table 2.

               evaluation         MNIST         F-MNIST          SVHN         CIFAR-10
              only last layer    99.58 ± 0.06   91.38 ± 0.38   94.31 ± 0.07   83.51 ± 0.78
             three last layers   99.62 ± 0.02   91.51 ± 0.27   94.36 ± 0.04   83.72 ± 0.80


shallow models do not benefit from averaging the last few layers as the accuracy of the last layer is
significantly higher than its predecessors.


Figure 13: A depiction of the two prominent evaluation techniques for Forward-Forward. The black
arrow represents data flow and the red arrows represent gradient flow. Goodness-based classification
(right) requires the network to be evaluated N times according to the amount of label. The ’head’ in
this figure can range from a simple average to a small classifier.


I   R ESIDUALS
Residual connections He et al. (2015b) have proven vital to train deeper networks with backprop-
agation. Therefore, utilizing them to improve FF seems like a clear path to improve the scaling
behavior. The motivation between residual connections is twofold: it provides a sensible ”start” to
each layer, namely the identity matrix, and allows the backward gradients to ”bypass” each layer.
This results in a smoother convergence, especially for deeper networks.
Within FF, both motivations no longer hold. First, adding the identity to each layer is not desirable as
this may discourage the network from learning new features. Second, there is no need for backward
gradients to bypass layers, as there is no full backpropagation. Additionally, the models used within
this work are too shallow enough to fully benefit from residuals, even if they were trained with
backprop. Interestingly, preliminary experiments using TFF/s and TFF/d on CIFAR-10 with residual
connections paint a more positive picture. Specifically, early during training (the first 30 epochs),
the use of residual connection yields improved results. However, after 100 epochs the accuracy
of the small and deep models are respectively 4% and 2% lower. Therefore, we believe residual
connections to hold some promise, if modified in a sensible manner to the requirements of FF.


                                                  22
