Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C ONTINUAL L EARNING IN O PEN - VOCABULARY C LAS -
SIFICATION WITH C OMPLEMENTARY M EMORY S YS -
TEMS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         We introduce a method for flexible and efficient continual learning in open-
         vocabulary image classification, drawing inspiration from the complementary
         learning systems observed in human cognition. Specifically, we propose to com-
         bine predictions from a CLIP zero-shot model and the exemplar-based model, using
         the zero-shot estimated probability that a sample’s class is within the exemplar
         classes. We also propose a “tree probe” method, an adaption of lazy learning prin-
         ciples, which enables fast learning from new examples with competitive accuracy
         to batch-trained linear models. We test in data incremental, class incremental, and
         task incremental settings, as well as ability to perform flexible inference on varying
         subsets of zero-shot and learned categories. Our proposed method achieves a good
         balance of learning speed, target task effectiveness, and zero-shot effectiveness.


1   I NTRODUCTION
A major machine learning goal is to create flexible learning systems, which we investigate in the
context of image classification, with the following goals:
      • Flexible inference: classify an image within any label set, testable via zero-shot classification
      • Continual improvement: accuracy improves as new data is received for related tasks without
        detriment to previous tasks
      • Efficient incremental learning: can efficiently update the model with new training examples
Flexible inference and continual improvement lead to robust and widely usable systems. Efficient
incremental learning reduces cost of training and facilitates responsive and interactive learning
approaches.
To our knowledge, no solution exists that meets all these goals. Open vocabulary methods, such as
CLIP Radford et al. (2021), attain flexible inference but cannot easily learn and improve with new
examples. Continual learning methods, such as LwF Li & Hoiem (2018), iCaRL Rebuffi et al. (2017),
EWC Kirkpatrick et al. (2016), and GDumb Prabhu et al. (2020), lack flexible inference and are not
easily extended to open vocabulary models. For example, LwF requires maintaining classification
heads for previous tasks and GDumb maintains examples for every possible label; neither strategy
directly applies when the label set is unbounded. In fact, one homogeneous system cannot easily
accommodate all goals. A deep network can aggregate information over enormous datasets to achieve
flexible inference, but updates from small targeted subsets can disrupt other tasks. Instance-based
methods can incrementally learn and continually improve, but cannot generalize to novel labels.
To build such a flexible learning system, we are inspired by the flexibility of human learning and
inference, enabled by complementary learning systems (CLS) O’Reilly et al. (2014). The fast-learning
system forms new memories and associations with sparse connections, enabling non-disruptive storage
of individual experiences. The slow-learning system gradually consolidates information in a densely
connected network, encoding general knowledge and regularities across experiences. The interplay
between these two complementary systems enables the brain to balance the rapid encoding of novel
information and gradual generalization of knowledge. How can we make computer learning systems
that likewise benefit from both consolidated and exemplar-based memory systems to continually
learn with zero-shot inference ability?


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Our system likewise comprises three components: slow-learning system, fast-learning system, and the
association module that incorporates both models for prediction. In this work, we focus on the latter
two components. We investigate in the context of open-vocabulary image classification, using CLIP
as the slow-learning system. Our fast-learning system stores individual representations of learning
exemplars, and the challenge is to learn from them in a way that is performant in both accuracy and
learning time (Sec. 3.2). To balance speed and performance, we consider classic learning approaches.
One option is linear probe, which can achieve good accuracy but learns from a new example in O(n)
time, where n represents the total number of exemplars. K-nearest neighbor (KNN) can learn in
O(1) time but tends to be less accurate than linear probe. Based on local linear models from the
lazy learning literature Bontempi et al. (1999), we propose a “tree probe” method that hierarchically
clusters examples and trains linear models for each cluster. The time to learn from a new example is
O(log n) (in practice, essentially constant time), and the accuracy is close to linear probe.
A second challenge is to predict using both CLIP and exemplar models (Sec. 3.3) to achieve good
performance on new tasks while maintaining zero-shot performance. The exemplar model tends to
perform well for test samples with labels that are in the exemplar set (“exemplar covered”), while the
consolidated model can potentially predict any label. At test time, we may not know whether the
label of a given test image is exemplar-covered. Our idea is to use CLIP to estimate the probability
that an image’s label is exemplar-covered and then weight the predictions of the two models.
Our complementary system achieves good accuracy, efficient learning, and flexible inference. We
evaluate our method in the forms of data-incremental, class-incremental, and task-incremental
learning, as well as flexible inference with categorization tasks that involve some, all, or none of the
exemplar-covered labels. Additionally, we compare on a recently created external benchmark Zheng
et al. (2023), outperforming all compared approaches with the additional benefit of efficient learning.
In summary, the reader may benefit from the following paper contributions:
         • Tree-probe exemplar model: Our locally linear models using a hierarchical clustering can be
           considered a member of the long-studied lazy learning approaches Bontempi et al. (1999),
           but we are not aware of this specific method being proposed or used. Tree-probe has
           practically constant training time in number of training samples and achieves better accuracy
           than KNN approaches. This is attractive for interactive search, active learning, and other
           applications where annotated examples are received in a trickle and fast learning is required.
         • Exemplar and consolidated model combination with embeddings: Our approach, to use
           the consolidated model to estimate applicability of the exemplar model and to combine
           model predictions in the label embedding space, enables effective continual open-vocabulary
           learning and performs significantly better than alternatives we tested.
         • Flexible learning/inference: Our experimental setup evaluates both the ability to continually
           learn from new samples and to flexibly apply those learnings to various category sets. This
           may provide a useful test framework to further improve open-vocabulary continual learning.

2     R ELATED WORKS
2.1   I NSTANCE - BASED LEARNING (IBL)
Instance-based learning (IBL) Aggarwal (2014) is a family of learning algorithms that construct a
decision boundary using a memory of training instances, allowing for efficient and flexible adaptation
to new data points. This learning paradigm relies on the principle of local approximation, where
predictions are made based on the stored instances that are most similar to the query. One of the most
well-known IBL methods is the k-Nearest Neighbors (KNN) algorithm, which has been extensively
studied for its simplicity and effectiveness in various domains, including classification and regression
tasks Guo et al. (2003); Zhang et al. (2006; 2017); Song et al. (2017).
Closely related to IBL is lazy learning, in which training data is organized for prediction at inference
time instead of training time. This approach can be more practical than batch or “eager” learning
in applications like online recommendation systems, when the training data is constantly evolving.
Lazy learning approaches can include KNN or locally linear regression Atkeson et al. (1997) or
classification models Aggarwal (2014), where models are trained based on neighbors to the query.
We investigate KNN, a form of locally linear classifiers, and globally linear classifiers, exploring their
trade-offs for training and inference time and accuracy on a growing set of exemplars, as well as how
to combine their predictions with a static image-language foundation model.


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2.2          O PEN - VOCABULARY IMAGE CLASSIFICATION
Open-vocabulary image classification aims to categorize images without constraints of predefined
labels. CLIP Radford et al. (2021) achieves this by learning embedding spaces of images and text,
trained via a contrastive objective that corresponding image/text pairs will be more similar than
non-corresponding pairs. A new image can be classified into an arbitrary set of labels based on the
similarity of the image embedding features to the text embedding features corresponding to each
label. An alternative approach is to jointly encode the image and text information and decode into text.
Following this approach, vision-language models, such as GPV-1 Gupta et al. (2022), GPV-2 Kamath
et al. (2022), VL-BERT Su et al. (2020), VL-T5 Cho et al. (2021), Unified-IO Lu et al. (2022),
Gato Reed et al. (2022), and Flamingo Alayrac et al. (2022), can solve a broad range of tasks that
includes open-vocabulary image classification, but typically are larger and more complex than CLIP.
We use CLIP as our consolidated model, due to its simplicity and verified effectiveness in a broad
range of tasks Wortsman et al. (2022b); Gu et al. (2021); Ghiasi et al. (2021); Lin et al. (2022).

2.3          C ONTINUAL LEARNING
Continual learning techniques aim to acquire new knowledge over time while preserving previously
learned knowledge McCloskey & Cohen (1989). Approaches to continual learning can be broadly
categorized into regularization Li & Hoiem (2016); Kirkpatrick et al. (2016); Zenke et al. (2017),
parameter isolation Aljundi et al. (2017); Rusu et al. (2016); Serrà et al. (2018); Mallya & Lazebnik
(2018); Zhang et al. (2020), and rehearsal methods Rebuffi et al. (2017); Yan et al. (2021); Lopez-Paz
& Ranzato (2017); Shin et al. (2017). Regularization techniques generally impose constraints on
the learning process to alleviate forgetting. Parameter isolation methods maintain learning stability
by fixing subsets of parameters Mallya & Lazebnik (2018); Serrà et al. (2018) or extending model
with new parameters Rusu et al. (2016); Yoon et al. (2017); Zhang et al. (2020). Rehearsal methods
involve storing and replaying past data samples during training Shin et al. (2017); Bang et al. (2021).
We are not aware of many works that address continual learning in the context of open-vocabulary
image classification. WiSE-FT Wortsman et al. (2022a) finetunes CLIP encoders on target tasks
and averages finetuned weights with original weights for robustness to distribution shifts. Likewise,
CLS-ER Arani et al. (2022) exponentially averages model weights in different paces for its plastic
and stable model to balance learning and forgetting, drawing inspirations from CLS. Though not
specifically designed for open-vocabulary continual learning, WiSE-FT and CLS-ER can be modified
to counter forgetting. Recently, ZSCL Zheng et al. (2023) explores this setting but mainly focuses
on finetuning consolidated CLIP encoders. It combines LwF Li & Hoiem (2016) and a weight
ensemble idea similar to WiSE-FT as the remedy to reduce forgetting during finetuning. Rather than
refining or expanding a single model, our approach is to create a separate exemplar-based model that
complements a pre-trained and non-updated more general consolidated model. In our tree-probe
method, the exemplar-based model continually learns using a local rehearsal, such that incorporating
a new example requires only storing the new image and text embeddings and tuning a linear model
using a subset of visually similar examples. This requires little storage or computation and preserves
the generality of the consolidated model.


3       M ETHOD
                     Fast-learning System                                  AIM: Adaptive Instance Marginalization

      Exemplar Set                         Exemplar Model
                                                                  Exemplar Embedding

       ...            ...                           ...     ...
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Fused Embedding
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Classifier
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            p(y 2 Ye |I)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                p(y 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            / Ye |I)
                                                                                   <latexit sha1_base64="rKQHSsZR4cxHf1hlm52jETOXa1k=">AAAB/3icbVDLSsNAFJ34rPUVFdy4GSxC3ZREfC2LbnRXwT6kCWEynbRDJ5MwMxFC2oW/4saFIm79DXf+jZM2C209MHA4517umePHjEplWd/GwuLS8spqaa28vrG5tW3u7LZklAhMmjhikej4SBJGOWkqqhjpxIKg0Gek7Q+vc7/9SISkEb9XaUzcEPU5DShGSkueuR9XU4dy6IRIDfwgexh7ZHR77JkVq2ZNAOeJXZAKKNDwzC+nF+EkJFxhhqTs2las3AwJRTEj47KTSBIjPER90tWUo5BIN5vkH8MjrfRgEAn9uIIT9fdGhkIp09DXk3lMOevl4n9eN1HBpZtRHieKcDw9FCQMqgjmZcAeFQQrlmqCsKA6K8QDJBBWurKyLsGe/fI8aZ3U7PPa2d1ppX5V1FECB+AQVIENLkAd3IAGaAIMRuAZvII348l4Md6Nj+noglHs7IE/MD5/AHvalcY=</latexit>                  <latexit sha1_base64="aUBn5AzPj+ZJQLQufZyszgn9Fas=">AAACAnicbVDLSsNAFJ34rPUVdSVuBotQNyURX8uiG91VsA9pQphMJ+3QySTMTIQQixt/xY0LRdz6Fe78GydtFtp64MLhnHu59x4/ZlQqy/o25uYXFpeWSyvl1bX1jU1za7slo0Rg0sQRi0THR5IwyklTUcVIJxYEhT4jbX94mfvteyIkjfitSmPihqjPaUAxUlryzN24mjo8UpRDJ0Rq4AfZ3cgjD9eHnlmxatYYcJbYBamAAg3P/HJ6EU5CwhVmSMqubcXKzZBQFDMyKjuJJDHCQ9QnXU05Col0s/ELI3iglR4MIqGLKzhWf09kKJQyDX3dmZ8pp71c/M/rJio4dzPK40QRjieLgoRBFcE8D9ijgmDFUk0QFlTfCvEACYSVTq2sQ7CnX54lraOafVo7uTmu1C+KOEpgD+yDKrDBGaiDK9AATYDBI3gGr+DNeDJejHfjY9I6ZxQzO+APjM8fB5yXNQ==</latexit>


                            CLIP Encoder
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LR               LR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Classifier       Classifier
                                                                  Zero-shot Embedding
                     Slow-learning System

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (b) Illustration of Tree Probe
                                                (a) Main diagram of our method                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (b) Illustration of TreeProbe


Figure 1: Method overview. (a) Our model integrates rapid and slow-learning systems. Final results
are made by fusing the predictions from both systems using AIM. (b) Illustration of TreeProbe,
which incrementally adds and hierarchically clusters examples. TreeProbe trains logistic regression
classifiers using examples in updated leaf nodes.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Given an image I and label set Y , our system’s inference task is to assign the correct label y ∈ Y .
Each training example (or “exemplar”) consists of an image, and a ground-truth label. Our problem
setting is called “open-vocabulary” or “zero-shot”, as the labels can be represented and related
through text, and the task at inference time may contain labels or candidate label sets not observed
during training. The training goal is to efficiently update the model with each new example, such that
accuracy improves for related labels while maintaining zero-shot performance.
Analogous to complimentary learning systems (CLS) theory O’Reilly et al. (2014), our approach
(Fig. 1) uses two models: a CLIP image/text encoder as the consolidated slow learning system
(Sec. 3.1), and a rapid-learning exemplar-based model that stores and encodes image and label
embeddings (Sec. 3.2). The CLIP model can assign confidence to any label from an arbitrary set.
The exemplar-based model can acquire expertise that complements the CLIP model, but its scope is
limited to exemplar labels. In Sec. 3.3, we propose simple mechanisms to combine the predictions of
each model to retain zero-shot capability while improving in tasks related to received examples.

3.1   S LOW- LEARNING SYSTEM : ZERO - SHOT MODEL
Deep networks, such as CLIP Radford et al. (2021), relate to slow-learning systems in humans in
that they repeatedly process examples to iteratively consolidate experience and improve predictive
ability in dense weight connections. We use CLIP as the slow-learning consolidated system, taking
advantage of its representations and open-vocabulary predictive ability learned from batch training
on massive datasets. To preserve generality, we do not update the CLIP parameters and instead train
complementary exemplar-based models to be used in combination with CLIP.
CLIP encodes an input image I using an image encoder fimg to an image embedding vI = fimg (I),
and encodes an input collection of text labels T = t1 , t2 , . . . , tm using a text encoder ftxt to text
embeddings vti = ftxt (ti ). Following Radford et al. (2021), a text label ti is framed as a sentence or
caption contextualizing the image label yi , such as “a photo of a F-16, a style of aircraft” to represent
the image label “F-16” in an airplane classification task. The model computes logits for each label as
cosine similarity between the image and text label, weighted by temperature τ (=100 in CLIP):
                                                         vI · vti
                                      l(vI , vti ) = τ ·             .                                 (1)
                                                         |vI ||vti |
Logits can be converted to probabilities using a softmax function:
                                                 exp(l(vI , vti ))
                               pz (y = yi |I) = Pm                    ).                              (2)
                                                 j=1 exp(l(vI , vtj )
The label with maximum probability is predicted.

3.2   FAST- LEARNING SYSTEM : EXEMPLAR - BASED MODEL
For the fast-learning system, given one or more exemplars, our goal is to maximize classification
performance with minimal training time and acceptable inference time. We consider two approaches:
instance-based and model-based prediction. Instance-based prediction leverages the exemplar set
directly by retrieving and comparing samples. Model-based prediction seeks to capture the underlying
structure of the data through a parameterized model. In both cases, our approach leverages the
embeddings from CLIP encoders to reduce storage and improve sample efficiency of learning.
Our exemplar memory module M stores encoded image embeddings and their labels. Each entry in
the memory can be denoted by Mj = {vIj , yj } where j represents the entry index, vIj represents
the image embedding of Ij , and yj is the corresponding label.
Given a set of target labels, the exemplar-based model can produce a probability for each label
pe (y = yi |vI ). Alternatively, the prediction can be represented as an embedding vector ve of
composition of one or several text embeddings. Prediction in terms of ve enables the exemplar model
to support zero-shot prediction for labels similar to exemplar labels.
KNN: Given vI , the KNN memory module finds its most similar k entries in the memory through
cosine similarities between vI and all vIj in the memory. Let Nk (vI ) be the set of indices of the
k highest cosine similarity scores to vI P
                                         . KNN classification for vI can be performed by majority
voting from the values: ŷ = arg maxy j∈Nk (vI ) 1(yj = y). Here, 1(·) is an indicator function.
The probability of vI being label yi is pe (y = yi |vI ) = k1 j∈Nk (vI ) 1(yj = yi ).
                                                             P


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To predict the embedding ve , we can use the text embedding of the most likely label. But we find that
computing a similarity-weighted average of the retrieved text embeddings gives better performance:
      P                                            exp(l(vI ,vIj ))
ve = j∈Nk (vI ) βj · ftxt (tj ), where βj = P ′          exp(l(vI ,ev )) .
                                                       j ∈Nk (vI )        j′


KNN takes virtually no time to train (O(1)), and reasonably fast retrieval is possible with optimized
libraries and parallel computing. However, accuracy tends to be lower than model-based methods.
Linear probe: Parameterized models offer an alternative approach, learning a fixed set of parameters
that exploit the underlying structures of the data to maximize classification performance. When new
exemplars are added, the linear probe (LinProbe) method is to extract image embeddings and train
linear classifiers on all accumulated exemplars. This relates to GDumb Prabhu et al. (2020), a simple
experience replay method that retrains models from scratch each time new data is received. But,
since we do not have the CLIP training data and wish to enable fast learning and retain zero-shot
ability, we do not retrain or fine-tune the CLIP encoders. The output probability can be written as:
                             exp (θyT vI )
pe (y = yi |vI ; θ) = P              i
                                         T       , where θyi represents the learned model parameters for label
                          yj ∈Ye exp (θyj vI )

yi and Ye is the union of exemplar labels. The predicted embedding is the text embedding of the
label ŷ with maximum probability: ve = ftxt (tŷ ).
Compared to KNN, the LinProbe model is much slower to train — O(n) for n training samples
assuming a constant number of epochs, which may be prohibitive when the model needs to be updated
quickly based on few examples. However, classification accuracy tends to be higher.
Tree probe: In a continual learning setting, we would ideally have fast training time of KNN with the
relatively good accuracy of LinProbe. We take inspiration from the instance-based and lazy learning
literature Aggarwal (2014), particularly locally linear models Domeniconi & Gunopulos (2002);
Atkeson et al. (1997). These methods classify a test sample by finding its k-nearest neighbors and
applying a linear classifier trained on the neighbors. This achieves O(1) training time but may be
impractical for inference, since a new classifier may need to be trained for each test sample.
Instead, we propose an approximation, building a clustering tree from the training data and training a
linear classifier in each leaf node. Starting from a root node, we search for the nearest leaf node for
a new data point and insert it if the node has not reached the predefined node capacity ψ. If a leaf
node reaches ψ, it splits into two child nodes and becomes a non-leaf node. The attached data points
are distributed to their children by KMeans clustering. In experiments, when receiving new data,
samples are added into the cluster tree one by one. Only classifiers in affected leaf node(s) need to
be retrained. When fixing the number of linear model training epochs and KMeans iterations, the
complexity to incorporate a new exemplar in training is O(ψ + log n) with ψ >> log n; the training
time stays limited even when the total number of exemplars is very large.
The simplest inference method would be to assign a test sample to a leaf node in the cluster tree and
classify it within the corresponding linear model, but this may lead to non-smooth predictions for
samples near the cluster boundaries. In our experiments, we ensemble the classifiers from leaf nodes
corresponding to the k nearest neighbors, such that the final output probability pe (y = yi |vI ) is the
average of the probabilities predicted by each neighbor’s classifier.
Similar to KNN, the exemplar embedding ve can be computed as the text embedding of the most
likely label from all neighbor classifiers. However, we obtain the best performance using a similarity-
weightedP average embedding from the most likely label ŷk of each classifier in the retrieval set:
ve =      k βk · ftxt (tŷk ), where βk ∝ exp(l(vI , vIk )) and vIk is the image embedding the kth
neighbor. The tree-probe method, denoted TreeProbe, achieves similar accuracy to LinProbe in our
continual learning experiments with sufficiently large ψ, but with much faster training time.

3.3   F USING PREDICTIONS OF THE TWO MODELS
We want to integrate predictions from the zero-shot and exemplar-based models to retain good
open-vocabulary classification performance and improve accuracy in predicting exemplar labels. This
can be tricky, especially when some labels in the task are not contained within the exemplar labels.
One approach is to simply average the probability or embedding predictions of the two models:
                      p(y = yi |I) = αpe (y = yi |vI ) + (1 − α)pz (y = yi |I)                (3)
                                     vout = αve + (1 − α)vI                                   (4)


                                                           5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The label probability is computed from vout using l(vout , vti ), as in Eqs. 1 and 2. When setting α =
0.5 for an unweighted average, this approach is denoted as Avg-Prob or Avg-Emb, respectively.
Using an unweighted average presumes that the zero-shot and exemplar models are equally reliable
for all samples. However, if the test sample’s label is within the exemplar’s domain, the exemplar
model will tend to be more accurate; otherwise, the zero-shot model will almost certainly outperform.
The test label is unknown, but an educated guess could enable a better prediction.
Addressing this issue, we devise an adaptive weighting mechanism, named Adaptive Instance
Marginalization (AIM), that estimates the likelihood of a test sample’s label being in the exemplar
set and balances the predictions from both models accordingly. The target label set is divided into
exemplar y ∈ Ye and non-exemplar y ∈  / Ye subsets, where Ye is the union of all exemplar labels.
The likelihoods p(y ∈ Ye |I) and p(y ∈ /PYe |I) are obtained by summing the zero-shot
                                                                                    P probabilities
over these subsets: p(y ∈ Ye |I) =       i∈Ye pz (y = yi |I) and p(y ∈/ Ye |I) =       / e pz (y =
                                                                                      i∈Y
yi |I) = 1 − p(yi ∈ Ye |I), with the summation in the denominator of Eq. 2 over all candidate labels
for the current task. Our AIM-Emb method sets α = p(y ∈ Ye |I) in Eq. 4.
Our AIM-Prob method encodes that both zero-shot and exemplar models are predictive for exemplar
classes, while only the zero-shot model can be trusted for non-exemplar classes:
                                     pz (y = yi |I)pe (y = yi |vI )
 p(y = yi |I) = p(y ∈ Ye |I) P                                         + p(y ∈
                                                                             / Ye |I)pz (y = yi |I). (5)
                                   j∈Ye pz (y = yj |I)pe (y = yj |vI )


The AIM method capitalizes on the strengths of both models, improving overall performance.

4     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
4.1   TASKS

We evaluate our system on target and zero-shot classification tasks. A “task” is an assignment of an im-
age into a label from particular label set. The exemplar model has received examples in the context of
“target” tasks but not “zero-shot” tasks. We utilize general tasks such as ImageNet Russakovsky et al.
(2015), SUN397 Xiao et al. (2010), CIFAR100 Krizhevsky & Hinton (2009), and fine-grained tasks
like EuroSAT Helber et al. (2019), OxfordIIITPets Parkhi et al. (2012), DTD Cimpoi et al. (2014),
Flower102 Nilsback & Zisserman (2008), FGVCAircraft Maji et al. (2013), StanfordCars Krause
et al. (2013), Food101 Bossard et al. (2014), UCF101 Soomro et al. (2012).
We report main results using target tasks CIFAR100, SUN397, FGVCAircraft, EuroSAT, OxfordII-
ITPets, StanfordCars, Food101 and Flowers102 and zero-shot tasks ImageNet, UCF101, and DTD.
The supplemental material contains dataset descriptions, prompt templates, zero-shot performance of
tasks, and additional experimental results and analysis.

4.2   E VALUATION SCENARIOS
We consider several continual learning scenarios for receiving data: 1) Data incremental: A fraction
of the training data, randomly sampled without enforcing class balance, is added in each stage; 2)
Class incremental: All training data for a randomly sampled subset of classes are added in each
stage; 3) Task incremental: All data for a single task, i.e. a dataset of examples assigned to a set of
target labels, are added in each stage. Data incremental learning includes seven stages, comprising
2%, 4%, 8%, 16%, 32%, 64%, and 100% of task data, respectively. Class incremental learning
divides a task into five stages, each containing 20% of classes. In task incremental learning, each task
is considered a stage. In data and class incremental experiments, models are built separately for each
target task. A target task is fully evaluated if there is at least one training sample for that task, even if
there are no training samples for some classes. In task incremental, one model is built spanning all
accumulated labels in each stage. In all cases, results are reported as the average accuracy of target
and zero-shot tasks at each stage. We additionally compute the averaged accuracy on seen classes and
unseen classes of each target task for class incremental learning to give more detailed result analysis.
Flexible inference: In the task incremental setting, after all training data for target tasks is received,
we will evaluate each method’s performance in three inference scenarios:
      • Zero-shot: evaluate on each zero-shot task and then average the accuracy on all tasks.


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             • Union + Zero-shot: we first create a union of target task labels that is considered as
               candidate labels for each target task. Then, we randomly sample 100 labels from the union
               of zero-shot task labels. We separately compute the average accuracies on the target and
               zero-shot tasks. The final performance is the average of the target and zero-shot accuracy.
             • Mix + Zero-shot: we randomly split the union of target labels into five splits. For each
               split, we additionally add a random sample of 100 labels from the zero-shot task. To balance
               evaluation across classes, we draw 100 test samples per class. Performance is the average
               across all splits.

These scenarios are especially challenging for most continual learning methods because there is no
task identifier at inference time, and the label of a test sample will sometimes be among the trained
classes and sometimes not.


5       E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

5.1        E FFECTIVENESS OF COMPLEMENTARY SYSTEM AND AIM


 (a) Data incremental learning results on target tasks   (b) Class incremental learning results on target tasks   (c) Task incremental learning results on target tasks   (d) Flexible inference



Figure 2: (a) Results comparing CLIP zero-shot, LinProbe and CLIP+LinProbe with Avg-Emb and
AIM-Emb on target tasks under the data incremental learning scenario. (b) Results of corresponding
models on target tasks under class incremental learning. We visualize curves for seen and unseen
classes including the overall performance identified with different markers. (c) Results of correspond-
ing models on target tasks under task incremental learning. (d) Flexible inference results after task
incremental learning on all tasks. Note LinProbe is hard to see in (a) and (b) because it has similar
results as CLIP+LinProbe (Avg-Emb).

We first investigate the importance of complementary learning systems and the effectiveness of
AIM. We design experiments comparing CLIP Zero-shot model, exemplar model using LinProbe
and then complementary models that incorporate CLIP Zero-shot and LinProbe using the Avg-
Emb and AIM-Emb fusing operations, denoted by CLIP+LinProb (Avg-Emb) and CLIP+LinProbe
(AIM-Emb).
The results on target tasks under data, class, and task incremental learning scenario are shown in
Fig. 2 (a-c). For data incremental, except for CLIP zero-shot, all other methods constantly improve
on target tasks, with CLIP+LinProbe (AIM-Emb) being the best on all stages. When the percentage
of available data is larger than 20%, all other models surpass the zero-shot model. LinProbe and
CLIP+LinProbe (Avg-Emb) have similar performances on target tasks, which can also be observed in
the class incremental learning results in Fig. 2 (b).
Results under the class incremental learning are important since they simulate the case that the
exemplar labels do not cover some labels in the task. In this case, we cannot simply choose whether
to use the exemplar model or zero-shot model for prediction by contrasting if exemplar labels totally
overlap with candidate labels. In Fig. 2 (b), we plot the accuracies on seen and unseen classes along
with the overall accuracy on all classes. The zero-shot model is inferior to other methods in seen
classes but performs well in unseen classes. LinProbe has good accuracy on seen classes, but its
unseen accuracies are close to 0. Likewise for CLIP+LinProbe (Avg-Emb). The AIM-Emb version
has a slightly lower accuracy than the Avg-Emb version on seen classes of early stages (<60%
classes) but has reasonable performance on unseen classes, especially in earlier stages. Its unseen
accuracy drops with more learned classes because AIM gradually tends to give more confidence for
the exemplar model. In all, we still see the overall accuracy of CLIP+LinProbe (AIM-Emb) is the
best among all methods, demonstrating the efficacy of AIM.


                                                                                                              7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


From the results in Fig. 2 (c) under the task-incremental learning scenario, the AIM approach steadily
shows better performance than the zero-shot model at all stages. LinProbe and CLIP+LinProbe
(Avg-Emb) can only beat the zero-shot model after the 6-th stage (FGVCAircraft). Both versions of
CLIP+LinProbe show better performance than exemplar-only models, demonstrating the benefits of
complementary systems.
The flexible inference scenarios highlight the effectiveness of the CLIP zero-shot model, as shown in
Fig. 2 (d). Since exemplar-only models entirely bias towards learned classes, they are incompetent
on zero-shot tasks. Hence, LinProbe has poor results in all scenarios. However, CLIP+LinProbe
(Avg-Emb) shows a considerable improvement over LinProbe on Zero-shot and Mix+Zero-shot
scenarios while being comparable on Union+Zero-shot. When substituting the fusing operation with
AIM-Emb, the performances of all scenarios significantly improve, with Mix+Zero-shot even slightly
better than the CLIP zero-shot model. Overall, AIM achieves similar flexible inference performance
to the CLIP zero-shot model.


5.2     C OMPARISON OF E FFICIENCY AND ACCURACY FOR FAST-L EARNING A PPROACHES


  (a) Task-incremental learning results on target tasks   (b) Time to add one example of TreeProbe and LinProbe   (c) Accuracy vs. training time for exemplar models


Figure 3: (a) Results of different complementary models under the task-incremental learning scenario.
Numbers included in a bracket are the node capacity of corresponding TreeProbe models. (b) We
perform an efficiency analysis of TreeProbe with different node capacities and LinProbe by estimating
how much time needed to incorporate one example into the exemplar model with different number
of instances carried in the exemplar set.To minimize randomness, each method is run five times. At
each data collection point, we sample an example from the exemplar set and fit it to memory five
times. Thus, each data point averages 25 unique simulations. x and y-axes are visualized in log scale.
(c) The accuracies of different complementary models on target tasks after learning the final stage
(y-axis) vs. the total training time in log scale (x-axis).


In this part, we perform a thorough analysis of different complementary models using AIM on their
performances and efficiency: CLIP+KNN, CLIP+LinProbe and CLIP+TreeProbe. We can also vary
the node capacities of TreeProbe to create different versions of CLIP+TreeProbe models.
We compare their performance under the task incremental learning scenario. Results in Fig. 3 (a) show
that node capacity can be used to control the performance of CLIP+TreeProbe. When node capacity
is larger than 5k, TreeProbe steadily outperforms KNN, and when node capacity reaches 100k,
TreeProbe is slightly better than LinProbe. Fig. 3 (b) shows that LinProbe conforms to linear learning
complexity as the number of instances in the exemplar set. When node capacity is not reached,
TreeProbe is the same as LinProbe since TreeProbe has only one leaf node and one classifier. After
reaching the node capacity, TreeProbe shows constant learning complexity. TreeProbe (100k) and
(50k) achieve similar performance to LinProbe but with 6x and 25x improvement in learning speed
when the exemplar set contains > 220k samples. This confirms our analysis of the time complexity
of learning for different exemplar models in Sec. 3.2. Fig. 3 (c) combines the results of Fig. 3 (a)
and Fig. 3 (b), showing the trade-off of learning efficiency and accuracy. The TreeProbe method,
thus, provides flexibility to choose the node capacity that appropriately balances responsiveness with
performance for a given application.


                                                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


5.3       C OMPARISON TO PREVIOUS METHODS
               Method                            Transfer     △     Avg.     △     Last    △
               CLIP Zero-shot                      69.4      0.0    65.3     0.0   65.3    0.0
               LwF Li & Hoiem (2016)               56.9     -12.5   64.7    -0.6   74.6   +9.3
               iCaRL Rebuffi et al. (2017)         50.4     -19.0   65.7   +0.4    80.1   +14.8
               WiSE-FT Wortsman et al. (2022a)     52.3     -17.1   60.7    -4.6   77.7   +12.4
               ZSCL Zheng et al. (2023)            68.1      -1.3   75.4   +10.1   83.6   +18.3
               TreeProbe (50k)                     69.3      -0.1   75.9   +10.6   85.5   +20.2

Table 1: Comparison of different methods on MTIL in Order I from ZSCL Zheng et al. (2023). All
results are taken from other ZSCL’s paper except for TreeProbe. “Transfer” evaluates the model’s
performance on zero-shot tasks; “Last” is the averaged accuracy on all target tasks after finishing the
final task while “Avg.” computes the average task performance on all training stages.
As introduced in Sec. 2.3, ZSCL Zheng et al. (2023) explores a similar setting to open-vocabulary
continual learning and is mainly evaluated under the task-incremental learning scenario. To keep
the comparison as fair as possible, we evaluate our approach under their evaluation protocols, and
we utilize the same prompt ensemble technique, data split ratio and seed, backbone network (ViT-
B/16), etc. The result is in Tab. 1. Our TreeProbe (50k)1 model achieves the best performance
under all metrics. Compared to the CLIP zero-shot model, our method barely compromises on
Transfer, showing that our approach maintains robust performance on zero-shot tasks. It is also
noteworthy that our method is more lightweight than ZSCL in GPU consumption, and we do not
perform hyperparameter selection for each task as we assume we have no knowledge about future
tasks, whereas ZSCL used different learning rates for different tasks for better performance.

5.4       S CALING TO LARGER ZERO - SHOT MODELS

                                       ViT-B/32         ViT-L/14@336px           ViT-H/14
               Method
                                  Target Zero-shot     Target Zero-shot     Target Zero-shot
               CLIP Zero-shot      60.2      54.0       72.1     65.6        79.2      71.7
               TreeProbe (50k)     80.5      53.8       86.6     65.4        90.2      71.6

 Table 2: Accuracies on target and zero-shot tasks with pretrained encoders of different capacities.
We use the CLIP ViT/B-32 model as our default zero-shot model but can easily adapt to other models.
We experiment with the pre-trained CLIP model ViT-L/14@336px, which boasts approximately 4x
the capacity of ViT-B/32, and ViT-H/142 , which is double the size of ViT-L/14@336px. We present
our findings in Tab. 2, where both methods are evaluated under the task incremental learning scenario.
Performance increases for larger models, and TreeProbe consistently outperforms CLIP Zero-shot on
the target tasks with nearly identical performance on zero-shot tasks, demonstrating that our approach
is beneficial for a wide range of zero-shot model sizes.

6       C ONCLUSION AND LIMITATIONS
In this work, we present an efficient and performant “tree probe” exemplar-based model and Adaptive
Instance Marginalization to combine zero-shot and exemplar models for open-vocabulary continual
learning. Our method is able to efficiently incorporate new samples, improving performance for
related tasks without negatively impacting zero-shot task performance, providing a simple way to
continually improve large-scale pretrained image-text classification models. We believe this work is a
step towards more flexible, efficient, and effective strategies in open-vocabulary continual learning.
Our work has several limitations. First, we do not consider constraints in how many exemplars can
be stored. Since each exemplar requires storing up to 4KB for the image and text encodings (using
the base CLIP ViT-B/32 model without any compression or limiting precision), roughly one million
exemplars can be stored per 4GB of memory. Second, we do not investigate how to improve the
consolidated zero-shot model. This is a promising direction for future work. Finally, we do not
explore structured prediction problems like semantic segmentation or visual question answering,
which likely require more complex image representations than a single embedding vector.
    1
        TreeProbe in this section and beyond is short for CLIP+TreeProbe (AIM-Emb).
    2
        Checkpoint from https://github.com/mlfoundations/open_clip


                                                      9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Charu C. Aggarwal. Instance-based learning : A survey. In Data Classification: Algorithms and
  Applications, chapter 6. CRC Press, 2014.
Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel
  Lenc, Arthur Mensch, Katie Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, Roman Ring, Eliza Rutherford, Serkan
  Cabi, Tengda Han, Zhitao Gong, Sina Samangooei, Marianne Monteiro, Jacob Menick, Sebastian
  Borgeaud, Andy Brock, Aida Nematzadeh, Sahand Sharifzadeh, Mikolaj Binkowski, Ricardo
  Barreira, Oriol Vinyals, Andrew Zisserman, and Karen Simonyan. Flamingo: a visual language
  model for few-shot learning. ArXiv, abs/2204.14198, 2022.
Rahaf Aljundi, Punarjay Chakravarty, and Tinne Tuytelaars. Expert gate: Lifelong learning with a
  network of experts. In CVPR, pp. 7120–7129, 2017.
Elahe Arani, Fahad Sarfraz, and Bahram Zonooz. Learning fast, learning slow: A general continual
  learning method based on complementary learning system. In ICLR, 2022.
Christopher G. Atkeson, Andrew W. Moore, and Stefan Schaal. Locally weighted learning. Artificial
  Intelligence Review, 11:11–73, 1997.
Jihwan Bang, Heesu Kim, Youngjoon Yoo, Jung-Woo Ha, and Jonghyun Choi. Rainbow memory:
   Continual learning with a memory of diverse samples. In CVPR, pp. 8218–8227, 2021.
Gianluca Bontempi, Mauro Birattari, and Hugues Bersini. Lazy learning for local modelling and
  control design. International Journal of Control, 72(7-8):643–658, 1999.
Lukas Bossard, Matthieu Guillaumin, and Luc Van Gool. Food-101 – mining discriminative compo-
  nents with random forests. In European Conference on Computer Vision, 2014.
Jaemin Cho, Jie Lei, Hao Tan, and Mohit Bansal. Unifying vision-and-language tasks via text
  generation. ArXiv, abs/2102.02779, 2021.
M. Cimpoi, S. Maji, I. Kokkinos, S. Mohamed, , and A. Vedaldi. Describing textures in the wild. In
 Proc. CVPR, 2014.
Jiequan Cui, Zhisheng Zhong, Shu Liu, Bei Yu, and Jiaya Jia. Parametric contrastive learning. In
   ICCV, pp. 695–704, 2021.
C. Domeniconi and D. Gunopulos. Adaptive nearest neighbor classification using support vector
  machines. In NeurIPS, 2002.
Golnaz Ghiasi, Xiuye Gu, Yin Cui, and Tsung-Yi Lin. Open-vocabulary image segmentation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2112.12143, 2021.
Xiuye Gu, Tsung-Yi Lin, Weicheng Kuo, and Yin Cui. Open-vocabulary object detection via vision
  and language knowledge distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.13921, 2021.
Gongde Guo, Hui Wang, David Bell, Yaxin Bi, and Kieran Greer. Knn model-based approach in
  classification. In On The Move to Meaningful Internet Systems 2003: CoopIS, DOA, and ODBASE:
 OTM Confederated International Conferences, CoopIS, DOA, and ODBASE 2003, Catania, Sicily,
 Italy, November 3-7, 2003. Proceedings, pp. 986–996. Springer, 2003.
Tanmay Gupta, Amita Kamath, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Derek Hoiem. Towards general purpose
  vision systems: An end-to-end task-agnostic vision-language architecture. In CVPR, 2022.
Patrick Helber, Benjamin Bischke, Andreas Dengel, and Damian Borth. Eurosat: A novel dataset
  and deep learning benchmark for land use and land cover classification. IEEE Journal of Selected
  Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing, 2019.
Jeff Johnson, Matthijs Douze, and Hervé Jégou. Billion-scale similarity search with GPUs. IEEE
  Transactions on Big Data, 2019.
Amita Kamath, Christopher Clark, Tanmay Gupta, Eric Kolve, Derek Hoiem, and Aniruddha Kemb-
 havi. Webly supervised concept expansion for general purpose vision models. In ECCV, 2022.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil C. Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, An-
  drei A. Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, Demis
  Hassabis, Claudia Clopath, Dharshan Kumaran, and Raia Hadsell. Overcoming catastrophic
  forgetting in neural networks. CoRR, abs/1612.00796, 2016.
Jonathan Krause, Michael Stark, Jia Deng, and Li Fei-Fei. 3d object representations for fine-grained
  categorization. In 4th International IEEE Workshop on 3D Representation and Recognition
  (3dRR-13), 2013.
A. Krizhevsky and G. Hinton. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Master’s thesis,
  Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, 2009.
Z. Li and D. Hoiem. Learning without forgetting. PAMI, 40(12):2935–2947, 2018.
Zhizhong Li and Derek Hoiem. Learning without forgetting. In Proc. ECCV, 2016.
Ziyi Lin, Shijie Geng, Renrui Zhang, Peng Gao, Gerard de Melo, Xiaogang Wang, Jifeng Dai,
  Yu Qiao, and Hongsheng Li. Frozen clip models are efficient video learners. In Computer Vision–
  ECCV 2022: 17th European Conference, Tel Aviv, Israel, October 23–27, 2022, Proceedings, Part
  XXXV, pp. 388–404. Springer, 2022.
Ziwei Liu, Zhongqi Miao, Xiaohang Zhan, Jiayun Wang, Boqing Gong, and Stella X. Yu. Large-scale
  long-tailed recognition in an open world. In CVPR, pp. 2537–2546, 2019.
Alexander Long, Wei Yin, Thalaiyasingam Ajanthan, Vu Nguyen, Pulak Purkait, Ravi Garg, Alan
  Blair, Chunhua Shen, and Anton van den Hengel. Retrieval augmented classification for long-tail
  visual recognition. In Proc. CVPR, 2022.
David Lopez-Paz and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. Gradient episodic memory for continual learning. In
  Proc. NeurIPS, 2017.
Jiasen Lu, Christopher Clark, Rowan Zellers, Roozbeh Mottaghi, and Aniruddha Kembhavi. Unified-
   io: A unified model for vision, language, and multi-modal tasks. ArXiv, abs/2206.08916, 2022.
Subhransu Maji, Esa Rahtu, Juho Kannala, Matthew Blaschko, and Andrea Vedaldi. Fine-grained
  visual classification of aircraft. arXiv preprint arXiv:1306.5151, 2013.
Arun Mallya and Svetlana Lazebnik. Packnet: Adding multiple tasks to a single network by iterative
  pruning. In CVPR, 2018.
Michael McCloskey and Neal J Cohen. Catastrophic interference in connectionist networks: The
 sequential learning problem. In Psychology of learning and motivation, volume 24, pp. 109–165.
 Elsevier, 1989.
Maria-Elena Nilsback and Andrew Zisserman. Automated flower classification over a large number
 of classes. In 2008 Sixth Indian Conference on Computer Vision, Graphics & Image Processing,
 2008.
Randall C. O’Reilly, Rajan Bhattacharyya, Michael D. Howard, and Nicholas Ketz. Complementary
  learning systems. Cogn. Sci., 38(6):1229–1248, 2014.
Omkar M. Parkhi, Andrea Vedaldi, Andrew Zisserman, and C. V. Jawahar. Cats and dogs. In Proc.
 CVPR, 2012.
Ameya Prabhu, Philip Torr, and Puneet Dokania. Gdumb: A simple approach that questions our
 progress in continual learning. In The European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), August
 2020.
Ameya Prabhu, Hasan Abed Al Kader Hammoud, Puneet K. Dokania, Philip H. S. Torr, Ser-Nam
 Lim, Bernard Ghanem, and Adel Bibi. Computationally budgeted continual learning: What does
 matter? CoRR, abs/2303.11165, 2023.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In Proc. ICML, 2021.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sylvestre-Alvise Rebuffi, Alexander Kolesnikov, Georg Sperl, and Christoph H. Lampert. icarl:
  Incremental classifier and representation learning. In Proc. CVPR, 2017.
Scott Reed, Konrad Zolna, Emilio Parisotto, Sergio Gomez Colmenarejo, Alexander Novikov, Gabriel
  Barth-Maron, Mai Gimenez, Yury Sulsky, Jackie Kay, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Tom Eccles, Jake
  Bruce, Ali Razavi, Ashley D. Edwards, Nicolas Manfred Otto Heess, Yutian Chen, Raia Hadsell,
  Oriol Vinyals, Mahyar Bordbar, and Nando de Freitas. A generalist agent. ArXiv, abs/2205.06175,
  2022.
Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng
  Huang, Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael S. Bernstein, Alexander C. Berg, and Li Fei-Fei.
  Imagenet large scale visual recognition challenge. IJCV, 115(3):211–252, 2015.
Andrei A. Rusu, Neil C. Rabinowitz, Guillaume Desjardins, Hubert Soyer, James Kirkpatrick, Koray
  Kavukcuoglu, Razvan Pascanu, and Raia Hadsell. Progressive neural networks. arXiv:1606.04671,
  2016.
Joan Serrà, Didac Suris, Marius Miron, and Alexandros Karatzoglou. Overcoming catastrophic
  forgetting with hard attention to the task. In Proc. ICML, pp. 4555–4564, 2018.
Hanul Shin, Jung Kwon Lee, Jaehong Kim, and Jiwon Kim. Continual learning with deep generative
  replay. In NeurIPS, pp. 2990–2999, 2017.
Yunsheng Song, Jiye Liang, Jing Lu, and Xingwang Zhao. An efficient instance selection algorithm
  for k nearest neighbor regression. Neurocomputing, 251:26–34, 2017.
Khurram Soomro, Amir Roshan Zamir, and Mubarak Shah. UCF101: A dataset of 101 human actions
  classes from videos in the wild. CoRR, abs/1212.0402, 2012.
Weijie Su, Xizhou Zhu, Yue Cao, Bin Li, Lewei Lu, Furu Wei, and Jifeng Dai. Vl-bert: Pre-training of
 generic visual-linguistic representations. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
 2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=SygXPaEYvH.
Mitchell Wortsman, Gabriel Ilharco, Jong Wook Kim, Mike Li, Simon Kornblith, Rebecca Roelofs,
 Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Ali Farhadi, Hongseok Namkoong, and Ludwig
 Schmidt. Robust fine-tuning of zero-shot models. In CVPR, pp. 7949–7961, 2022a.
Mitchell Wortsman, Gabriel Ilharco, Jong Wook Kim, Mike Li, Simon Kornblith, Rebecca Roelofs,
 Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Ali Farhadi, Hongseok Namkoong, et al. Robust
 fine-tuning of zero-shot models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
 and Pattern Recognition, pp. 7959–7971, 2022b.
Jianxiong Xiao, James Hays, Krista A Ehinger, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. Sun database:
   Large-scale scene recognition from abbey to zoo. In Proc. CVPR, 2010.
Shipeng Yan, Jiangwei Xie, and Xuming He. DER: dynamically expandable representation for class
  incremental learning. In Proc. CVPR, 2021.
Jaehong Yoon, Eunho Yang, Jeongtae Lee, and Sung Ju Hwang. Lifelong learning with dynamically
  expandable networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.01547, 2017.
Friedemann Zenke, Ben Poole, and Surya Ganguli. Continual learning through synaptic intelligence.
  In Proc. ICML, pp. 3987–3995, 2017.
Hao Zhang, Alexander C Berg, Michael Maire, and Jitendra Malik. Svm-knn: Discriminative nearest
  neighbor classification for visual category recognition. In 2006 IEEE Computer Society Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR’06), volume 2, pp. 2126–2136. IEEE, 2006.
Jeffrey O. Zhang, Alexander Sax, Amir Zamir, Leonidas J. Guibas, and Jitendra Malik. Side-tuning:
  A baseline for network adaptation via additive side networks. In ECCV, pp. 698–714, 2020.
Shichao Zhang, Xuelong Li, Ming Zong, Xiaofeng Zhu, and Debo Cheng. Learning k for knn
  classification. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology (TIST), 8(3):1–19, 2017.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Zangwei Zheng, Mingyuan Ma, Kai Wang, Ziheng Qin, Xiangyu Yue, and Yang You. Preventing zero-
  shot transfer degradation in continual learning of vision-language models. CoRR, abs/2303.06628,
  2023.
Bolei Zhou, Àgata Lapedriza, Aditya Khosla, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. Places: A 10
  million image database for scene recognition. IEEE TPAMI, 40(6):1452–1464, 2018.


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S UPPLEMENTAL M ATERIALS : C ONTINUAL L EARNING IN
O PEN - VOCABULARY C LASSIFICATION WITH C OMPLEMENTARY
M EMORY S YSTEMS

S-1    A LGORITHMIC DESCRIPTIONS OF T REE P ROBE

Algorithm 1: Training Procedure of                      Algorithm 2: Inference Procedure of
TreeProbe                                               TreeProbe
Input: Training set X, Tree T , Leaf                    Input: Image embedding vI , Tree T ,
 capacity ψ                                              Number of nearest nodes k, Exemplar
Output: Trained classifiers in each leaf                 set M ,
 node of T                                              Output: Exemplar embedding ve for vI
foreach vi ∈ X do                                       vK = F IND N EAREST S AMPLES(vI , M )
    l = N EAREST L EAF(vi , T )                         v = list()
    if C OUNT(l) < ψ then                               foreach vi ∈ vK do
        l = I NSERT DATA(vi , l)                            l = N EAREST L EAF(vi , T )
        T RAIN C LASSIFIER(l)                               c = G ET C LASSIFIER(l)
    end                                                     v ← C LASSIFY(vI , c)
    else                                                end
         S PLIT N ODE(l, vi )                           ve = C OMPUTE E MBEDDING(v, vI )
        l = N EAREST L EAF(vi , T )
        l = I NSERT DATA(vi , l)
        T RAIN C LASSIFIER(l)
    end
end


Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2 contain psuedocode for the training and inference of our TreeProbe
method. Definitions of the involved functions are provided below:
       • N EAREST L EAF(vi , T ): Returns the nearest leaf node to the data point xi in tree T .
       • C OUNT(l): Returns the current number of data points in leaf node l.
       • I NSERT DATA(vi , l): Inserts data point vi into leaf node l and returns the updated node.
       • S PLIT N ODE(l, vi ): Splits leaf node l into two child nodes when it reaches capacity,
         distributes data points using KMeans clustering, and adds new data point vi to the appropriate
         child node.
       • T RAIN C LASSIFIER(l): Trains a linear classifier on the data points in leaf node l.
       • F IND N EAREST S AMPLES(vI , M ): Finds the k nearest neighbors in the exemplar set to the
         image embedding vI .
       • G ET C LASSIFIER(l): Return the classifier for node l.
       • C LASSIFY(vi , c): Classifies vi using the linear classifier c, returning the label embedding
         of the most likely label.
       • C OMPUTE E MBEDDING(v, vI ): Computes the exemplar embedding for vI by applying a
         similarity-weighted average of the text embeddings of the most likely class labels from a
         temporal list v.
The notation of Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2 may differ from the main paper.

S-2    I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS
We conduct our experiments on a setup featuring an RTX 3090 GPU and an AMD Ryzen 9 5950X
CPU, using PyTorch as our primary framework. We adhere to the CLIP code example, using sklearn


                                                 14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


LogisticRegression to implement linear classifiers and setting the sklearn regularization
strength to 0.316. The maximum iteration is set to 5k. Our tree probe’s node capacity is set at 50k.
For efficient retrieval from large-scale exemplar sets, we use FAISS Johnson et al. (2019), specifically
using the IndexFlatIP class for its precision and performance. Model performances are gauged via
Top-1 accuracy, with the officially released ViT-B/32 CLIP checkpoint serving as our memory or
zero-shot model. We select k = 9 based on a hyperparameter sweep. Our approach is not sensitive to
k, with very similar performance in a range from 6 to 30.

S-3           M ORE EXPERIMENT SETTING DETAILS
                              Class Incremental Learning

                              20%    40%    60%    80%     100% Proportion of classes
                2%
                4%
                8%
               16%

    Data       32%
Incremental
  Learning
               64%


                                                                                                                     ...
               100%
                                                                                                                  Number of
         Proportion of data           Dataset 1                                   Dataset 2           Dataset 3
                                                                                                                   datasets
                                                                          Task Incremental Learning



Figure S1: Illustration of continual learning scenarios. Data incremental learning includes seven
stages, each comprising 2%, 4%, 8%, 16%, 32%, 64%, and 100% of task data respectively. Class in-
cremental learning divides a task into five stages, each containing 20% of classes. In task incremental
learning, each task is considered a stage.

We present an illustration of data, class, and task incremental learning scenarios in Fig. S1. When
evaluating different methods in data and class incremental learning scenarios, we ensure fairness by
randomly selecting an identical portion of data/class for all methods, achieved by setting the same
seed. Models are separately built for each target task. The performance of each stage is averaged
across all target tasks. In task-incremental learning, each stage is embodied by a distinct task. The
task order is randomly arranged as CIFAR100, SUN397, FGVCAircraft, EuroSAT, OxfordIIITPets,
StanfordCars, Food101, and Flowers102, consistent for all methods for fair comparison. As shown in
ZSCL Zheng et al. (2023), task order has little impact on the relative performance comparison of
different models. For all learning scenarios, we make the assumption that training data accumulates
across all stages in all scenarios, with a similar spirit to Prabhu et al. (2023). This assumption is based
on the fact that real-world applications are often more limited by computational and time budgets
than by storage. If data privacy is not a concern, building a continual learning system without losing
data access is more effective than assuming past data is non-accessible. Furthermore, we enhance
storage efficiency by saving samples as condensed feature vectors, a significant improvement over
some earlier works.

S-4           D ESCRIPTIONS OF TASKS
We perform experiments on various commonly used visual datasets to demonstrate the generalization
capabilities of our method. These datasets encompass a broad range of image categories and
application scenarios, including both fine-grained and generalized datasets. We briefly introduce all
used tasks in this paper in the following.

S-4.1         G ENERAL TASKS

ImageNet ImageNet Russakovsky et al. (2015) contains 1,281,167 training images, 50,000 validation
images and 100,000 test images. The categories represent a wide variety of objects, animals, scenes,
and even abstract concepts. This dataset has served as a fundamental dataset to evaluate performances
of classification models, or as a pretraining dataset.


                                                                            15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


CIFAR100 The CIFAR100 dataset Krizhevsky & Hinton (2009) consists of object images and is a
subset of the 80 million tiny images dataset. It contains 60,000 32×32 color images from 100 object
categories, with 600 images per category. The dataset has 100 fine-grained classes, grouped into 20
coarse-grained classes.
SUN397 The SUN397 dataset Xiao et al. (2010) consists of scene images, containing 108,754 images
across 397 scene categories, with each category having between 100 and 500 images. This dataset is
commonly used for scene understanding tasks. Since there is no official dataset split for this dataset,
we randomly select 60% of images as training data, 20% as validation data, and the rest as test data.
We use NumPy random permutation to split with the seed set to 0.


S-4.2    F INE - GRAINED TASKS


FGVCAircraft The FGVCAircraft dataset Maji et al. (2013) serves as a benchmark for fine-grained
visual categorization of aircraft. It contains 10,200 images from 102 distinct categories. Each category
includes approximately 100 images, annotated with the aircraft model, variant, and manufacturer.
DTD The Describable Textures Dataset (DTD) Cimpoi et al. (2014) consists of 5,640 images across
47 texture categories, with each category featuring 120 real-world texture images such as fabrics,
rocks, and surfaces. The dataset poses a challenge for texture classification due to subtle differences
between textures within the same category and large variations in texture appearance caused by scale,
orientation, and lighting.
Food101 The Food-101 dataset Bossard et al. (2014) comprises 101,000 images across 101 food
categories, each with 1,000 images. This dataset challenges fine-grained image classification due to
high intra-class variation and visual similarities across categories. It serves as a rigorous benchmark
for evaluating computer vision models in food recognition and provides a robust platform for training
machine learning models in understanding culinary aesthetics and preferences.
StanfordCars The StanfordCars dataset Krause et al. (2013) is a benchmark dataset containing
16,185 images from 196 different car classes, divided into a 50-50 training and testing split. The
classes correspond to specific car makes, models, and years, such as the 2012 Tesla Model S or 2012
BMW M3 coupe.
Flowers102 The 102 Category Flower Dataset Nilsback & Zisserman (2008) is a compilation of
flower images. It includes 8,189 images across 102 flower categories, with each category containing
between 40 and 258 images. The dataset’s images vary in size and aspect ratio, captured using
different cameras, lighting conditions, and backgrounds.
OxfordIIITPets The OxfordIIITPets dataset Parkhi et al. (2012) is a collection of pet images,
featuring 7,349 images from 37 different cat and dog breeds. Each breed has between 100 and 200
images. The dataset is challenging because the appearance of the same breed can vary significantly,
and different breeds may have similar-looking features.
EuroSAT The EuroSAT dataset Helber et al. (2019) is a remote sensing image dataset comprising
Sentinel-2 satellite data. It contains 27,000 images that cover 13 spectral bands and consist of 10
different land use and land cover categories, including forests, urban areas, and water bodies. This
dataset is commonly employed for remote sensing and land cover classification tasks. Since there is
no official dataset split for this dataset, we randomly select 70% of images as training data and the
rest as validation data. We use NumPy random permutation to perform splitting with the seed set to 0.
UCF101 The UCF101 dataset Soomro et al. (2012) is a commonly used benchmark for action
recognition. It consists of 13,320 videos from 101 action categories, with each category containing at
least 100 videos. The actions include a wide range of human activities such as basketball shooting,
horse riding, and juggling. The dataset is unique in its focus on complex, naturalistic action sequences,
with videos varying in length from a few seconds to a minute. Since there is no official dataset split
for this dataset, we randomly select 70% of images as training data and the rest as validation data.
We use NumPy random permutation to perform splitting with the seed set to 0.


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S-4.3      L ONG - TAILED TASK

Places365LT Places365LT Liu et al. (2019) a synthetic long-tail derivative of Places2 dataset Zhou
et al. (2018). The image resolution is 256×256. It contains 365 scene classes with at least 5 samples
each. The classes are not uniformly distributed, forming a long-tailed distribution. It contains some
label noises, making classification even harder on this dataset.


S-5       P ROMPT TEMPLATES FOR TASKS


 Task(s)                                                                                              Prompt template
 ImageNet Russakovsky et al. (2015), CIFAR100 Krizhevsky & Hinton (2009), SUN397 Xiao et al. (2010)   “a photo of a {label}.”
 FGVCAircraft Maji et al. (2013)                                                                      “a photo of a {label}, a type of aircraft.”
 DTD Cimpoi et al. (2014)                                                                             “a photo of a {label} texture.”
 StanfordCars Krause et al. (2013)                                                                    “a photo of a {label}, a type of car.”
 Food101 Bossard et al. (2014)                                                                        “a photo of {label}, a type of food.”
 Flowers102 Nilsback & Zisserman (2008)                                                               “a photo of a {label}, a type of flower.”
 OxfordIIITPets Parkhi et al. (2012)                                                                  “a photo of a {label}, a type of pet.”
 EuroSAT Helber et al. (2019)                                                                         “a centered satellite photo of {label}.”
 UCF101 Parkhi et al. (2012)                                                                          “a video of a person doing {label}.”
 Places365LT Liu et al. (2019)                                                                        “a photo of the {label}, a type of place.”


                                                   Table 1: Prompts of tasks


CLIP Radford et al. (2021) suggests utilizing a sentence template (e.g., ‘‘A photo of a
{label}.’’), as input to the text decoder instead of a plain text label, due to its training data being
primarily full sentences describing images. Consistent with this paper’s focus, we employ a simple
prompt template for each task. Most of these templates are based on CLIP’s recommendations3 and
are summarized in Tab. 1.


S-6       Z ERO - SHOT PERFORMANCES ON DIFFERENT TASKS


      Task                                                            Zero-shot Acc (%)                Official ZS Acc (%)
      ImageNet Russakovsky et al. (2015)                                     59.7                               63.2
      CIFAR100 Krizhevsky & Hinton (2009)                                    62.3                               65.1
      SUN397 Xiao et al. (2010)                                              59.2                               63.2
      FGVCAircraft Maji et al. (2013)                                        18.1                               21.2
      DTD Cimpoi et al. (2014)                                               42.0                               44.5
      StanfordCars Krause et al. (2013)                                      58.6                               59.4
      Food101 Bossard et al. (2014)                                          82.6                               84.4
      Flowers102 Nilsback & Zisserman (2008)                                 67.9                               66.7
      OxfordIIITPets Parkhi et al. (2012)                                    87.5                               87.0
      EuroSAT Helber et al. (2019)                                           45.4                               49.4
      UCF101 Parkhi et al. (2012)                                            60.1                               64.5
      Places365LT Liu et al. (2019)                                          40.0                                /

Table 2: Zero-shot performances of CLIP ViT-B/32 pretrained model on different tasks. “ZS” is for
zero-shot and “Acc” is for accuracy. Results of column “Official ZS Acc” are taken from the CLIP
original paper Radford et al. (2021). “/” represents lack of official results.


Tab. 2 shows the zero-shot performance of our implementation in different tasks. We conjecture
that the main difference of official zero-shot performances comes from the ensemble prompt trick
as mentioned in CLIP Radford et al. (2021) and randomness in dataset splits of several tasks (e.g.,
SUN397).


                                                                    17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
        Zero-shot task performances on three
        scenarios


(a) Zero-shot performance of data incremental learning   (b) Zero-shot performance of class incremental learning   (c) Zero-shot performance of task incremental learning


Figure S2: Zero-shot performances on data (a), class (b), and task (c) incremental learning scenarios.
x-axis represents stages when the evaluation is performed.


S-7         A DDITIONAL RESULTS

S-7.1         Z ERO - SHOT TASK PERFORMANCES OF EVERY STAGE

We further append the results of zero-shot tasks evaluated after each stage on the data, class, and
task incremental learning in Fig. S2. Across all scenarios, AIM-Emb helps maintain the zero-shot
performances on all stages.

S-7.2         M ORE RESULTS OF THE COMPARISON TO PREVIOUS METHODS
                  Method                                                 Transfer             △          Avg.        △          Last         △
                  CLIP Zero-shot                                           69.4               0.0        65.3       0.0         65.3         0.0
                  LwF Li & Hoiem (2016)                                    56.9             -12.5        64.7       -0.6        74.6        +9.3
                  iCaRL Rebuffi et al. (2017)                              50.4             -19.0        65.7      +0.4         80.1        +14.8
                  WiSE-FT Wortsman et al. (2022a)                          52.3             -17.1        60.7       -4.6        77.7        +12.4
                  ZSCL Zheng et al. (2023)                                 68.1              -1.3        75.4      +10.1        83.6        +18.3
                  KNN                                                      69.3              -0.1        72.7      +7.4         78.4        +13.1
                  LinProbe                                                 69.3              -0.1        77.1      +11.8        86.0        +20.7
                  TreeProbe (50k)                                          69.3              -0.1        75.9      +10.6        85.5        +20.2

Table 3: Comparison of different methods on MTIL in Order I from ZSCL Zheng et al. (2023). KNN,
LinProbe , and TreeProbe (50k) are complementary methods with AIM-Emb as the fusing approach.

We also supplement the results obtained by KNN and LinProbe while comparing to previous methods
in Tab. 3. As shown, all of the approaches of complementary systems with AIM-Emb achieve good
Transfer, reiterating the effectiveness of AIM. LinProbe excels at all metrics with the cost of efficiency,
which is predictable from the results shown in our main manuscript.
To give more details on the accuracies we achieve on every task under all stages for TreeProbe (50k),
we follow ZSCL Zheng et al. (2023) to give all numbers in Tab. 4 for further reference.


S-8         A DDITIONAL ABLATION EXPERIMENTS

Effect of different fusing operations. We describe several forms of the fusing operations in Sec. 3.3,
including: Avg-Prob, AIM-Prob, Avg-Emb, and AIM-Emb. We compare using TreeProbe (50k)
under the task incremental learning scenario. Fig. S3 shows the results on target and zero-shot tasks.
The figure shows that AIM-Emb and AIM-Prob have similar performance on target tasks, surpassing
the other two fusing operations. Combined with the zero-shot performance, the results suggest the
effectiveness of AIM in adaptively choosing the better prediction model. The probabilistic prediction
is better than the embedding prediction when performing averaging in both target tasks and zero-shot
tasks. But when combined with AIM, the embedding version has a reasonably better performance in
zero-shot tasks. Therefore, we choose AIM-Emb as the default fusing operation.

    3
        https://github.com/openai/CLIP/blob/main/data/prompts.md


                                                                                 18
         Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                    Caltech101


                                                  CIFAR100


                                                                                                                 OxfordPet
                                                                      EuroSAT


                                                                                                                                      SUN397
                                                                                     Flowers
                        Aircraft


                                                                                                        MNIST
                                                              DTD


                                                                                                Food


                                                                                                                              Cars
         Transfer                  87.90         68.22       45.32   54.61       71.08         88.86   59.45    89.07        64.61   64.05     69.3
         Aircraft     52.45        87.90         68.22       45.32   54.61       71.08         88.86   59.45    89.07        64.61   64.05
         Caltech101   52.48        96.89         68.22       45.32   54.61       71.08         88.86   59.45    89.07        64.61   64.05
         CIFAR100     52.48        96.89         68.22       45.32   54.61       71.08         88.86   59.45    89.07        64.61   64.05
         DTD          52.42        96.83         81.98       70.32   54.61       71.08         88.86   59.45    89.07        64.61   64.05
         EuroSAT      52.45        89.92         81.99       66.65   95.74       71.08         88.86   59.45    89.07        64.61   64.05
         Flowers      52.51        90.55         81.93       66.44   95.74       54.12         88.86   59.45    89.07        64.61   64.05
         Food         52.48        90.78         81.94       67.23   95.78       65.49         92.25   59.45    89.07        64.61   64.05
         MNIST        52.09        93.95         81.96       69.73   94.33       95.69         92.27   98.59    89.07        64.61   64.05
         OxfordPet    52.63        95.10         82.05       70.05   95.63       95.69         92.29   98.58    92.91        64.61   64.05
         Cars         52.54        95.22         81.94       67.98   94.15       95.59         92.29   98.58    93.02        86.27   64.05
         SUN397       52.48        95.56         81.94       66.91   95.59       95.59         92.21   98.60    93.19        86.15   81.76     85.5
         Avg.         52.45        93.59         79.47       61.93   80.49       77.96         90.40   73.68    90.15        68.53   65.66     75.9
Fusing operation
         Table 4: Accuracy (%) of our TreeProbe (50k) model on the MTIL benchmark with order-I. Each
         row represents the performance on every dataset of the model trained after the corresponding task.
         Transfer, Avg., and Last metrics are shown in color. We follow the same table arrangement as in
         ZSCL Zheng et al. (2023).


                Figure S3: Target (left) and zero-shot (right) accuracies of different fusing operations.


         Different versions of KNN and choice of k. As indicated in Sec. 3.2, we can get the embedding by
         taking the one attached to the most likely label (MV-KNN), or averaging the text embeddings of the
         k nearest neighbors (AVG-KNN), or performing a weighted-averaging over the embeddings of all k
         nearest neighbors where weights come from the similarities between the image embedding and the
         k neighbors’ image embeddings (WAVG-KNN). We also compare these approaches under different
         ks to further choose a suitable k for experiments. As indicated in Fig. S4, from the curve, k = 9
         gives reasonable performances of all approaches on both the target and zero-shot tasks. Compared to
         AVG-KNN, larger k is more beneficial for MV-KNN since larger k is more stable for MV-KNN, and
         it is more likely to include more mismatches from the nearest neighbors forAVG-KNN . From the
         plot, we can clearly read that WAVG-KNN is consistently better than AVG-KNN and MV-KNN across
         different ks, making it our default option of the prediction approach for fast learning system.
         Effect of ensemble classifiers in TreeProbe inference. Referencing Sec. 3.2, we observe that ensem-
         ble predictions from multiple classifiers associated with k retrievals slightly enhance performance.
         Fig. S5 presents these results under the task incremental learning setting for eight target tasks. Our
         final model, TreeProbe, is better than its variant without the ensemble classification function in both
         target and zero-shot performance. The additional inference cost for ensemble predictions is negligible,
         so we choose it as the default setting for its better performance.


                                                                                19
        Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ensemble classifier

        Figure S4: Results of different versions of KNN on target tasks after finishing all stages under the
        task incremental learning scenario. We further ablate on k selection so choose k as the x-axis. The
        vertical dashed line represents k = 9.


        Figure S5: Target and zero-shot task performance comparison w.r.t. ensemble classifiers. “TreeProbe
        w/o ensem. cls.” is the version of TreeProbe by finding the cluster most similar to the input and using
        the corresponding classifier to predict labels. The reported accuracy is the average across tasks after
        incrementally receiving training data from the datasets shown on the x-axis.


        S-9       E VALUATION ON LONG - TAILED CLASSIFICATION

         Method         CLIP Zero-shot   KNN    LinProbe   TreeProbe   KNN*   LinProbe*   TreeProbe*   PaCo   RAC
         Accuracy (%)        40.0        35.5     37.0       30.5      40.4     42.7         41.3      41.2   47.2

        Table 5: Comparison of long-tailed classification on Places365LT Liu et al. (2019). * means +
        AIM-Emb. For this experiment, we use CLIP ViT-L/14@336px as the backbone network.
        In long-tailed classification, some test labels are rare or unobserved in training, so blending exemplar-
        based models with consolidated models can be beneficial, as shown by Long et al. (2022). To
        accommodate this setting, we adjust our AIM-Emb method by considering the 2/3 rarest labels
        as not being present in the exemplar set and the remainder as being present, to calculate vout . In
        this experiment, the node capacity of TreeProbe methods is 10k. In Tab. 5, we present results on
        the Places365LT dataset Liu et al. (2019). Our AIM-Emb method with LinProbe and TreeProbe
        outperform the zero-shot baseline. We also compare to PaCo Cui et al. (2021) and RAC Long et al.
        (2022), which are specifically designed for long-tail classification. PaCo incorporates learnable
        class centers to account for class imbalance in a contrastive learning approach. RAC trains an
        image encoder augmented with label predictions from retrieved exemplars. Although not specifically


                                                             20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


designed for long-tailed classification, our method performs similar to PaCo, but RAC performs best
of all.


                                                21
