S CORE - BASED GENERATIVE MODELS BREAK THE
CURSE OF DIMENSIONALITY IN LEARNING A FAMILY
OF SUB -G AUSSIAN PROBABILITY DISTRIBUTIONS

 Frank Cole                                                         Yulong Lu
 Department of Mathematics                                          Department of Mathematics
 University of Minnesota                                            University of Minnesota
 Minneapolis, MN, 55414, USA                                        Minneapolis, MN, 55414, USA
 {cole0932}@umn.edu                                                 {yulonglu}@umn.edu


                                            A BSTRACT

         While score-based generative models (SGMs) have achieved remarkable suc-
         cesses in enormous image generation tasks, their mathematical foundations are
         still limited. In this paper, we analyze the approximation and generalization of
         SGMs in learning a family of sub-Gaussian probability distributions. We intro-
         duce a notion of complexity for probability distributions in terms of their rel-
         ative density with respect to the standard Gaussian measure. We prove that if
         the log-relative density can be locally approximated by a neural network whose
         parameters can be suitably bounded, then the distribution generated by empiri-
         cal score matching approximates the target distribution in total variation with a
         dimension-independent rate. We illustrate our theory through examples, which
         include certain mixtures of Gaussians. An essential ingredient of our proof is to
         derive a dimension-free deep neural network approximation rate for the true score
         function associated to the forward process, which is interesting in its own right.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Generative modeling is a central task in modern machine learning, where the goal is to learn a
high dimensional probability distribution given a finite number of samples. Score-based generative
models (SGMs) Sohl-Dickstein et al. (2015); Song et al. (2021)) recently arise as a novel family of
generative models achieving remarkable empirical success in the generation of audio and images
Yang et al. (2022); Croitoru et al. (2023), even outperforming state-of-the-art generative models
such as generative adversarial networks Dhariwal and Nichol (2021). More recently, SGMs have
proven effective in a variety of applications such as natural language processing Austin et al. (2021);
Savinov et al. (2021), computational physics Lee et al. (2023a); Jing et al. (2022), computer vision
Amit et al. (2021); Baranchuk et al. (2021); Brempong et al. (2022), and medical imaging Chung
and Ye (2022). In addition to their own expressive power, SGMs can also help to understand and
improve other existing generative models, such as variational autoencoders Huang et al. (2021); Luo
(2022) and normalizing flows Gong and Li (2021)).
SGMs are often implemented by a pair of diffusion processes, known as forward and backward pro-
cesses. The forward process transforms given data into pure Gaussian noise, while the backward
process turns the noises into approximate samples from the target distribution, thereby accomplish-
ing generative modeling. The analytical form of the reverse process is unknown, since its parameters
depend on the target distribution, which is only accessible through data; hence, the reverse process
must be learned. This is made possible by the remarkable fact that the time reversal of an diffusion
process is again a diffusion process whose coefficients depend only on the target distribution via the
score function, a time-dependent vector field given by the gradient of the log-density of the forward


                                                  1
process. There exist well-studied techniques to cast the estimation of the score function from data
as a supervised learning problem Hyvärinen and Dayan (2005); Vincent (2011), which is crucial to
the practical implementation of SGMs.
While SGMs have received significant attention from theoretical viewpoints, there are still several
barriers to a complete theoretical understanding. Recent results Chen et al. (2023a;b); Benton et al.
(2023) have shown that the distribution recovery error of SGMs is essentially controlled by the
estimation error of the score function, which is typically parameterized by a neural network. While
neural networks are known to be universal approximators for many classes of functions Cybenko
(1989); Yarotsky (2017), the number of parameters of the neural network needed to approximate a
function to error ϵ often scales like ϵ−d , where d is the dimension of the data. Such rates are of
little practical significance for high dimensional problems, and thus the ability of neural networks to
express the score function of a general probability distribution remains a mystery.
Nonetheless, SGMs have still exhibited great success in generating high-quality samples from com-
plex, high-dimensional data distributions. One salient reason for this is that, while the data itself
may be very high-dimensional, the score function of the noising process often possesses some in-
trinsic structure that can be exploited by neural networks. The purpose of this article is to justify this
intuition rigorously for a broad class of probability distributions. Specifically, we study the genera-
tive power of SGMs for probability distributions which are absolutely continuous with respect to the
standard Gaussian distribution. Such distributions admit a probability density function of the form
                                                      ∥x∥2

                                           1
                                  p(x) = exp −              + f (x) ,                                  (1)
                                           Z           2
where exp(f ) : Rd → R+ is the Radon-Nikodym derivative of p with respect to the Gaussian
distribution and Z is the normalization constant. This representation of the density has proven par-
ticularly elucidating in the context of statistical learning and Bayesian inference, where the Gaussian
component can model our subjective beliefs on the data. In this paper, we show that the expression
for the density in Equation 1 is also relevant to SGMs, because the score function is related to the
function f by a tractable composition of functions. A central theme of this work is that if f belongs
to a low-complexity function class, then the score function inherits a similar low-complexity struc-
ture. This enables deep neural networks to learn the score function of diffusion processes without
the curse of dimensionality in some concrete cases.

1.1   O UR CONTRIBUTIONS

We summarize our contributions as follows.

      1. We prove that if the log-relative density of the data distribution with respect to the standard
         Gaussian can be locally approximated without the curse of dimensionality, then the score
         function at any fixed time t can be approximated in the L2 (pt ) norm, where pt denotes the
         marginal density of the forward process at time t, without the curse of dimensionality.
      2. We show that the empirical score matching estimator within a prescribed class neural net-
         works can estimate the score at any fixed time without the curse of dimensionality. The
         error is decomposed into the approximation error of the score and the Rademacher com-
         plexity of the neural network class.
      3. We combine our results with existing discretization error bounds (e.g., in Chen et al.
         (2023b)) to obtain explicit error estimates for SGMs in terms of the number of training
         samples. As an application, we prove that SGMs can sample from certain Gaussian mix-
         ture distributions with dimension-independent sample complexity.

1.2   R ELATED WORK

A majority of the recent theoretical analysis of SGMs De Bortoli et al. (2021); Lee et al. (2022;
2023b); Chen et al. (2023a;c); Benton et al. (2023) focuses on obtaining convergence guarantees
for SGMs under minimal assumptions on the target distribution but, crucially, under the assumption
that the score estimator is accurate in the sense of L2 or L∞ . The common message shared among
these works is that learning the distribution is as easy (or hard) as learning the score function. More
precisely, the estimation error of the target density is mainly controlled by the estimation error of


                                                    2
the score function and the discretization error of the diffusion processes (as another error source)
scales at most polynomially in the data dimension. However, there has been relatively little work to
address the problem of score estimation error.
More recently, it was proven in Oko et al. (2023) that SGMs can estimate Besov densities with a
minimax optimal rate under the total variation distance. However, the obtained sample complexity of
density estimation over a Besov space suffers from the curse of dimensionality. The paper Oko et al.
(2023) further proved that the estimation rate can be substantially improved under the additional
assumption that the data distribution is supported on a low-dimensional linear subspace, in which
case the resulting rate only depends on the intrinsic dimension. Distributions with the same low-
dimensional structure was also studied by Chen et al. (2023d) in the Lipschitz continuous setting.
The paper De Bortoli (2022) obtained convergence bounds in the Wasserstein distance for SGMs
under a more general manifold hypothesis on the target distributions (including empirical measures).
Our work differs from the work above in that we do not make low-dimensional assumption on the
data distribution. Instead, we assume that the target is absolutely continuous with respect to a Gaus-
sian and that the log-relative-density belongs to the Barron space Barron (1993). Barron functions
have recently received much attention due to the fact that shallow networks can approximation them
without curse of dimensionality; see, e.g., Klusowski and Barron (2018); Siegel and Xu (2022);
Ma et al. (2022). In the context of generative modeling, the recent work Domingo-Enrich et al.
(2021a;b) investigated the statistical guarantees of energy-based models under the assumption that
the underlying energy function lie in Barron space (or the F1 space therein). The work Lee et al.
(2017) obtained expressive bounds for normalizing flows in representing distributions that are push-
forwards of a base distribution through compositions of Barron functions. This work shares the
same spirit as Domingo-Enrich et al. (2021a;b); Lee et al. (2017) and demonstrates the statistical
benefits of SGMs when target distribution exhibits low-complexity structures.
We note that in an earlier version of this work, the log-relative density f was assumed to be bounded.
After discussions with an anonymous reviewer, we were inspired to strengthen the results to allow
f to grow at infinity. In more detail, the reviewer pointed out that when f is bounded, the data
distribution satisfies a log-Sobolev inequality (LSI) with constant e∥f ∥∞ , which implies that the
distribution can be sampled via Langevin dynamics with an estimator for the vanilla score. Our
current results extend beyond the LSI case.

1.3   N OTATION

Throughout this article, we study functions and probability distributions on a Euclidean space Rd
of a fixed dimension d. We let ∥ · ∥ denote the Euclidean norm on Rd . For a vector or function,
∥ · ∥∞ denotes the supremum norm, and ∥ · ∥Lip denotes the Lipschitz seminorm ofR a metric space-
valued function. We let γd (dx) denote the standard Gaussian measure on Rd , i.e., f (x)γd (dx) =
                         2
(2π)−d/2 Rd f (x)e−∥x∥ /2 dx. The indicator of a set S is denoted IS . We denote by (·)+ the ReLU
          R

activation function, defined by (c)+ = max(0, c) for c ∈ R. For a vector x, (x)+ is interpreted
componentwise. For X0 ∈ Rd and t > 0, we define Ψt (·|X0 ) as the Gaussian density function
with mean e−t X0 and variance 1 − e−2t . For non-negative functions g(x), h(x) defined on Rd , we
write g(x) ≲ h(x) (resp. ≳) or g(x) = O(h(x)) (resp. Ω(h(x)) if there exists a constant Cd > 0
which depends at most polynomially on the dimension d such that g(x) ≤ Cd h(x) (resp. ≥). We
write g(x) = Θ(h(x)) if g(x) ≲ h(x) ≲ g(x). For β ∈ (0, 1/2) and g ∈ L2 (γd ) we define
                          2
                      x
            R
Mβ (g) := Rd g 1−2β          γd (du).


2     BACKGROUND
In this section, we give a brief overview of the mathematical preliminaries required to understand
our main result.

2.1   A PRIMER ON SGM S

In a score-based generative model (SGM), data is first transformed to noise via a forward process;
we work with an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process (Xt )0≤t≤T , which solves the stochastic differential


                                                  3
equation                                            √
                                 dXt = −Xt dt + 2dWt , X0 ∼ p0 .                                   (2)
Here, p0 is some initial data distribution on Rd , and Wt denotes d-dimensional Brownian motion.
In the limit T → ∞, the law pt of the process XT quickly approaches that of the standard Gaussian
measure γd ; in particular, we have pt → γd exponentially fast in t in the KL divergence, total
variation metric and 2-Wasserstein metric Bakry et al. (2014); Villani (2021). The SDE can be
solved explicitly and, at each fixed time t, the solution coincides in law with the random variable
                                        p
                      Xt = e−t X0 + 1 − e−2t ξ, X0 ∼ p0 , ξ ∼ N (0, Id ).
In particular, Xt conditioned on X0 is a Gaussian random variable with mean e−t X0 and variance
1 − e−2t . By averaging over X0 , we obtain a simple expression for the density pt in terms of p0 :
                                                   (x − e−t y)2
                                        Z
                                     −1
                           pt (x) = Zt     exp −                  dp0 (y)                          (3)
                                                   2(1 − e−2t )
where Zt = (2π(1 − e−2t ))d/2 is the time-dependent normalization constant.
The reverse process, X̄t = XT −t , is also a diffusion process Anderson (1982); Haussmann and
Pardoux (1986), solving the SDE (for 0 ≤ t ≤ T )
                                                          √
                     X̄t = (X̄t + 2∇ log pT −t (X̄t ))dt + 2dW̄t , X̄0 ∼ pt ,              (4)
where W̄t denotes time-reversed Brownian motion on Rd . In order to implement SGMs in practice,
one must discretize the OU process, and a canonical algorithm is the exponential integrator scheme
                                                       dis
(EIS). In order to implement the EIS, one samples X̄0       ∼ pT , picks time steps 0 = t0 < t1 <
· · · < tN ≤ T and simulates the SDE
                         dX̄tdis = X̄tdis + 2∇ log pT −tk (X̄tk ) dt + dB̄t


for each interval [tk , tk+1 ]. S Also, the reverse process is typically initialized at X̄0 ∼ γd in practice,
because pT is unknown. However, the error accrued by this choice is small, evidenced by the
exponential convergence of pT to γd as T → ∞. The process one samples is then obtained by
replacing the score function at time T − tk with a score estimate sk :

                            dYt = (Yt + 2sk (Ytk )) dt + dBt , t ∈ [tk , tk+1 ]
                                                                                                          (5)
                            Y0 ∼ N (0, Id).

Loss function: To learn the score function at time t, a natural objective to minimize is the following
least-squares risk, namely,
                       st (t, X) 7→ EXt ∼pt ∥s(t, Xt ) − ∇x log pt (Xt )∥2 ,


for a given estimator st : Rd → Rd . However, this risk functional is intractable since, in the genera-
tive modeling setting, one does not have access to pointwise data of the score function. However, it
can be shown Vincent (2011) that for any st ,
  EXt ∼pt [∥st (Xt ) − ∇x log pt (Xt )∥2 ] = EX0 ∼p0 EXt ∼pt |X0 [∥st (t, Xt ) − Ψt (Xt |X0 )∥2 ] + E,


                                                                             −t
                                                                      t −e
where E is a constant independent of st . Here, Ψt (Xt |X0 ) = − X1−e        X0
                                                                           −2t  denotes the score func-
tion of the forward process conditioned on the initial distribution. Note that the integral on the
right-hand side can be approximated on the basis of samples of p0 , since the trajectories (Xt |X0 )
are easy to generate. This motivates our definition of the population risk at time t:
                    Rtt (st ) = EX0 ∼p0 EXt ∼pt |X0 [∥s(t, Xt ) − Ψt (Xt |X0 )∥2 ] .

                                                                                                    (6)
If we define the individual loss function at time t by
                         ℓtt (st , x) = EXt |X0 =x ∥st (Xt ) − Ψt (Xt |X0 )∥2 ,

                                                                                                         (7)
then the population risk can be written as
                                       Rtt (st ) = Ex∼p0 [ℓtt (st , x)].


                                                      4
We also define the empirical risk associated to the i.i.d. samples {Xi }N
                                                                        i=1 by
                                                 N
                                   ct (st ) = 1
                                     N          X
                                   R t             ℓt (st , Xi ).                                 (8)
                                              N i=1 t

We then to solve the optimization problem
                                                           N
                                                  ct (st )
                                              min R t
                                              st ∈F

where F is an appropriately defined class of vector fields on Rd (e.g., a class of neural networks).
The use of the risk functional in 6 to learn the score has been termed denoising score matching,
because the function Ψt (Xt |X0 ) is the noise added to the sample X0 along the forward process.

2.2   N EURAL NETWORKS

A fully connected feedforward ReLU neural network is a function of the form
                                                               +           +
                                                  +
              x 7→ WL WL−1 · · · W2 (W1 x + b1 ) + b2 . . .      + bL−1      + bL ,

where WL : RdL−1 × RdL are matrices, bL ∈ RdL are vectors, and, when x is a vector, (x)+
is interpreted as a componentwise mapping. The parameters (Wi )L                 L
                                                                    i=1 and (bi )i=1 are called the
weights and biases of the neural network respectively. The number of columns of Wi is called the
width of the ith layer. When L = 2, a neural network is called shallow, and, when they take values
in R, such networks admit a representation
                                             m
                                             X
                                    x 7→           ai (⟨wi , x⟩ + bi )+ ,
                                             i=1
                  d
where x, wi ∈ R and ai , bi ∈ R. Neural networks have achieved remarkable success in learn-
ing complex, high-dimensional functions. In this work, we study their ability to express the score
function of the diffusion process defined in Equation 2. In order to control the generalization error
incurred by empirical risk minimization, one must introduce a notion of ’complexity’ for neural net-
works, and a natural notion is the path norm, defined for real-valued shallow ReLU neural networks
by
                            Xm                                   m
                                                                 X
                 ∥ϕ∥path :=      |ai | (∥wi ∥1 + |bi |) , ϕ(x) =   ai (wiT x + bi )(+)
                            i=1                                       i=1
and extended in a natural way to vector valued/deep ReLU neural networks. It has been shown that
the collection of L-fold compositions of shallow networks of uniformly bounded path seminorm
enjoys good generalization properties in terms of Rademacher complexity.

3     P ROBLEM AND MAIN RESULTS
We outline our main assumptions on the data distribution.
Assumption 1. The data distribution p0 is absolutely continuous with respect to the standard Gaus-
sian distribution. Throughout the paper, we let p0 denote both the probability distribution and the
PDF of the data, and we write f (x) := ∥x∥2 /2 + log p0 (x) for the log-relative density of p0 with
respect to the standard Gaussian distribution, so that
                                         1        ∥x∥2
                               p0 (x) = exp −             + f (x) .
                                         Z             2
We further assume that

      1. There exist positive constants rf , α, β with β ≪ 1 such that −α∥x∥2 ≤ f (x) ≤ β∥x∥2
         whenever ∥x∥ ≥ rf , and α, β satisfy c(α, β) := 4(α+β)
                                                          (1−β) < 1;

      2. f is continuously differentiable;


                                                       5
        3. sup∥x∥≤R ∥∇f (x)∥ grows at most polynomially as a function of R;
                                                        d/2
        4. the normalization constant Z satisfies (2π)Z       ≤ C, where C is a constant depending at
           most polynomially on dimension.

Assumption 1 roughly states that the tail of the data distribution should decay almost as quickly
as a standard Gaussian. As an illustrating example, consider the Gaussian mixture model q(x) ∝
     ∥x−x1 ∥2
 −                    2
e 2σmin + ∥x−x 2∥
        2
             2
           2σmax  . If we write f (x) = ∥x∥2 /2 + log q(x), then for any ϵ > 0, there exists rϵ > 0
such that
                          2
                                                        2
                     1 − σmin  +ϵ        2              σmax − 1 + ϵ
                −          2         ∥x∥   ≤ f (x) ≤           2
                                                                         ∥x∥2 ,
                        2σmin                               2σmax
whenever ∥x∥ ≥ rϵ . This shows that Assumption 1 applies to Gaussian mixtures, as long as the
bandwidths are suitably constrained.
The benefit of expressing the data distribution in terms of the log-relative density is that it leads to a
nice explicit calculation of the score function. In particular, Lemma 1 states that the j th component
of the score function of the diffusion process is given by
                                                                            !
                                                                       j
                                                 1                −t Ft (x)
                         (∇x log pt (x))j =              −xj + e              ,                        (9)
                                             1 − e−2t                Gt (x)
                                         √                −t
                                                             √
where Ftj (x) =                 −t                                 −2t
                                   xj + 1 − e−2t uj )ef (e x+ 1−e u) γd (du) and Gt (x) =
                        R
                           d (e
           √
R f (e−t x+ 1−e−2t u)     R
  e                   γd (du). The linear growth assumption ensures that the tail p0 has similar de-
cay properties to that of a Gaussian, of which we make frequent use. The other assumptions on ∇f
and the normalization constant are stated for convenience.
In order to obtain tractable bounds on the estimation error of SGMs for learning such distributions,
it is necessary to impose additional regularity assumptions on the function f .
Assumption 2. [Learnability of the log-relative density] For every ϵ > 0 and R > 0, there exists
an L-layer ReLU neural network ϕR,ϵ
                                 f   which satisfies

                                     sup |f (x) − ϕR,ϵ
                                                   f (x)| ≤ Rϵ.
                                    ∥x∥≤R


We denote by η(ϵ, R) = ∥ϕR,ϵ
                         f ∥path the path norm of the approximating network as a function of ϵ
and R.

We will generally abbreviate ϕR,ϵ
                               f to ϕf in mild abuse of notation. Assumption 2 is weak because any
continuous function can be approximated by neural networks to arbitrary precision on a compact set
(Cybenko (1989)). However, we are mainly interested in cases where ϕf generalizes well to unseen
data; this corresponds to η(ϵ, R) growing mildly as ϵ → 0.

3.1     G ENERAL RESULTS

Our first result shows that, under Assumptions 1 and 2, the score function can be approximated effi-
ciently by a neural network, even in high dimensions. Our result helps to understand the massive suc-
cess of deep learning-based implementations of SGMs used in large-scale applications. We denote
by N N L,K the set of neural networks from Rd to Rd with depth L and path norm at most K. Recall
that for a class of vector fields F, we denote by F score,t = {x 7→ 1−e1−2t (−x + e−t f (x)) : f ∈ F}.
Proposition 1 (Approximation error for score function). Suppose assumptions 1 ad 2 hold. Then
there exists a class of neural networks N N with low complexity such that
                              Z
                  inf score,t     ∥ϕ(x) − ∇x log pt (x)∥2 pt (x)dx
               ϕ∈N N           Rd

                                       1               2d 2(1−c(α,β))        1        1/2
               = O max                         (1 + 2α) ϵ             ,              ϵ       ,
                                  (1 − e−2t )2                          (1 − e−2t )3

                                                    6
The class of neural networks is defined precisely in the appendix. A high-level idea of the proof is
to show that the map from f to the score function ∇x log pt has low-complexity in a suitable sense.
The next result concerns the generalization error of learning the score function via empirical risk
minimization.                                                       r                            d

Proposition 2. [Generalization error for score function] Set Rϵ = d + 1−c(α,β) 1
                                                                                    log (1+2α)
                                                                                             ϵt2

and R̃ϵ = d − log(t6 ϵ4 ). The empirical risk minimizer bs in N N score,t of the empirical risk R
             p
                                                                                                 bt
satisfies the population risk bound
                                          Rt (bs) = O(ϵ2 ),
provided the number of training samples is N ≥ Nϵ,t , where Nϵ,t satisfies

         Nϵ,t = Ω max 22Lf +10 d2 t−6 0 (1 + 2α)
                                                   12d −4 4
                                                      ϵ η Rϵ , (1 + 2α)2d ϵ2(1−2c(α,β)) ,
                                                                          !
             2Lf +10          12d −6−72c(α,β) −4−48c(α,β) 4         6 4
            2          (1 + 2α)   t              ϵ          η (R̃ϵ , t ϵ ) .


The next result describes how the learned score can be used to produce efficient samples from p0 ,
with explicit sample complexity rates.
Proposition 3. [Distribution estimation error of SGMs] Let bs denote the empirical risk mini-
mizer in N N score,t of the empirical risk R b t , let pb denote the distribution obtained by simulat-
ing the reverse process defined in Equation 5 over the time interval [t0 , T ] with sc   tk in place of
the true score for each discretization point, using the exponential integrator discretization scheme
outlined in Section 2.1 with maximum step size κ and number of steps M . Then, with T =
1                                                                                 1               −2 2
2 (log(1/d) + 2d log(1 + 2α) + 2(1 − c(α, β)) log(1/ϵ)) , M ≥ dT ϵ, κ ≲ M , t0 ≤ Mβ (f )            ϵ ,
and N ≥ Nϵ,t0 (where Nϵ,t0 is as defined in Proposition 2), we have
                                         T V (p0 , pb) = O (ϵ)
with probability > 1 − poly(1/N ).
The proof of the above result has three essential ingredients: Prop 2, which controls the score esti-
mation error for any fixed t, an application of Theorem 1 in Benton et al. (2023), which bounds the
KL divergence between pt0 and pb along the exponential integrator scheme in terms of κ, M , T and
the score estimation error, and Lemma 10, which proves that the KL divergence between p0 and pt0
can be bounded by Mβ (f ).

3.2   E XAMPLES

We now discuss several concrete examples to which our general theory can be applied.

                                                     ∥x∥2
Infinite-width networks: Suppose that p0 ∝ e−R 2 +f (x) , where f (x) is an infinite-width ReLU
network of bounded total variation, i.e., f (x) = Rd+2 a(wT x + b)(+) dµ(a, w, b), where c > 0 and
µ is a probability measure on Rd+2 . For such an f , the Barron norm is defined as
                                       Z
                         ∥f ∥B := inf         |a|(∥w∥1 + |b|)µ(da, dw, db),
                                      µ   Rd+1
where the infimum is over all µ such that the integral representation holds. The space of all such
functions is sometimes referred to as the Barron space or variation space associated to the ReLU acti-
vation function. The Barron space has been identified as the ’correct’ function space associated with
approximation theory for shallow ReLU neural networks, since direct and inverse approximation
theorems hold. Namely, for any f in the Barron space and any R > 0, there exists a shallow ReLU
neural network fN N such that sup∥x||≤R |f (x) − fN N (x)| ≤ Rϵ, where fN N has O(∥f ∥2B ϵ−2 )
parameters and ∥fN N ∥path ≲ ∥f ∥B . Conversely, any function which can be approximated to ac-
curacy ϵ by a network with path norm uniformly bounded in ϵ belongs to the Barron space. A
comprehensive study of Barron spaces can be found in Ma et al. (2022).
Under the Barron space assumption on f , we can leverage the linear growth and fast approximation
rate of Barron spaces to obtain dimension-independent sample complexity rates for SGMs.


                                                     7
Proposition 4. [Distribution estimation under Barron space assumption] Suppose that p0 (x) ∝
       2
e−∥x∥ /2+f (x) , where f belongs to the Barron space. Let ∥f ∥B denote the Barron norm and let
                                                                                           8c
cf = inf{c > 0 : |f (x)| ≤ c∥x∥} ≤ ∥f ∥B . Given δ ∈ (0, 1), let ϵ(δ) be small enough that R̃f ≤ δ,
             p                                                                               ϵ

where R̃ϵ = d − log(M1+δ/4 (f )−10 ϵ−10 ) Then for all ϵ ≤ ϵ0 , the distribution pb learned by the
diffusion model satisfies
                                        T V (b
                                             p, p0 ) = O(ϵ),
provided the number of samples N satisfies.
                                                 12d                            !
                             2Lf +10       2cf          12+144δ −16−192δ      4
                  N =Ω 2               1+             M1+δ/4 ϵ            ∥f ∥B .
                                           R̃ϵ

When ϵ is small, we essentially require ϵ−10 samples to learn p0 to accuracy ϵ (up to the prefactors) -
this is a significant improvement to classical sample complexity bounds in high dimensions, wherein
the rate typically tends to zero as d → ∞. We emphasize that the significance of our contribution
is that the rate of the sample complexity is independent of dimension, and we leave it as an open
direction whether all prefactors can be improved to depend only polynomially on d.

Gaussian mixtures: Distributions that describe real-world data are often highly multimodal, and a
natural model for such distributions is the Gaussian mixture model; we assume the initial density to
be of the form
                                        ∥x − x1 ∥2                ∥x − x2 ∥2

                      1 1                               1
                p0 =           exp −         2       +     exp −      2
                                                                                ,
                      2 Z1                 2σmin       Z2            σmax
               2       2
where 0 < σmin     ≤ σmax   are the bandwidths and x1 , x2 ∈ Rd are the modes of the distribution.
The results that follow can easily be adapted to mixtures with more than two components and with
arbitrary weights, but we keep the setting as simple as possible to illustrate the results. Due to
the growth condition imposed in Assumption 1, our theory cannot be applied to Gaussian mixtures
with arbitrarily small bandwidths; this is discussed further in Appendix E. We prove the following
distribution estimation result for Gaussian mixtures.
Propositionr 5. [Distribution estimation for Gaussian mixture] Given ϵ > 0, set
                                          d

                            log (1+2α)
                       1
                                                               p
Rϵ =           d + 1−c(α,β)           ϵt2     and R̃ϵ =          d − log(t6 ϵ4 ).  Let p0 (x) =
                 2                 2
                                     !
             ∥x−x1 ∥                 ∥x−x2 ∥
1     1 −     2σ 2
                                 −
2     Z1 e
                min    + Z12 e          2
                                      2σmax
                                               be a mixture of two Gaussians, and fix δ ≪ 1. Assume that
                 2
the bandwidths σmin     2
                     , σmax  satisfy c(α, β) = 4(α+β)
                                                 1−2β < 1, where α and β are as defined in Assump-
tion 1. Then there exists an ϵ0 (depending on δ) such that for any ϵ ≤ ϵ0 , the distribution pb learned
by the SGM satisfies
                               T V (bp, p0 ) = O (1 + 2α)d ϵ1−c(α,β) ,
provided the number of samples N satisfies N ≥ max(Nϵ,1 , Nϵ,2 ), where
                                                                                              !
                        Nϵ,1 = Ω          22Lf +10 d2 t−6
                                                       0 (1 + 2α)
                                                                  12d −4
                                                                     ϵ ·    sup     p−4
                                                                                     0 (x)
                                                                           ∥x∥≤Rϵ

and                                                                                                !
             Nϵ,2 = Ω 2      2Lf +10
                                          (1 + 2α)12d −6−72c(α,β) −4−48c(α,β)
                                                        t            ϵ            · sup       p−4
                                                                                               0 (x)   .
                                                                                    ∥x∥≤R̃ϵ
                   2      2
As an example, if σmin = σmax = 1, then we have
                                                     T V (b
                                                          p, p0 ) = O(ϵ)
provided the number of samples satisfies

                         N = Ω 22Lf +10 (1 + δ)12d ed/2 ϵ−24−768δ .


                                                             8
The details of the proof are presented in Appendix E. One technical detail is that we need to be able
to approximate the log density by a ReLU neural network so that Assumption 2 is satisfied. Unlike
in the previous example, the log-likelihood is not a Barron function. However, it can be shown that
for any R, the restriction of the log-likelihood to BR can be represented by a composition of two
Barron functions, and from this it follows that the log-likelihood can be locally approximated by a
ReLU network with two hidden layers.

4   C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we derived distribution estimation bounds for SGMs, applied to a family of sub-
Gaussian densities parameterized by Barron functions. The highlight of our main result is that the
sample complexity independent of the dimension. An important message of this work is that, for
a data distribution of the form in Assumption 1, a low-complexity structure of the log-likelihood f
induces a similar low-complexity structure of the score function. In particular, the score function
can be approximated in L2 by a neural network without the curse of dimensionality. Some recent
works (Oko et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023d) have derived distribution estimation bounds under
assumptions of low-dimensionality on the data; we chose to investigate an approximation-theoretic
notion of ’low-complexity’, and thus our results are a complement to these existing works.
We conclude by mentioning some potential directions for future research. First, we wonder whether
similar results could be achieved if we relax some of our assumptions on the data distribution; for
instance, we would like to extend the results to the case where the log-likelihood is allowed to decay
arbitrarily quickly. Second, it is not clear whether our estimation rate for the class of densities con-
sidered is sharp, and thus obtaining lower bounds for sampling from such densities is an interesting
open problem. We conjecture that our generalization error bound can be improved using more re-
fined techniques such as local Rademacher complexities. Finally, obtaining training guarantees of
score-based generative models remains an important open problem, and another natural direction
for future work would be to study the gradient flow/gradient descent dynamics of score matching
under similar assumptions on the target distribution.

5   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Frank Cole and Yulong Lu thank the support from the National Science Foundation through the
award DMS-2343135.

R EFERENCES
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International conference on machine learn-
  ing, pages 2256–2265. PMLR, 2015.

Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations. PMLR, 2021.

Ling Yang, Zhilong Zhang, Yang Song, Shenda Hong, Runsheng Xu, Yue Zhao, Yingxia Shao,
  Wentao Zhang, Bin Cui, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Diffusion models: A comprehensive survey of
  methods and applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.00796, 2022.

Florinel-Alin Croitoru, Vlad Hondru, Radu Tudor Ionescu, and Mubarak Shah. Diffusion models in
  vision: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2023.

Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 34:8780–8794, 2021.

Jacob Austin, Daniel D Johnson, Jonathan Ho, Daniel Tarlow, and Rianne Van Den Berg. Structured
  denoising diffusion models in discrete state-spaces. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34:17981–17993, 2021.


                                                   9
Nikolay Savinov, Junyoung Chung, Mikolaj Binkowski, Erich Elsen, and Aaron van den Oord. Step-
  unrolled denoising autoencoders for text generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.06749, 2021.
Jin Sub Lee, Jisun Kim, and Philip M Kim. Score-based generative modeling for de novo protein
   design. Nature Computational Science, pages 1–11, 2023a.
Bowen Jing, Gabriele Corso, Jeffrey Chang, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Torsional dif-
  fusion for molecular conformer generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  35:24240–24253, 2022.
Tomer Amit, Tal Shaharbany, Eliya Nachmani, and Lior Wolf. Segdiff: Image segmentation with
  diffusion probabilistic models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.00390, 2021.
Dmitry Baranchuk, Ivan Rubachev, Andrey Voynov, Valentin Khrulkov, and Artem Babenko. Label-
 efficient semantic segmentation with diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.03126, 2021.
Emmanuel Asiedu Brempong, Simon Kornblith, Ting Chen, Niki Parmar, Matthias Minderer, and
  Mohammad Norouzi. Denoising pretraining for semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 4175–4186, 2022.
Hyungjin Chung and Jong Chul Ye. Score-based diffusion models for accelerated mri. Medical
  image analysis, 80:102479, 2022.
Chin-Wei Huang, Jae Hyun Lim, and Aaron C Courville. A variational perspective on diffusion-
  based generative models and score matching. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems, 34:22863–22876, 2021.
Calvin Luo.    Understanding diffusion models:        A unified perspective.     arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2208.11970, 2022.
Wenbo Gong and Yingzhen Li. Interpreting diffusion score matching using normalizing flow. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2107.10072, 2021.
Aapo Hyvärinen and Peter Dayan. Estimation of non-normalized statistical models by score match-
  ing. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 6(4), 2005.
Pascal Vincent. A connection between score matching and denoising autoencoders. Neural compu-
  tation, 23(7):1661–1674, 2011.
Hongrui Chen, Holden Lee, and Jianfeng Lu. Improved analysis of score-based generative modeling:
  User-friendly bounds under minimal smoothness assumptions. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pages 4735–4763. PMLR, 2023a.
Sitan Chen, Sinho Chewi, Jerry Li, Yuanzhi Li, Adil Salim, and Anru R Zhang. Score approx-
   imation, estimation and distribution recovery of diffusion models on low-dimensional data. In
   International Conference on Learning Representations. PMLR, 2023b.
Joe Benton, Valentin De Bortoli, Arnaud Doucet, and George Deligiannidis. Linear convergence
  bounds for diffusion models via stochastic localization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03686, 2023.
George Cybenko. Approximation by superpositions of a sigmoidal function. Mathematics of control,
  signals and systems, 2(4):303–314, 1989.
Dmitry Yarotsky. Error bounds for approximations with deep relu networks. Neural Networks, 94:
 103–114, 2017.
Valentin De Bortoli, James Thornton, Jeremy Heng, and Arnaud Doucet. Diffusion schrödinger
  bridge with applications to score-based generative modeling. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:17695–17709, 2021.
Holden Lee, Jianfeng Lu, and Yixin Tan. Convergence for score-based generative modeling with
  polynomial complexity. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:22870–22882,
  2022.


                                               10
Holden Lee, Jianfeng Lu, and Yixin Tan. Convergence of score-based generative modeling for
  general data distributions. In International Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory, pages
  946–985. PMLR, 2023b.
Sitan Chen, Sinho Chewi, Holden Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Jianfeng Lu, and Adil Salim. The probability
   flow ode is provably fast. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.11798, 2023c.
Kazusato Oko, Shunta Akiyama, and Taiji Suzuki. Diffusion models are minimax optimal distribu-
  tion estimators. International Conference of Machine Learning, 2023.
Minshuo Chen, Kaixuan Huang, Tuo Zhao, and Mengdi Wang. Score approximation, estimation and
 distribution recovery of diffusion models on low-dimensional data. In International Conference
 on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2023d.
Valentin De Bortoli. Convergence of denoising diffusion models under the manifold hypothesis.
  Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2022.
Andrew R Barron. Universal approximation bounds for superpositions of a sigmoidal function.
  IEEE Transactions on Information theory, 39(3):930–945, 1993.
Jason M Klusowski and Andrew R Barron. Approximation by combinations of relu and squared
  relu ridge functions with ℓ1 and ℓ0 controls. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 64(12):
  7649–7656, 2018.
Jonathan W Siegel and Jinchao Xu. Sharp bounds on the approximation rates, metric entropy, and
  n-widths of shallow neural networks. Foundations of Computational Mathematics, pages 1–57,
  2022.
Chao Ma, Lei Wu, et al. The barron space and the flow-induced function spaces for neural network
  models. Constructive Approximation, 55(1):369–406, 2022.
Carles Domingo-Enrich, Alberto Bietti, Eric Vanden-Eijnden, and Joan Bruna. On energy-based
  models with overparametrized shallow neural networks. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pages 2771–2782. PMLR, 2021a.
Carles Domingo-Enrich, Alberto Bietti, Marylou Gabrié, Joan Bruna, and Eric Vanden-Eijnden.
  Dual training of energy-based models with overparametrized shallow neural networks. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2107.05134, 2021b.
Holden Lee, Rong Ge, Tengyu Ma, Andrej Risteski, and Sanjeev Arora. On the ability of neural
  nets to express distributions. In Conference on Learning Theory, pages 1271–1296. PMLR, 2017.
Dominique Bakry, Ivan Gentil, Michel Ledoux, et al. Analysis and geometry of Markov diffusion
  operators, volume 103. Springer, 2014.
Cédric Villani. Topics in optimal transportation, volume 58. American Mathematical Soc., 2021.
Brian DO Anderson. Reverse-time diffusion equation models. Stochastic Processes and their Ap-
  plications, 12(3):313–326, 1982.
Ulrich G Haussmann and Etienne Pardoux. Time reversal of diffusions. The Annals of Probability,
  pages 1188–1205, 1986.
Stephan Wojtowytsch et al. On the banach spaces associated with multi-layer relu networks:
  Function representation, approximation theory and gradient descent dynamics. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2007.15623, 2020a.
Shai Shalev-Shwartz and Shai Ben-David. Understanding machine learning: From theory to algo-
  rithms. Cambridge university press, 2014.
Chao Ma, Stephan Wojtowytsch, Lei Wu, et al. Towards a mathematical understanding of
  neural network-based machine learning: what we know and what we don’t. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2009.10713, 2020.


                                               11
Stephan Wojtowytsch et al. Representation formulas and pointwise properties for barron functions.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.05982, 2020b.
Andreas Maurer. A vector-contraction inequality for rademacher complexities. In Algorithmic
  Learning Theory: 27th International Conference, ALT 2016, Bari, Italy, October 19-21, 2016,
  Proceedings 27, pages 3–17. Springer, 2016.


                                               12
