Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                         M OTION G UIDANCE : D IFFUSION -BASED I MAGE E DIT-
                                         ING WITH D IFFERENTIABLE M OTION E STIMATORS

                                          Daniel Geng, Andrew Owens
                                          University of Michigan
                                          https://dangeng.github.io/motion_guidance


                                                                                     A BSTRACT

                                                  Diffusion models are capable of generating impressive images conditioned on text
arXiv:2401.18085v1 [cs.CV] 31 Jan 2024


                                                  descriptions, and extensions of these models allow users to edit images at a rel-
                                                  atively coarse scale. However, the ability to precisely edit the layout, position,
                                                  pose, and shape of objects in images with diffusion models is still difficult. To
                                                  this end, we propose motion guidance, a zero-shot technique that allows a user to
                                                  specify dense, complex motion fields that indicate where each pixel in an image
                                                  should move. Motion guidance works by steering the diffusion sampling process
                                                  with the gradients through an off-the-shelf optical flow network. Specifically, we
                                                  design a guidance loss that encourages the sample to have the desired motion, as
                                                  estimated by a flow network, while also being visually similar to the source im-
                                                  age. By simultaneously sampling from a diffusion model and guiding the sample
                                                  to have low guidance loss, we can obtain a motion-edited image. We demonstrate
                                                  that our technique works on complex motions and produces high quality edits of
                                                  real and generated images.


                                         1   I NTRODUCTION

                                         Recent advances in diffusion models have provided users with the ability to manipulate images
                                         in a variety of ways, such as by conditioning on text (Hertz et al., 2022; Tumanyan et al., 2023),
                                         instructions (Brooks et al., 2023), or other images (Gal et al., 2022). Yet existing methods often
                                         struggle to make many seemingly simple changes to image structure, like moving an object to a
                                         specific position or changing its shape.
                                         An emerging line of work has begun to address these problems by incorporating motion prompts,
                                         such as user-provided displacement vectors that indicate where a given point on an object should
                                         move (Chen et al., 2023; Pan et al., 2023a; Shi et al., 2023; Mou et al., 2023; Epstein et al., 2023).
                                         However, these methods have significant limitations. First, they are largely limited to sparse motion
                                         inputs, often only allowing constraints to be placed on one point at a time. This makes it difficult
                                         to precisely capture complex motions, especially those that require moving object parts in nonrigid
                                         ways. Second, existing methods often require text inputs and place strong restrictions on the under-
                                         lying network architecture, such as by being restricted to editing objects that receive cross-attention
                                         from a text token, by requiring per-image finetuning, or by relying on features from specific layers
                                         of specific diffusion architectures.
                                         To address these issues, we propose motion guidance, a simple, zero-shot method that takes ad-
                                         vantage of powerful, off-the-shelf motion estimators. This method allows users to edit images by
                                         specifying a dense, and possibly complex, flow field indicating where each pixel should move in the
                                         edited image (Fig. 1 ). We guide the diffusion sampling process using a loss function incorporating
                                         an off-the-shelf optical flow estimator, similarly to classifier guidance Dhariwal & Nichol (2021).
                                         As part of each diffusion sampling step, we estimate the motion between the generated image and
                                         the input source image, and measure the extent to which it deviates from the user-provided flow
                                         field. We then augment the noise estimate with gradients through our loss, in the process backprop-
                                         agating through the optical flow estimator. Simultaneously, we encourage the generated image to
                                         be visually similar to the source image by encouraging corresponding pixels to be photoconsistent,
                                         allowing our model to trade off between the fidelity of motion and visual appearance.
                                         In contrast to other approaches, our method does not require any training, and does not require a
                                         specific diffusion network architecture. We show that our method works for both real and generated


                                                                                           1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                     Source
                     Image
                                                                       Motion
                                                                       Guided
                     Target
                      Flow
    Flow Legend

                                  a) Òa teapot ßoating in waterÓ                   b) Òa photo of a catÓ


         c) Òa photo of a lionÓ                d) Òa photo of a laptopÓ           e) Òa photo of topiaryÓ


      f) Òa painting of a lone treeÓ                 g) [real image]                  h) [real image]
Figure 1: Flow Guidance. Given a source image and a target flow, we generate a new image that has the desired
flow with respect to the original image. Our method is zero-shot, achieving this by performing guidance through
an optical flow network, and works on both real and synthetic images. Note, qualitative results in the main body
of this paper were automatically selected for, and random results can be found in Appendix A3.

images, and that it supports a wide range of complex target motions, such as flow fields that have
been extracted from a video. We make the following contributions:
• We propose motion guidance, a zero-shot technique that allows users to specify a motion field to
  edit an image.
• We show that off-the-shelf optical flow networks provide a useful guidance signal for diffusion.
• Through qualitative and quantitative experiments, we show that our model can handle a wide
  range of complex motion fields, including compositions of translations, rotations, homographies,
  stretching, deformations, and even flow fields extracted from a video.

2     R ELATED WORK
Diffusion Models. Diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020; Song et al.,
2021) are powerful generative models that learn to reverse a forward process where data is iteratively
converted to noise. The reverse process is parameterized by a neural network that estimates the
noise, ϵθ (xt , t, y), given the noisy datapoint xt , the timestep t, and optionally some conditioning y,
for example an embedding of a text prompt. This noise estimate is then used to gradually remove the
noise from the data point under various update rules, such as DDPM or DDIM (Song et al., 2020).
Guidance. Diffusion models admit a technique called guidance, in which the denoising process is
perturbed toward a desired outcome. This perturbation may come from the diffusion model itself as
in classifier-free guidance (Ho & Salimans, 2022; Nichol et al., 2021), a classifier as in ImageNet
classifier guidance Dhariwal & Nichol (2021), or in general the gradients of an energy function.
Many forms of guidance function have been proposed including CLIP embedding distance (Wallace
et al., 2023; Nichol et al., 2021), LPIPS similarity (Lee et al., 2023), bilateral filters (Gu & Davis,
2023), internal representations of diffusion models themselves (Epstein et al., 2023), and “readout
heads” (Luo et al., 2023). Ho et al. (2022) propose to do guidance on a one-step approximation
of the clean data, which they term reconstruction guidance, and Bansal et al. (2023) apply this


                                                           2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024



                                       Òa teapot ßoating in waterÓ


 a)                       b)                          c)                      d)


 e)                        f)                         g)                      h)


Figure 2: Moving and Deforming Objects. We show various motion edits on a single source image (a),
demonstrating our method can handle diverse deformations including scaling and stretching. We provide a
legend for flow visualization in Figure 1.

idea to achieve guidance on various off-the-shelf models such as segmentation, detection, facial
recognition, and style networks. Our method proposes using off-the-shelf optical flow models as
guidance to achieve motion-based image editing.

Image Editing. Diffusion models, due to their strong image priors, are an attractive starting point
for many image editing techniques. Some methods, such as SDEdit (Meng et al., 2022), propose to
run the forward diffusion process partially, and then denoise the partially corrupted image. Other
methods modify the denoising step as in Lugmayr et al. (2022) and Wang et al. (2023). Still others
finetune a diffusion model for image manipulation tasks (Brooks et al., 2023; Zhang & Agrawala,
2023). Another class of diffusion-based image manipulation techniques uses the features and at-
tention inside the denoising models themselves to edit images. These techniques work due to the
observation that features can encode attributes, identity, style, and structure. Methods in this vein
include Prompt-to-Prompt (Hertz et al., 2022), Plug-and-Play (Tumanyan et al., 2023), and Self-
Guidance (Epstein et al., 2023).
The majority of these techniques enable impressive editing of image style, but are unable to modify
the image structure. A more recent line of work seeks to achieve editing of structure. These methods
are closest to ours. DragGAN (Pan et al., 2023a) proposes an optimization scheme over StyleGAN
features that allows users to “drag” points in an image to new locations. However, these results
are constrained to narrowly trained GANs. In order to achieve much wider applicability concurrent
work has adapted the DragGAN optimization scheme to diffusion models (Shi et al., 2023; Mou
et al., 2023), however these approaches either require fine-tuning with LoRA (Hu et al., 2021) for
each image or have not been shown to work on complex, densely defined deformations. In recent
work, Epstein et al. (2023) perform motion editing with classifier guidance, using the activations
and textual-visual cross-attention of the diffusion model to specify object position and shape. This
limits the complexity of deformations and constrains manipulable objects to those that have a corre-
sponding textual token in the prompt. In contrast, our guidance comes from an off-the-shelf optical
flow network and thus does not suffer from these problems, nor does it rely on a particular architec-
ture for the diffusion model. Overall our method seeks to build upon past and concurrent work, by
enabling dense, complex, pixel-level motion manipulation for a wide range of images in a zero-shot
manner.


3     M ETHOD

Our goal is to allow a user to edit a source image x∗ ∈ Rw×h×3 by specifying a target flow field
f ∈ Rw×h×2 that indicates how each pixel should move. To do this, we develop techniques that
guide a diffusion model’s denoising process using an off-the-shelf optical flow network.


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.1      G UIDANCE IN D IFFUSION M ODELS

Diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Song et al., 2021) generate images by repeatedly
denoising a sample of random noise. They are commonly represented (Ho et al., 2020) as functions
ϵθ (xt ; t, y) that predict the noise in a noisy data point xt at step t of the diffusion process, using
an optional conditioning signal y. Classifier guidance (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021) seeks to generate
samples that minimize a function L(x), such as an object classification loss, by augmenting the
noise estimate with the gradients of L:
                                 ϵ̃θ (xt ; t, y) = ϵθ (xt ; t, y) + σt ∇xt L(xt ),                   (1)
where ϵ̃θ is the new noise function and σt is a weighting schedule. A key benefit of this approach
is that it does not require retraining, and it does not explicitly place restrictions on L, except for
differentiability. Recent work has shown that this approach can be straightforwardly extended to use
functions L that accept only clean (denoised) images as input (Bansal et al., 2023).

3.2      M OTION G UIDANCE

We will use guidance to manipulate the positions and shapes of objects in images. We design a
guidance function L(x) (Eq. 1 ) that measures how well a generated image, x, captures the desired
motion. We encourage the optical flow between x∗ and x to be f . Given a (differentiable) off-the-
shelf optical flow estimator F (·, ·), we will minimize the loss
                                      Lflow (x) = ∥F (x∗ , x) − f ∥1 .                                (2)
While we found that performing guidance on this loss could produce the desired motions, we also
observed that the edited objects would often change color or texture. This is because motion estima-
tion models are invariant to many color variations1 , thus there is little to constrain the appearance of
the object to match that of the source image. Inspired by Pan et al. (2023b) and Geng et al. (2022),
to address this we add a loss that encourages corresponding pixels to have similar colors
                              Lcolor (x) = ∥x∗ − warp(x, F (x∗ , x))∥1 ,                              (3)
where warp(x, f ) indicates a backward warp of an image x using the displacement field f . The full
loss we use for guidance is then
                            L(x) = λflow Lflow (x) + λcolor mcolor Lcolor (x),                        (4)
where λflow and λcolor are hyperparameters that trade off between the model’s adherence to the tar-
get motion and the visual fidelity to objects in the source image, and mcolor is a mask to handle
occlusions, explained below.

3.3      I MPLEMENTING MOTION GUIDANCE

We find a number of techniques useful for producing high quality edits with motion guidance.
Handling Occlusions. When objects move, they occlude pixels in the background. Since these
background pixels have no correspondence in the generated image, the color loss (Eq. 3 ) is coun-
terproductive. Similar to Li et al. (2023), we adopt the convention that the target flow specifies the
motions of the foreground, i.e., that when an object moves, it will occlude the pixels that it overlaps
with. To implement this, we create an occlusion mask from the target flow and mask out the color
loss in the occluded regions. Please see Appendix A1 for details.
Edit Mask. For a given target flow, often many pixels will not move at all. In these cases, we
can reuse content from the source image by automatically constructing an edit mask m from the
target flow, indicating which pixels require editing. This mask consists of all locations that any
pixel is moving to or from. To apply the edit mask during diffusion sampling, we assume access
to a sequence of noisy versions of the source image x∗ for each timestep, which we denote x∗t .
For real images this sequence can be constructed by injecting the appropriate amount of noise into
x∗ at each timestep t, or alternatively it can be obtained through DDIM inversion (Song et al.,
2020). For images sampled from the diffusion model, we can also cache the x∗t from the reverse
process. Then, similarly to Song et al. (2021) and Lugmayr et al. (2022), during our denoising
process at each timestep t we replace pixels outside of the edit mask with the cached content: xt ←
m ⊙ xt + (1 − m) ⊙ x∗t .
   1
       This is quite useful for flow estimation on videos, where lighting may change rapidly frame to frame.


                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Handling Noisy Images. In standard classifier guidance, noisy images xt are passed into the
guidance function. In our case, this results in a distribution mismatch with the off-the-shelf optical
flow model, which has only been trained on clean images. To address this we adopt the technique
of Bansal et al. (2023) and Ho et al. (2022), and compute the guidance function on a one step
approximation of the clean x0 given by
                                                √
                                          xt − 1 − αt ϵθ (xt , t)
                                   x̂0 =            √             ,                                (5)
                                                       αt
resulting in the gradient ∇xt L(x̂0 (xt )), with a more in-domain input to the guidance function.
Recursive Denoising. Another problem we encounter is that the optical flow model, due to its
complexity and size, can be quite hard to optimize through guidance. Previous work (Lugmayr
et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023; Bansal et al., 2023) has shown that repeating each denoising step
for a total of K steps, where K is some hyperparameter, can result in much better convergence.
We adopt this recursive denoising technique to stabilize our method and empirically find that this
resolves many optimization instabilities, in part due to an iterative refinement effect (Lugmayr et al.,
2022) and also in part due to the additional steps that the guidance process takes, effectively resulting
in more optimization steps over the guidance energy.
Guidance Clipping. We also find that clipping guidance gradients prevents instabilities during
denoising. Concurrent work by Gu & Davis (2023) introduces an adaptive clipping strategy, but we
find that simply clipping gradients by their norm to a pre-set threshold, cg , works well in our case.


4     R ESULTS

We evaluate our method’s ability to manipulate image structure, both qualitatively and quantitatively,
on real and generated images. Additional results can be found in Appendix A3.

4.1   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

We use RAFT (Teed & Deng, 2020) as our flow model. To create target flow fields, we com-
pose a set of elementary flows and use a segmentation model (Kirillov et al., 2023) for masking.
Target flow construction and hyperparameters are discussed in detail in Appendix A1 . We addi-
tionally implement a simple GUI to generate various flow fields, which we describe in Appendix
Figure A1 and A2. For our experiments we use Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2021). Rather
than performing diffusion directly on pixels, Stable Diffusion performs diffusion in a latent space,
with an encoder and decoder to convert between pixel and latent space. To accommodate this, we
precompose the decoder with the motion guidance function, L(D(·)), so that the guidance function
can accept latent codes. Additionally, we downsample our edit mask to 64 × 64, the spatial size of
the Stable Diffusion latent space.

4.2   Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS

Main qualitative results can be found in Figures 1 , 2 , 3 , and 4 . Following previous work (Ramesh
et al., 2021; Bansal et al., 2023) we generate multiple samples per example and choose the best
result according to the guidance energy. Details can be found in Sec. A1, and random and top-5
qualitative results can be found in Sec. A3. We point out several strengths of our method:
Disocclusions. Because our method is built on top of a powerful diffusion model, it is able to
reason about disoccluded regions. For example, in Figure 1c our model moves the lion to the left
and is able to fill in the previously occluded face.
Diverse Flows. Our method successfully manipulates images using translations (Figures 1c , 1h ,
3a ), rotations (Figures 1b , 4a ), stretches (Figures 1a , 1f , 1g ), and scaling (Figures 2e , 2f , 4b ). It
also handles complex deformations (Figures 1e , 3c , 4c ), homographies (Figures 1d , 3b ), and mul-
tiple objects (Figures 4e , 1e ). Moreover, our method is able to handle relatively large movements
(Figures 2b , 2c , 2d , 3a ). We are able to achieve successes on diverse flows due to the generality of
both the optical flow and diffusion model we use.

                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Diverse Images. We show that our approach works on a wide range of input images with diverse
objects and backgrounds, including non-photorealistic images such as paintings or sketches (Figures
1f , 4b , 5a , 5b , 5c ), despite the fact that the optical flow network was not trained on these styles.
We attribute this success due to the fact that optical flow is a relatively low level signal, and does not
require understanding of high level semantics to estimate. Additionally, we show that our method
works for both synthetic images as well as real images (Figures 1g , 1h , 3c , 4e , 7b , 7c , 7d ).

Soft Optimization. In contrast to forward warping, our method optimizes a soft constraint: satisfy
the flow while also producing a plausible image. Because of this, our method works even for coarsely
defined target flows as shown in Figures 1c , 1h , 5b . This is particularly useful when we do motion
transfer in Section 4.6 and Figure 7 , where the extracted flow is only roughly aligned with the
source image. Another benefit of soft optimization is that our method works even when target flows
are ambiguous, such as when flows specify that two objects should overlap as in Figure 1e .

Text Conditioning. Because our method is based on guidance, it is independent of text condi-
tioning. This is useful for editing real images, for which no caption exists. In all figures, samples
conditioned on text will have the prompt written in italics below the example, and real images are
labeled as “[real image]” and are unconditionally generated.

4.3    A BLATIONS

In Figure 3 we qualitatively ablate out key components of our guidance function.

No Recursive Denoising. Without recursive denoising our method converges much less fre-
quently, often resulting in samples with heavy artifacts as in Figure 3c . Even in cases where the
guidance mostly succeeds, artifacts can still occur as in Figure 3a .

No Color Loss. Without the color loss, our method generally moves objects to the correct loca-
tions, but objects tend to change color as in Figure 3a . These samples still achieve a low flow loss
because of the color invariance of the optical flow network, highlighting the need for the color loss.
In some cases we see catastrophic failure, as in Figure 3c .

No Flow Loss. Removing the flow loss also removes any knowledge the method has of the target
flow. To address this we also modify the color loss (Eq. 3 ), replacing the computed flow with the
target flow. Without the flow loss our method is able to move objects to the correct location but
often hallucinates things in disoccluded areas, such as the half apple in Figure 3a or the waterfall in
Figure 3c . This is because the color loss does not produce any gradient signal in disoccluded areas
due to the warping operation. In the disoccluded areas the diffusion model effectively acts freely
with no guidance at all, resulting in these hallucinations.

      Source Image               Target Flow   No Recursive Denoising   No Color Loss   No Flow Loss   No Occlusion Mask   Ours - Motion Guided


a)


          Òan apple on a wooden tableÓ


b)


              Òa photo of a laptopÓ


c)


                  [real image]

Figure 3: Ablations. We qualitatively ablate out techniques we use to achieve motion guidance. For a discus-
sion please see Section 4.3 . We provide a legend for the flow visualization in Figure 1.

                                                                            6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


No Occlusion Masking. Without occlusion masking the color loss is incorrect in occluded areas.
This is because the target flow in occluded areas is invalid, so the warping operation mismatches
pixels. As a result we tend to see “ghosting” of moved objects, where objects blend into the back-
ground or take on the color of the disoccluded background, as can be seen in Figure 3a or Figure 3c .
In more extreme cases, the object can fail to move into the occluding region at all, as in Figure 3b .

4.4           BASELINES

We present comparisons between our method and baselines in Figure 4 . For a more extensive set of
comparisons please see Figure A7 in the appendix.
InstructPix2Pix. InstructPix2Pix (Brooks et al., 2023) distills Prompt-to-Prompt (Hertz et al.,
2022) into a diffusion model that is conditioned on textual editing instructions. Because this model
is only text-conditioned, it is not possible to give it access to the target flow, but we try to faithfully
summarize the flow in an instruction. As can be seen, despite our best efforts, InstructPix2Pix
is never able to move objects significantly although it does occasionally alter the image in rather
unpredictable ways. This failure can be attributed to two factors. Firstly, text is not an ideal method
for describing motion. For example it is quite hard to encapsulate the motion in Figure 4e in text
without being excessively verbose. And secondly, feature-copying methods such as Prompt-to-
Prompt often fail to make significant structural edits to images.
Forward Warp with SDEdit. We also use baselines that explicitly use the target flow. Specif-
ically, we forward warp the latent code by the target flow and use SDEdit (Meng et al., 2022),
conditioned on the text prompt (if given) at various noise levels to “clean” the warped image. While
SDEdit succeeds to a degree in Figure 4b and Figure 4d , the results are of lower quality and the
failure cases contain severe errors.
Forward Warp with RePaint. In addition to cleaning the forward warped images using SDEdit,
we try the diffusion based inpainting method RePaint (Lugmayr et al., 2022), conditioned on the text
prompt (if given), to fill in disoccluded areas in the forward warp. The inpainted areas are generally
realistic looking, but often not exactly correct. For example in Figure 4d , an additional teapot is
generated in the disoccluded area.
           Source Image             Target Flow              InstructPix2Pix           FW + SDEdit 75%       FW + SDEdit 50%   FW + SDEdit 25%   FW + RePaint   Ours - Motion Guidance


a)



         Òa photo of a catÓ                        Òrotate the cat slightly to the rightÓ


b)



     Òa painting of a sunßowerÓ                   Òmake the sunßower head a bit largerÓ


c)



     Òan aerial photo of a riverÓ                      Òcurve the river to the leftÓ


d)



 Òa teapot ßoating in waterÓ                            Òmove the teapot downÓ


e)



            [real image]                   Òmove the window directly under the lampÉÓ

Figure 4: Baselines. We show qualitative examples from various baselines and our method. The instruction
used for InstructPix2Pix is shown beneath each InstructPix2Pix sample. For a discussion please see Section 4.4 .
We provide a legend for the flow visualization in Figure 1.

                                                                                                         7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                Source Image              Target Flow    GAN Inversion   DragGAN   Ours - Motion Guidance


           a)



                   Òa crayon drawing of an elephantÓ


           b)



                    Òa watercolor painting of a lionÓ


           c)



                  Òa sketch of a man face in a tophatÓ

Figure 5: Comparison to DragGAN. DragGAN works only on domains for which a StyleGAN has been
trained on. Attempts to edit real images that are out-of-domain, even if they are invertible, results in failures
that our model handles well. Here we show results on StyleGANs trained for (a) elephants (b) lions (c) faces.
We provide a legend for the flow visualization in Figure 1.

DragGAN. Recent work has proposed an iterative two-step optimization procedure over GAN
features to “drag” user specified handle points to target points. While the method, DragGAN (Pan
et al., 2023a), is impressive it has only been demonstrated on StyleGANs (Karras et al., 2020) trained
on narrow domains, such as dogs, lions, or human faces, limiting the scope of such a method. To
demonstrate this, we show out-of-domain cases in which DragGAN fails in Figure 5 . Following
DragGAN, to invert an image to a StyleGAN latent code we use PTI (Roich et al., 2021). We then
subsample the target flow to obtain handle and target points that are required by DragGAN. Drag-
GAN GPU memory usage scales linearly with the number of handle points, so densely sampling the
flow is not feasible, even on an NVIDIA A40 GPU with 48 GB of memory. DragGAN also supports
an edit mask, so we provide it with the same automatically generated edit mask that our method
uses. We find that while the GAN inversion is successful even on out-of-domain cases, DragGAN
motion edits contain many artifacts.

4.5   Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS

We are interested in not just optimizing for a specific target flow, but also generating images that
are faithful to the source image and that are coherent. Therefore we evaluate our method on two
metrics which are designed to reflect the trade-offs we are interested in. One metric is the Flow
Loss, Lflow from Equation 2 , which should measure how accurately a generated image adheres to
the target flow. Because our guidance function actually uses Lflow with RAFT, we present results
using both RAFT and GMFlow (Xu et al., 2022) in case we are overfitting. For our second metric
we compute the CLIP Similarity as the cosine distance between the CLIP visual embeddings of the
source and generated images. We treat this as a measure of faithfulness to the source image as well
as a measure of general image quality.


Figure 6: Quantitative Metrics. We show performance of baselines and our method on the Flow Loss and
CLIP Similarity metrics, on two different datasets, Our curated dataset and an automatically generated KITTI
dataset. Please see Section 4.5 for further discussion.


                                                             8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We evaluate on two different datasets. The first dataset is composed of examples with handcrafted
target flows, a subset of which can be seen in Figures 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , and 7 . This dataset has the
advantage of containing interesting motions that are of practical interest. In addition, we can write
highly specific instructions for the InstructPix2Pix baseline for a fair comparison. However, this
dataset is curated to an extent. We ameliorate this by performing an additional evaluation on an
automatically generated dataset based on KITTI (Geiger et al., 2012), which contains egocentric
driving videos with labeled bounding boxes on cars. To build our dataset we construct target flows
consisting of random translations on cars. For more details on the datasets please see Appendix A2 .
We show results in Figure 6 . As can be seen, our method offers an attractive trade-off between
satisfying the target flow and keeping faithful to the source image. The RePaint baseline, which is
essentially forward warping and then inpainting, achieves a low flow loss due to the explicit warp
operation but suffers from artifacts due to aliasing and inpainting and thereby results in a low CLIP
similarity. The SDEdit baseline, which also uses forward warping, can achieve a low flow loss if the
noise level is low, but also falls short on the visual similarity metric.
4.6     M OTION T RANSFER
Sometimes it is hard to specify a flow by hand. In these cases we find that our method can success-
fully “transfer” motion from a video to an image. We give examples in Figure 7 , where we extract
the flow from a video of the earth rotating and use it as our target flow. We find that even if the
extracted flow does not overlap perfectly with the target image the desired motion can be achieved.
We attribute this to the fact that our guidance is a soft optimization and the diffusion model overall
ensures high-level semantic consistency.


                               Frame 0             Frame 1                   Extracted Flow


      [real image]   Motion Edited       [real image]        Motion Edited            [real image]   Motion Edited

Figure 7: Motion Transfer. Our method can use the motion extracted from a source video to motion-edit
a completely different image. Note we use fewer recursive denoising steps for these samples than for other
samples because we found it to improve results slightly. We provide a legend for the flow visualization in
Figure 1.

5     D ISCUSSION
Limitations. While our method can produce high quality motion-conditioned edits, it is also sus-
ceptible to various weaknesses. In particular, we inherit the deficiencies of diffusion models and
guidance based methods, such as slow sampling speed. The use of universal guidance also intro-
duces instability in the sampling process, which is only partially addressed by the recursive denois-
ing strategy (Sec. 3.3). In addition, we also inherit the limitations of our optical flow method, and
find that certain target flows are not possible. We give a comprehensive discussion of our limitations
in Appendix A4 .
5.1     C ONCLUSION

Our results suggest that we can manipulate the positions and shapes of objects in images by guiding
the diffusion process using an optical flow estimator. Our proposed method is simple, does not
require text or rely on a particular architecture, and does not require any training. We see our
work as a step in two research directions. The first direction is in integrating differentiable motion
estimation models into image manipulation models. Second, our work opens the possibility of
repurposing other low-level computer vision models for image generation tasks through diffusion
guidance.


                                                         9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This project was supported by a Sony Research Award. Daniel Geng is supported by a National
Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship under Grant No. 1841052. Daniel would also
like to thank Berlin for a wonderful summer, during which this research was conducted.

R EFERENCES
Arpit Bansal, Hong-Min Chu, Avi Schwarzschild, Soumyadip Sengupta, Micah Goldblum, Jonas
  Geiping, and Tom Goldstein. Universal guidance for diffusion models, 2023. 2, 4, 5, 13, 20

Tim Brooks, Aleksander Holynski, and Alexei A. Efros. Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow image
  editing instructions. In CVPR, 2023. 1, 3, 7

Tsai-Shien Chen, Chieh Hubert Lin, Hung-Yu Tseng, Tsung-Yi Lin, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Motion-
  conditioned diffusion model for controllable video synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.14404,
  2023. 1

Prafulla Dhariwal and Alex Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. In Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2021. 1, 2, 4

A. Dosovitskiy, P. Fischer, E. Ilg, P. Häusser, C. Hazırbaş, V. Golkov, P. v.d. Smagt, D. Cremers,
  and T. Brox. Flownet: Learning optical flow with convolutional networks. In IEEE Interna-
  tional Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2015. URL http://lmb.informatik.
  uni-freiburg.de/Publications/2015/DFIB15. 13

Dave Epstein, Allan Jabri, Ben Poole, Alexei A Efros, and Aleksander Holynski. Diffusion self-
  guidance for controllable image generation. Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  2023. 1, 2, 3, 13

Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit H Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel
  Cohen-Or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using textual
  inversion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01618, 2022. 1

Andreas Geiger, Philip Lenz, and Raquel Urtasun. Are we ready for autonomous driving? the kitti
  vision benchmark suite. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
  2012. 9

Daniel Geng, Max Hamilton, and Andrew Owens. Comparing correspondences: Video prediction
  with correspondence-wise losses. In CVPR, 2022. 4

Zeqi Gu and Abe Davis. Filtered-guided diffusion: Fast filter guidance for black-box diffusion
  models, 2023. 2, 5

Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or.
 Prompt-to-prompt image editing with cross attention control. 2022. 1, 3, 7, 21

Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance, 2022. 2

Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. arXiv preprint
  arxiv:2006.11239, 2020. 2, 4

Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, Alexey Gritsenko, William Chan, Mohammad Norouzi, and David J
  Fleet. Video diffusion models. arXiv:2204.03458, 2022. 2, 5

Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.09685, 2021. 3

Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, Miika Aittala, Janne Hellsten, Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo Aila. Analyz-
  ing and improving the image quality of StyleGAN. In Proc. CVPR, 2020. 8


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
  Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C. Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick.
  Segment anything. arXiv:2304.02643, 2023. 5, 13
Yuseung Lee, Kunho Kim, Hyunjin Kim, and Minhyuk Sung. Syncdiffusion: Coherent montage via
  synchronized joint diffusions. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2023. 2
Wei Li, Xue Xu, Xinyan Xiao, Jiachen Liu, Hu Yang, Guohao Li, Zhanpeng Wang, Zhifan Feng,
 Qiaoqiao She, Yajuan Lyu, and Hua Wu. Upainting: Unified text-to-image diffusion generation
 with cross-modal guidance, 2022. 13
Zhengqi Li, Richard Tucker, Noah Snavely, and Aleksander Holynski. Generative image dynamics.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.07906, 2023. 4, 13
Andreas Lugmayr, Martin Danelljan, Andres Romero, Fisher Yu, Radu Timofte, and Luc Van Gool.
  Repaint: Inpainting using denoising diffusion probabilistic models, 2022. 3, 4, 5, 7
Grace Luo, Trevor Darrell, Oliver Wang, Dan B Goldman, and Aleksander Holynski. Readout
  guidance: Learning control from diffusion features. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.02150, 2023. 2
N. Mayer, E. Ilg, P. Häusser, P. Fischer, D. Cremers, A. Dosovitskiy, and T. Brox. A large
  dataset to train convolutional networks for disparity, optical flow, and scene flow estima-
  tion. In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
  2016. URL http://lmb.informatik.uni-freiburg.de/Publications/2016/
  MIFDB16. arXiv:1512.02134. 13
Chenlin Meng, Yutong He, Yang Song, Jiaming Song, Jiajun Wu, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Stefano Ermon.
  SDEdit: Guided image synthesis and editing with stochastic differential equations. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. 3, 7
Chong Mou, Xintao Wang, Jiechong Song, Ying Shan, and Jian Zhang. Dragondiffusion: Enabling
  drag-style manipulation on diffusion models, 2023. 1, 3
Alex Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob McGrew,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and editing with
  text-guided diffusion models, 2021. 2
Xingang Pan, Ayush Tewari, Thomas Leimkühler, Lingjie Liu, Abhimitra Meka, and Christian
  Theobalt. Drag your gan: Interactive point-based manipulation on the generative image mani-
  fold. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10973, 2023a. 1, 3, 8
Zhaoying Pan, Daniel Geng, and Andrew Owens. Self-supervised motion magnification by back-
  propagating through optical flow. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2023b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.17056. 4
Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 8821–8831. PMLR, 2021. 5, 13
Daniel Roich, Ron Mokady, Amit H Bermano, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Pivotal tuning for latent-based
  editing of real images. ACM Trans. Graph., 2021. 8
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models, 2021. 5
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed Kam-
  yar Seyed Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, S. Sara Mahdavi, Rapha Gontijo Lopes, Tim Sal-
  imans, Jonathan Ho, David J Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi. Photorealistic text-to-image diffu-
  sion models with deep language understanding, 2022. 13
Yujun Shi, Chuhui Xue, Jiachun Pan, Wenqing Zhang, Vincent YF Tan, and Song Bai. Dragdif-
  fusion: Harnessing diffusion models for interactive point-based image editing. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2306.14435, 2023. 1, 3


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In Francis Bach and David Blei (eds.), Pro-
  ceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 37 of Proceedings
  of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2256–2265, Lille, France, 07–09 Jul 2015. PMLR. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v37/sohl-dickstein15.html. 2, 4
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models.
   arXiv:2010.02502, October 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.02502. 2, 4
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=PxTIG12RRHS. 2, 4
Zachary Teed and Jia Deng. Raft: Recurrent all-pairs field transforms for optical flow. In Computer
  Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings,
  Part II 16, pp. 402–419. Springer, 2020. 5
Narek Tumanyan, Michal Geyer, Shai Bagon, and Tali Dekel. Plug-and-play diffusion features for
  text-driven image-to-image translation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
  puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 1921–1930, June 2023. 1, 3
Bram Wallace, Akash Gokul, Stefano Ermon, and Nikhil Naik. End-to-end diffusion latent opti-
  mization improves classifier guidance, 2023. 2
Yinhuai Wang, Jiwen Yu, and Jian Zhang. Zero-shot image restoration using denoising diffusion
  null-space model. The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. 3,
  5
Haofei Xu, Jing Zhang, Jianfei Cai, Hamid Rezatofighi, and Dacheng Tao. Gmflow: Learning
  optical flow via global matching. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8121–8130, 2022. 8
Lvmin Zhang and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image diffusion models,
  2023. 3


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A1     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
Hyperparameters We use Stable Diffusion v1.4 with a DDIM sampler for 500 steps, and we
generate images at a resolution of 512 × 512. All experiments are conducted on a single NVIDIA
A40 GPU. For our motion guidance function (Eq. 4) we found that setting λcolor to 100 and λflow
to 3 worked well. In addition, in our implementation we scale the guidance gradients by a global
weight of 300. We set the gradient clipping threshold cg to be 200 and take K = 10 recursive
denoising steps. For just the motion transfer results we set K = 10, 5, 2 for the cat, pug, and panda
respectively. For the RAFT optical flow model we use the public checkpoint trained on FlyingChairs
(Dosovitskiy et al., 2015) and FlyingThings3D (Mayer et al., 2016) with 5 iterative updates.
Guidance Schedule Previous work (Saharia et al., 2022; Epstein et al., 2023; Li et al., 2022)
has shown that sample quality can improve with well-chosen guidance schedules, that is, applying
guidance with varying strength through out denoising. We find that applying guidance as normal
for the first 400 steps and turning it completely off for the final 100 steps is beneficial in our case
and we use this schedule for all samples. Intuitively, in the final 100 steps the low-level structure of
the image is already sampled and little can be done to alter the motion of the sample. Turning off
guidance during this phase allows the model to focus on synthesizing realistic, high quality details.
Occlusion Masking In order to create an occlusion mask we need additional information or as-
sumptions beyond just the flow. For example, depth could indicate to us which objects would oc-
clude others. Similar to Li et al. (2023), in the absence of this information we make the simplifying
assumption that the target flow is applied to a foreground object. Then in order to construct an occlu-
sion mask we find all background regions that will be overwritten by the target flow by performing
a warp and add these pixels to the occlusion mask, which is used to mask the color loss.
Reranking Following previous work (Ramesh et al., 2021; Bansal et al., 2023) we generate multi-
ple samples and automatically filter these samples. Specifically, we generate 32 samples per example
and re-rank based on the final motion guidance loss value. We find that re-ranking is particularly
useful for filtering out poorly converged samples, which we discuss in more detail in Appendix A4.
We present both top-5 and random samples in Appendix A3. Note we do not use re-ranking for our
quantitative evaluations in Section 4.5.
Target Flow Construction We craft target optical flows by composing translations, rotations,
scaling, stretching, and shearing. For more complex flows, such as with the river or the topiary
samples, we interpolate between discrete displacements with sine functions. For homographies, as
in the laptop example, we define starting and ending locations for corners and fit a homography H
to these points. We then extract a flow by computing Hx − x, the displacement for each point x
under the homography.
In most cases we mask out the flow using a mask extracted using SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023). This
mask is dilated by a few pixels by applying an all ones convolution, equivalent to a box blur, and
then thresholding. We find this helpful because SAM often slightly under estimates the extent of an
object. All flow outside of the dilated mask is set to zero. We do not mask for the motion transfer
samples.
For ease of use, we create a simple GUI that combines the segmentation step and the generation of
optical flows. Our GUI allows users to create translations, rotations, stretches, scaling, and complex
deformations simply by clicking a dragging. For more details and examples, see Figures A1 and A2.

A2     DATASET D ETAILS
For the dataset based on KITTI we use frames with bounding box car annotations. We first filter
out frames with no cars, frames with cars that are too small or too large, and frames with occluded
cars. Occlusion information is annotated by the dataset. For each frame we choose a car and crop
the frame to that car, and resize to obtain a 512 × 512 image. We then construct a flow representing
a translation of the bounding box, with a uniformly random direction and a magnitude uniformly
sampled between 10 and 50 pixels. We use a total of 226 examples. For the InstructPix2Pix baseline
we automatically construct an instruction prompt by mapping the randomly sampled direction to
one of 8 sentences such as “move the car to the left” or “move the car to the right and down.” We
visualize results of motion guidance on this dataset in Figure A3.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


     Original Image               SAM Masking                    GUI Flow                  Motion Edited

Figure A1: Overview of GUI. Our GUI allows a user to start with an image, mask out the objects they want to
motion-edit, and construct an optical flow to be used with our method.


                      Flow Legend                 Translation                  Rotation


                        Stretching                  Scaling            Interpolated Stretching

Figure A2: Implemented GUIs. Our GUI supports the synthesis of optical flows by clicking and dragging
control arrows. We describe the interface for each of the above examples. Translation: Global translations
are parameterized by the direction and magnitude of the arrow dragged out by the user. Rotation: The initial
click defines the center of rotation. The angle of rotation is parameterized by the distance the user drags the
cursor away from the center. Stretching: The initial click determines the center of stretching. The dragged
arrow determines the angle at which to stretch, and the factor by which to stretch. The notch on the arrow
indicates unity, where the stretching factor is equal to 1. Dragging an arrow between the center and the notch
indicates squeezing, and dragging an arrow away from the notch and center indicates squeezing. Scaling: The
center of scaling is determined by the initial click of the user. The factor by which to scale is determined by
the arrow’s distance from the center of scaling. The circle indicates unity, where the scaling factor is equal to
1. Dragging an arrow inside the circle equates to shrinking, and dragging an arrow outside of the circle equates
to expanding. Interpolated stretching: We can take the “stretching” UI and allow a user to draw multiple
arrows, each defining a stretch (or squeeze). Treating these arrows as “control points,” we can interpolate
between these stretches and squeezes to synthesize complex deformations.


                                                       14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 Target
  Flow


 Source
 Image


 Motion
 Guided


Figure A3: KITTI Dataset Examples. We show examples of motion guided edits on the automatically gen-
erated KITTI dataset. Two failure cases are shown on the very right. One in which the car is distorted rather
than moved on to the railroad tracks, and one in which the identity of the car changes to satisfy the target flow.
Because the exact motion can be difficult to interpret from the flow visualization alone, we also draw the target
location of the bounding box in the top row.

      Source Image              Target Flow            Ours - Motion Guided        Source Image       Target Flow         Ours - Motion Guided


a)                                                                            b)


          Òa photo of a cute humanoid robot on a solid backgroundÓ                                    [real image]


c)                                                                            d)


                         Òa painting of a lone treeÓ                                               Òa photo of a lionÓ


e)                                                                            f)


                        Òa photo of a modern houseÓ                                               Òa photo of a laptopÓ


Figure A4: Additional examples. We present additional results using our motion guidance method. These
include target flows that are (a) rotations (b) stretches (c) scaling (d, e) translations and (f) homographies.

For our curated dataset we sample images from Stable Diffusion using custom prompts and collect
real images from Unsplash. We then handcraft interesting target flows for each image. For the
InstructPix2Pix baselines we then manually annotate an instruction describing the motion the target
flow should apply to the source image. In addition, for our evaluations we further augment the
dataset by scaling each target flow by a total of 6 factors, with the aim of covering a wide range of
flow magnitudes. This results in 204 examples.

A3        A DDITIONAL R ESULTS
We show more examples of motion guidance in Figure A4. In addition, we show multiple samples
for source image and target flow pairs with both ranked sampling (see Appendix A1 for details)
in Figure A5 and random sampling in Figure A6. We also show more qualitative examples using
baseline methods and our method in Figure A7. Finally, we show samples and their flow with respect
to the source image over the course of the denoising process in Figure A8.


                                                                          15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                Source Image   Target Flow               Top-5 Samples


      Òa photo of a laptopÓ


         Òa photo of a lionÓ


 Òa painting of a sunßowerÓ


 Òa teapot ßoating in waterÓ


 Òa teapot ßoating in waterÓ


 Òa teapot ßoating in waterÓ


        Òa photo of topiaryÓ


  Òa painting of a lone treeÓ


                [real image]


                [real image]


                [real image]


                [real image]


Figure A5: Top 5 Ranked Samples. We show a selection of the top 5 samples after reranking with our guidance
loss, from a set of 32 samples. The samples are ordered left to right, better to worse ranked. For a random set
of samples using the same images and target flows please see Figure A6.


                                                             16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                Source Image   Target Flow             Random Samples


      Òa photo of a laptopÓ


         Òa photo of a lionÓ


 Òa painting of a sunßowerÓ


 Òa teapot ßoating in waterÓ


 Òa teapot ßoating in waterÓ


 Òa teapot ßoating in waterÓ


        Òa photo of topiaryÓ


  Òa painting of a lone treeÓ


                [real image]


                [real image]


                [real image]


                [real image]


Figure A6: Random Samples. We show a random set of 5 samples for each image and target flow pair. These
samples are of slightly lower quality than the re-ranked examples from Figure A5, as can be seen in the teapot
handle, the texture of the topiary bush, the pug, or the painting of a tree.


                                                             17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


           Source Image            Target Flow             InstructPix2Pix             FW + SDEdit 75%    FW + SDEdit 50%   FW + SDEdit 25%   FW + RePaint   Ours - Motion Guidance


a)



         Òa photo of a catÓ                           Òtilt the head to the leftÓ


b)



Òa photo of a modern houseÓ                         Òraise the roof of the houseÓ


c)



       Òa photo of a laptopÓ                       Òclose the laptop lid a tiny bitÓ


d)



         Òa photo of a lionÓ                         Òmove the lion to the leftÓ


e)



            [real image]                                 Òlengthen the hairÓ


f)



Òa photo of a cute humanoid                         Òraise the arm of the robotÓ
robot on a solid backgroundÓ


g)



     Òa teapot ßoating in waterÓ                       Òmove the teapot leftÓ


h)



     Òa teapot ßoating in waterÓ                     Òmake the teapot smallerÓ


h)



        Òa photo of topiaryÓ        Òmake the left topiary top heavy and the right topiary roundÓ



Figure A7: Additional Baseline Images. We qualitatively compare baselines to our method on additional
examples. For further discussion please see Section 4.4.


                                                                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Source Image /(
                      t = 500        t = 400        t = 300        t = 200        t = 100         t=0
     Target Flow


Figure A8: Denoising Samples and Flows. We show samples through the denoising process, along with the
computed flows with respect to the source image. Specifically, we show the one-step approximation of the
clean data point at timestep t, as well as its flow with respect to the source image as estimated by RAFT. Note
that because our schedule removes guidance for the final 100 steps, which we found improved results, the final
flow for t = 0 is not as similar to the target flow as previous timesteps.


                                                      19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


          Source Image              Target Flow   Ours - Motion Guidance


 a)


      ÒIvy vines on a brick wallÓ


 b)


             [real image]


 c)                                                                            d) Guidance Failure Cases


         Òa photo of a lionÓ


Figure A9: Failure Cases. We show various failure cases of our method. (a) Our method cannot handle
out-of-distribution target flows, such as a vertical flip. (b) In some cases our method alters the content of the
source image, such as the surfboard and the removal of the right leg of the surfer. (c) Guidance can sometimes
be unstable and randomly result in poorly converged images, such as the lion example. In (d) we plot the
guidance energies over the denoising process for the sample in (c) in brown, along with five other samples that
successfully converged. The dip at timestep 400 is the result of our guidance schedule.


A4         L IMITATIONS AND FAILURE C ASES

Our method can effectively apply motion-based manipulations to both real and synthesized images
for a wide range of target optical flows, but it also has limitations, which we discuss here.

Target Flows Our method works for a wide range of flows, as demonstrated in Fig-
ures 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, and A4, such as compositions of translations, rotations, stretches, shears,
homographies, and deformations. However, we also found that there are some target flows that
do not produce good results. For example, we could not get horizontal or vertical flips to work.
We hypothesize this is because these target flows are out-of-domain for off-the-shelf optical flow
networks. We give an example in which we try to optimize a vertical flip target flow in Figure A9a.

Diffusion and Guidance Because our model is based on diffusion guidance we inherit the draw-
backs of diffusion models and guidance. For one, our method is slow to sample from. Much of our
overhead comes from recursive denoising, which scales linearly with sampling time. Depending on
the number of recursive denoising steps, we take 15 minutes in our best case with 2 recursive steps
and in the worst we take around 70 minutes with 10 recursive steps, which is on par with previous
work (Bansal et al., 2023). In addition we find that guidance is sometimes unstable, which is exac-
erbated by the large and complex optical flow models we are backpropagating through. We show
an example of guidance failure in Figure A9c and show the corresponding guidance energy over the
reverse diffusion process in Figure A9d, along with the energy plots for successful samples. We
hypothesize this instability comes from a trade-off on guidance strength. A large guidance strength
results in a lower guidance loss, but also increases the magnitude of the perturbation, and thereby
the chances that sampling may diverge.

Forgetting and Identity Our method is also prone to “forgetting” the content of the source image.
Minor cases of this can be seen in Figure A4f, in which the content of the laptop screen changes, or
in Figure 1h in which the reflection in the window slightly changes. This problem can be exacerbated
by real images for which we have no caption we can condition on, as shown in Figure A9b.


                                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               Source Image                                                               Text-Based Edits


   a)


         Òa photo of an ice cream coneÓ      Òa line drawing of an ice cream coneÓ   Òa crochet of an ice cream coneÓ Òa crayon drawing of an ice cream coneÓ


   b)


                   [real image]                      Òa sketch of a horseÓ           Òa watercolor painting of a horseÓ          Òa painting of a horse in
                                                                                                                                  the style of van GoghÓ


Figure A10: Text-Conditioned Image-to-Image Translation. Setting the target flow to zero and applying
motion guidance while using a new text prompt can enable text-based edits while keeping the structure of the
source image.


        Frame 0                    Frame 1                    Extracted Flow                   [real image]               Motion Edited            Forward Warp


        [real image]              Motion Edited            Forward Warp                        [real image]               Motion Edited            Forward Warp


Figure A11: Motion Transfer Compared to Forward Warp. We show the misalignments between the target
flow and the source image by forward warping.

A5         A DDITIONAL A PPLICATIONS
Text Conditioned Image to Image Translation. Setting the target flow to be zero everywhere
allows us to modify an image while keeping its high level structure by providing an appropriate
prompt, as shown in Figure A10. We note that this is not simply setting the weight on the flow
loss to be zero. Rather, we are constraining the sample to have zero flow with respect to a source
image. This allows us to produce quite different images that share the same structure as the source
image, as in the “line drawing” in Figure A10a. While we can produce high quality results, we
find that our technique is not as robust as other existing methods for text conditioned image-to-
image translation such as Prompt-to-Prompt (Hertz et al., 2022). We believe this is because the flow
network must compute the optical flow between two images of different styles, which is typically
quite out-of-domain for the model. We hope that future progress in motion estimators may improve
the robustness of this technique.

A6         A DDITIONAL M OTION T RANSFER A NALYSIS
Motion transfer is particularly difficult because the flow does not align with the source image very
well. We demonstrate this by forward warping the source images by the target flow from Figure A11.
Our results do not look like the forward warped results because we optimize a soft objective: produce
a likely image from the data distribution learned by the diffusion model, that simultaneously has low
guidance energy.


                                                                                21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      f = 0.1             f = 0.2              f = 0.3             f = 0.4             f = 0.5


      f = 0.6             f = 0.7              f = 0.8             f = 0.9             f = 1.0


Figure A12: Motion Guidance on Scaled Flows We show motion guidance on the waterfall example from
Figure 3, but we scale the flow by a factor of f for each image.


A7     V IDEOS FROM M OTION G UIDANCE
We show a sequence of motion edits on the waterfall example from Figure 3. Each sample uses
the same target flow, but scaled by some factor f . These demonstrate our model working for more
fine-grained flow than the large motions presented in the main body of the paper. In addition, this
indicates the possibility of using our method to construct videos. However, we note that because the
images are sampled independently, there is no coherence to how our method fills in disocclusions,
resulting in a slightly choppy video. We leave this problem for future work.


                                                 22
