Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E VALUATING AND I MPROVING G ENERATION C ONSIS -
TENCY OF L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS VIA A D IVIDE -
C ONQUER -R EASONING A PPROACH
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Evaluating the quality and variability of text generated by Large Language Mod-
         els (LLMs) poses a significant, yet unresolved research challenge. Traditional
         evaluation methods, such as ROUGE and BERTScore, which measure token simi-
         larity, often fail to capture the holistic semantic equivalence. This results in a low
         correlation with human judgments and intuition, which is especially problematic
         in high-stakes applications like healthcare and finance where reliability, safety,
         and robust decision-making are highly critical. This work proposes an automated
         framework for evaluating the consistency of LLM-generated texts using a divide-
         and-conquer strategy. Unlike existing LLM-based evaluators that operate at the
         paragraph level, our method employs a divide-and-conquer evaluator (DCE) that
         breaks down the comparison between two generated responses into individual
         sentences, each evaluated based on predefined criteria. To facilitate this approach,
         we introduce an automatic metric converter (AMC) that translates the output from
         DCE into an interpretable numeric score. Beyond the consistency evaluation, we
         further present a reason-assisted improver (RAI) that leverages the analytical rea-
         sons with explanations identified by DCE to generate new responses aimed at
         reducing these inconsistencies. Through comprehensive and systematic empirical
         analysis, we show that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods by a
         large margin (e.g., +19.3% and +24.3% on the SummEval dataset) in evaluating the
         consistency of LLM generation across multiple benchmarks in semantic, factual,
         and summarization consistency tasks. Our approach also substantially reduces
         nearly 90% output inconsistencies, showing promise for effective hallucination
         mitigation and reduction.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Large language models (LLMs) such as GPT-4 and PaLM 2 (Yang et al., 2023; Bubeck et al.,
2023) have demonstrated impressive performance on a variety of natural language generation (NLG)
tasks, including summarization (Tam et al., 2022), open-book question-answering (QA) (Kamalloo
et al., 2023), and retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) (Lewis et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2023a).
However, conventional evaluation methods, such as BARTScore (Yuan et al., 2021) and BERTScore
(Zhang et al., 2020), which rely on token-level comparison, are inadequate for accurately and reliably
measuring the quality of generated content, particularly in complex scenarios with long paragraphs
(Liu et al., 2023b; Hanna & Bojar, 2021). To address this issue, LLM-based evaluators such as
G-Eval (Liu et al., 2023b) and GPTScore (Jinlan et al., 2023) have proposed a new framework that
evaluates texts via paragraph-level comparison. While these evaluators show promise for certain tasks,
their scores often fail to achieve high concordance with human judgments of semantic equivalence.
Furthermore, as only numeric scores are provided with no explanation, it can be challenging for
humans to trust or reason about these scores, particularly when using LLMs that are known to
hallucinate (Li et al., 2023; Ji et al., 2023; Rawte et al., 2023).
Assessing the consistency of LLMs is more broadly connected to AI safety and has become a critical
step in improving the reliability of these systems by preventing the generation of misinformation
and harmful content. Wang et al. (2022) demonstrates that consistency checking can significantly
enhance the chain of thought reasoning in LLMs. Similarly, Kuhn et al. (2023) leverages semantic


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


consistency for uncertainty estimation in NLG. Recent studies employ consistency checking to
detect hallucinations based on pre-trained LLMs (Manakul et al., 2023) and instruction-tuned LLMs
(Mündler et al., 2023). Although these methods exhibit promising results on several specific tasks,
including mathematical reasoning and factual assessment, the potential failures (Chen et al., 2023)
of self-consistency are often overlooked. This is essentially due to a lack of a generic, automatic,
and reliable strategy that assesses the consistency of two responses, let alone remediating such
inconsistency after identifying them.
                (a)                                                               (b)
                          LLM Agent        Sentence-level         LLM Agent
                                            consistency
                        Divide-Conquer     • Decision             Auto-Metric
 Input paragraph        Evaluator (DCE)    • Reasons            Converter (AMC)
    Reference
                         Re-evaluation
    Candidate
                                             LLM Agent           Numeric score    (c)

                      Improved candidate
                         (sentences)       Reason-Assisted
      Consistency                           Improver (RAI)        Consistency
      improvement                                                  Evaluation


Figure 1: (a) Overview of the proposed DCR framework. The first two components (DCE-AMC) aim at
providing a better strategy for evaluating and quantifying semantic consistency to best match human
judgments. Building on this, a third component RAI further utilizes analytical reasoning to iteratively
improve the consistency of LLM-generated content w.r.t. the reference by minimizing hallucinations.
(b) The combination of DCE and AMC (DCE-AMC-4) significantly outperforms the baseline methods
in terms of correlations with human ratings. (c) RAI substantially reduces output inconsistencies by
∼ 90% through a single improvement iteration on SummEval and QAGS benchmarks.

In this paper, we introduce a novel framework, called Divide-Conquer-Reasoning (abbrevi-
ated as DCR hereafter), for developing an automatic and reliable consistency evaluation method. Our
approach capitalizes on the intuition that human evaluators typically assess consistency by comparing
the semantic meaning of the generated text to the reference text sentence-by-sentence, and then
combining the analysis to make a holistic judgment of the complete concept. Unlike existing metrics
that rely on either token-level or paragraph-level checks, our approach is rooted in the sentence
level and is better aligned with human judgments. This approach avoids confusing LLM by either
providing too much information at once or zooming in too narrowly. Additionally, our approach does
not rely on LLMs, which are prone to hallucination, to output numeric scores without justification.
Another advantage of our approach is its ability to mitigate inconsistencies after identifying them.
The DCR framework is composed of three components, each executed by an LLM agent, as shown in
Fig. 1. Given the reference and candidate, the Divide-Conquer Evaluator (DCE) realizes the notion of
divide-conquer to determine whether the candidate is semantically equivalent to the reference at a
sentence level. DCE automatically partitions the candidate paragraph into sentences (divide), evaluates
each sentence against the reference paragraph based on pre-defined semantic-level consistency criteria
(conquer), and generates a list of reasons that explain why each sentence is or is not consistent with
the reference paragraph. Next, the Auto-Metric Converter (AMC) which builds upon DCE, converts
the reasons (with explanations) into a numeric score system that is more intuitive for humans to
comprehend and evaluate the performance of DCE. The numeric score can be used to evaluate
consistency in various tasks, such as summarization, factual assessment, and hallucination detection.
Our DCR framework not only evaluates consistency but also enhances it through the Reason-Assisted
Improver (RAI), a third LLM agent that utilizes the outputs of DCE to generate new candidate sen-
tences. By incorporating the explanations provided by DCE with the original context, RAI produces
sentences that mitigate inconsistencies (hallucinations). This improvement process can be iteratively
applied by utilizing the re-evaluation produced by DCE to ultimately achieve a candidate response
that is fully aligned with the reference text.
We conducted an evaluation of our approach on three different NLG tasks, including semantic,
summarization, and factual consistency evaluations. Our results demonstrate that DCR significantly
outperforms all existing baseline methods as a consistency evaluator, with improvements of up
to 19.3% and 24.3% compared to G-Eval on the SummEval dataset. Additionally, our approach
achieved high correlations with human judgment on all three benchmarks. Notably, we observed
highly promising results in consistency improvement rate (from 86.71% to 91.11%) at a substantially
lower effort and cost due to its multi-thread parallel implementation.

                                                            2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    Reference (paragraph)           Divide-Conquer Evaluator                                                                              Auto-Metric Converter
                                                                       Compared with      { “is_consistent”: False
     “The sky is blue. ···             Let’s examine the candidate,                                                                             Let’s analyze reasons
                                       sentence by sentence
                                                                       the reference?     “reasons”: [
     The sea is green.···”                                                                                                                      and assign scores

                                        “The sea is red.”               Not consistent        “Not consistent, the sea is green.”                      -1
    Candidate (paragraph)
                                        “And the sky is blue.”           Consistent           “Consistent, the sky is blue.”                          +1
     “The sea is red. ···
    And the sky is blue.···”            “··· ··· ···”                      ··· ··· ···        “··· ··· ···” ] }                                        ···



                                {                                                        Reason-Assisted Improver
                                      “Improved”: [                                                                                         {
                                                                      Re-generate new
                                          “The sea is green.”                                 Let me examine reasons                            “score”: [-1,1]
                                                                         candidate
                                          “And the sky is blue.”                              and improve                                       “final score”: 0.5
                                          “··· ··· ···”                                                                                     }
        Iterative multi-round                                                            “reasons”: “Not consistent, the sea is green.”
            Improvement?              ]                                                  “sentences”: “The sea is red.”
                                }                                                        ··· ··· ···


    Figure 2: An example of evaluating and improving the consistency of generated text via DCR.

2      P RELIMINARIES
Black-Box LLM Evaluation. One of the drawbacks of current grey-box LLM evaluations is that
they require output token-level probabilities (Jiang et al., 2023). However, prominent LLMs such as
GPT-3.5, GPT-4, PaLM 2, and Claude 2, are only available through restricted API calls. Therefore,
such token-level information might not be available. By contrast, in this paper, we focus on the design
of a black-box approach that remains applicable even when only text-based responses are available
from the LLM; that is, we only have access to the model output.
Problem Formulation. Given a user query Q and LLM model M, let C refer to the candidate
response drawn from C = M(Q). LLM-generated responses are commonly evaluated using some
reference texts, denoted by R, for instance, human writing samples for generation tasks and original
content for summarization tasks. The objective of consistency evaluation is to build a function f that
quantitatively measures the semantic equivalence S between the generated candidates C and reference
R as S = f (R, C|Q, M) where S could be binary decision, such as “Yes” or “No”, “Consistent” or
“Not Consistent”, or numeric score, e.g., [-1, +1]. However, it is worth noting that our evaluation can
be generally used to check consistency between two candidates where both are generated by LLMs.
In that scenario, we only need to assume one candidate as the reference for self-check consistency.
Limitation of Existing Methods. The conventional metrics, such as BERTscore and BARTscore,
rely on a token-level comparison using n-gram or contextual embedding to calculate cosine-similarity.
However, this approach fails to capture the overall semantic meaning as it directly aggregates token-
level similarities. To address this issue, leveraging the power of LLMs for self-evaluation has
been proposed. G-Eval (Liu et al., 2023b) and GPT-Eval (Jiang et al., 2023) evaluate consistency
at a paragraph-level by prompting LLMs to compare two candidates as a whole. However, these
approaches have a major drawback as the generated verbal scores by LLMs are prone to hallucinations,
resulting in abnormally higher ratings for LLM-generated content that diverge from human judgment
(Liu et al., 2023b). Such methods also generate no actionable insight to justify the score or mitigate
inconsistencies after identifying them.

3      D IVIDE -C ONQUER -R EASONING
To overcome the aforementioned limitations, we propose to evaluate and improve the consistency of
LLM output via a Divide-Conquer-Reasoning approach, referred to as DCR. The approach comprises
three key components, as illustrated in Fig. 1: (1) DCE, which disassembles the candidate paragraph
and scrutinizes semantic inconsistencies sentence-by-sentence, (2) AMC, which converts sentence-
level inconsistency/consistency reasons into numeric scores for quantitative interpretation, and (3)
RAI, which conducts analytical reasoning to improve consistency through candidate regeneration.
Essentially, our approach involves a combination of sentence-level analysis, semantic consistency
checking, and causal analysis, making it an ideal evaluation metric for a diverse range of NLG tasks
that require comparison to reference texts, such as summarization, open-book question-answering
(QA), and retrieval-augmented generation.
Moreover, DCR not only evaluates but also improves the consistency of generated text through
analysis and reasoning, which aligns with human intuition. Fig.2 provides an example of how DCR
can evaluate and enhance the consistency of candidate text. In the following sections, we will discuss
each component in detail.


                                                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


3.1   D IVIDE -C ONQUER E VALUATOR (DCE)

The Divide-Conquer Evaluator (DCE) is an LLM Agent designed to perform semantic consistency
checks between the reference and the candidate using a sentence-by-sentence strategy. This agent
accepts a reference paragraph and a candidate paragraph as inputs, and employs a divide-conquer
strategy to break down the entire paragraph into multiple individual sentences (divide) and then
assess each sentence against the reference (conquer). More specifically, given the input reference
R = ⟨sr1 , ..., srl ⟩ and candidate C = ⟨sc1 , ..., sck ⟩, we build a DCE agent LDCE using the LLM model
M (e.g., GPT-3.5/4) with an instructed prompt PDCE as:
                        {γ1 , γ2 , ..., γk } = LDCE (⟨sc1 , sc2 , ..., sck ⟩, R | M, PDCE ).               (1)
Eq.1 generates reasons, denoted as Γ = {γ1 , γ2 , ..., γk }, which is a list of reasons explaining why
each sentence sci (i = 1, 2, ..., k) is or is not consistent against the entire reference paragraph R. It’s
important to note that the reasons γi might comprise a short paragraph containing multiple explanation
sentences. We can tailor instruction prompts by defining task-specific criteria to accommodate
different tasks. Table 1 provides an example of a prompt example with pre-defined criteria for the
summarization consistency task.

               Table 1: Summarization Consistency Divide-Conquer Evaluator Prompt
 Your task is to evaluate whether the summary is consistent with the article. You will evaluate it by
 going through each sentence of the summary and check against the following procedures:
  • Understands all the aspects of the sentence, and compare if each aspect exists in the article
  • If it does, compare if the information in this sentence is consistent with what is in the article
  • Compare if all the information in this sentence can be directly inferred or entailed from what is
 in the article. It is OK that not all information from the article exists in this summary

3.2   AUTO -M ETRIC C ONVERTER (AMC)

The Auto-Metric Converter (AMC) is an LLM Agent that aims to quantitatively measure the consis-
tency evaluation derived from the Divide-Conquer Evaluator (DCE) by converting the reasons from
DCE into a numeric score system. This is accomplished by introducing an LLM agent, denoted as
LAMC , which takes reasons ⟨γ1 , γ2 , ..., γk ⟩ with an instructed prompt PAMC as inputs:
                          {z1 , z2 , ..., zk } = LAMC ({γ1 , γ2 , ..., γk } | M, PAMC ).                   (2)
The LLM Agent LAMC functions as a binary sentiment classifier that classifies the reasons
⟨γ1 , γ2 , ..., γk ⟩ to be either positive (marked by “+1" if the sentence is consistent), or negative (marked
by “-1” otherwise). As a result, AMC outputs an array of scores {z1 , z2 , ..., zk }, zi ∈ {−1, +1} for
each sentence ⟨sc1 , sc2 , ..., sck ⟩ in the candidate C. We then utilize this score array to calculate a
comprehensive score Z to evaluate how consistent the candidate (paragraph) is against the reference
(paragraph):
                                  k
                                            !
                                X
                        Z=           zi + α /(k + β), Ẑ = (Z + 1)/2, Ẑ ∈ [0, 1]                           (3)
                            i=1

where k is the length of the score array, i.e., the number of sentences in the candidate paragraph.
Depending on the prompt, the reasons output by DCE may not all be on the sentence level. To ensure
that the score calculated is solely generated by sentence-level reasons, we introduce α and β in Eq. 3,
as explained in detail in Appendix A.4. Finally, we rescale Z to obtain the final score Ẑ that is
typically between 0 (completely inconsistent) and 1 (completely consistent). The closer this score Ẑ
is to 0, the more inconsistent the candidate C is against the reference R.

3.3   R EASON -A SSISTED I MPROVER (RAI)

The Reason-Assisted Improver (RAI) is an LLM Agent that focuses on improving the consistency
of candidate sentences by reasoning through the inconsistent explanations generated by the Divide-
Conquer Evaluator (DCE). To achieve this goal, we propose an LLM agent LRAI to generate new


                                                         4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


candidate sentences ⟨ŝc1 , ŝc2 , ..., ŝck ⟩ based on the collected reasons {γ1 , γ2 , ..., γk } and original sen-
tences ⟨sc1 , sc2 , ..., sck ⟩:
                  ⟨ŝc1 , ŝc2 , ..., ŝck ⟩ = LRAI ({γ1 , γ2 , ..., γk }, ⟨sc1 , sc2 , ..., sck ⟩, R | M, PRAI ).           (4)
The core task of LRAI is to rewrite the original sentence sci if sci is inconsistent with the reference
R and return a new generated ŝci (ŝci ̸= sci ), otherwise retain sci . The newly generated responses
Cˆ = ⟨ŝc1 , ŝc2 , ..., ŝck ⟩ can be considered as the consistency-improved candidate, which can be re-
evaluated by DCE to check if Cˆ mitigates inconsistencies against the reference R.
The improved candidate Cˆ in Eq.4 can be directly fed to the DCE agent in Eq.1 after the first-round
DCR , i.e., DCE→ AMC→ RAI. A straightforward extension is multi-round consistency improvement,
where the consistency is iteratively improved until reaching the maximum number of rounds m.
Algorithm 1 illustrates the workflow of the DCR framework, which consists of three core components:
DCE, AMC, and RAI.
Algorithm 1 Proposed Divide-Conquer-Reasoning (DCR) framework
 1: Requirements: Candidate C, Reference R, LLM model M, LLM agents LDCE , LAMC , LRAI with instructed
    prompts PDCE , PAMC and PRAI , and the maximum number of rounds m
 1: for rounds r = 1, ..., m do
 2:   Disassemble candidate C into sentences ⟨sc1 , sc2 , ..., sck ⟩, evaluate sentence-level consistency against
      reference R, and return the reasons {γ1 , γ2 , ..., γk } ← LDCE (⟨sc1 , sc2 , ..., sck ⟩, R | M, PDCE ) in Eq. 1
 3:   Transform reasons into numeric scores {z1 , z2 , ..., zk } ← LAMC ({γ1 , γ2 , ..., γk } | M, PAMC ) in Eq. 2
 4:   Calculate the final consistency evaluation score Ẑ based on {z1 , z2 , ..., zk } using Eq. 3
 5:   Generate improved candidate ⟨ŝc1 , ŝc2 , ..., ŝck ⟩ ← LRAI ({γ1 , γ2 , ..., γk }, ⟨sc1 , sc2 , ..., sck ⟩, R | M, PRAI )
 6:   Update the candidate ⟨sc1 , sc2 , ..., sck ⟩ ← ⟨ŝc1 , ŝc2 , ..., ŝck ⟩ and return Step 2
 7: return Ẑ, ⟨ŝc1 , ŝc2 , ..., ŝck ⟩


4    E XPERIMENTS
4.1 B ENCHMARKS AND I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
We utilize GPT-3.5 (gpt-3.5-turbo) and GPT-4 (gpt-4) as our LLM agents, and the evaluations
are carried out using the Azure OpenAI API. We set the temperature to 0.0 to generate responses via
the greedy algorithm. The specific prompts used for each LLM agent are detailed in the Appendix
(from Table 7 to Table 12). All experiments are conducted on our local machine (Macbook-Pro with
M1 chip) without the need for GPU resources. In our experimental setup, we set both α and β in
Eq. 3 to 0. We employ four datasets to evaluate DCR where QQP and PAWS are binary datasets, as
well as SummEval and QAGS have numeric scores representing human judgments.
 • QQP and PAWS: Quora Question Pair corpus (Iyer et al., 2017) and the Paraphrase Adversaries
   from Word Scrambling dataset (amd Jason Baldridge & He, 2019) contain pairs of sentences
   labeled to indicate whether they are paraphrases or not, while PAWS specifically focuses on the
   adversarial paraphrases. Following the guidance of BERTScore (Zhang et al., 2020), we are using
   the PAWSQQP development set and the first 5000 from the training set of QQP.
 • SummEval (Fabbri et al., 2021) is a standard dataset that assesses various summarization evaluation
   techniques. It gathers human ratings in various aspects and is built on the CNN/DailyMail dataset
   (Hermann et al., 2015). In this study, we mainly focus on the consistency evaluation.
 • QAGS (Wang et al., 2020) serves as a benchmark for assessing hallucinations in summariza-
   tion tasks. Its objective is to evaluate the consistency aspect of summaries across two distinct
   summarization datasets: QGS-CNN and QAGA-XSUM.
4.2 BASELINES
We evaluate DCR against a variety of evaluation metrics and LLM-based evaluators that have achieved
state-of-the-art performance.
• ROUGE (Lin, 2004) is widely used evaluation metric with three different variants ROUGE-1,
  ROUGE-2, and ROUGE-L. We are using ROUGE-2 and ROUGE-L as comparisons in our study.
• BERTScore (Zhang et al., 2020) calculates the similarities between two pieces of text using the
  contextualized embedding derived from the BERT model(Devlin et al., 2019). It operates as a
  similarity-based assessment tool, which has been widely used for various applications.


                                                                 5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


• MoverScore (Zhao et al., 2019) enhances BERTScore by incorporating soft alignments and
  introducing new aggregation techniques to provide a more robust similarity assessment.
• BARTScore (Yuan et al., 2021) is a comprehensive evaluator that uses the average likelihood of
  the model’s output as its measurement criteria.
• UniEval (Zhong et al., 2022) is a consolidated evaluator capable of assessing various elements of
  text generation as QA tasks. It manages diverse evaluation tasks by modifying the question format.
• GPTScore (Jinlan et al., 2023) is an LLM-based evaluator that assesses texts using pre-training
  models, e.g., GPT-3, and is designed to provide a higher likelihood to high-quality generated text.
• G-Eval (Liu et al., 2023b) is another LLM evaluator that utilizes LLMs with a chain-of-thoughts
  (CoT) approach with a form-filling paradigm to evaluate the quality of NLG outputs.
4.3 M AIN RESULTS ON C ONSISTENCY E VALUATION (DCE-AMC)
Semantic Consistency Evaluation. Table 2 shows the Area Un- Table 2: AUROC results on QQP
der the ROC curve (AUROC) for automatic baseline metrics and and PAWSQQP
our method, following the practice of BERTScore (Zhang et al.,
                                                                         Metrics       QQP PAWSQQP
2020). We note that while most metrics from BERTScore perform
acceptably on QQP, they exhibit a significant performance drop            BLEU         0.707   0.527
on PAWSQQP . This suggests that these baseline metrics struggle         METEOR         0.755   0.532
to detect the challenging adversarial examples from a semantic         ROUGE-L         0.740   0.536
consistency perspective. In contrast, our method, whether im-           CHRF++         0.577   0.608
                                                                          BEER         0.741   0.564
plemented with GPT-3.5 or GPT-4, outperforms all the baseline
                                                                          EED          0.743   0.611
metrics on both QQP and PAWSQQP , without a significant drop. CharacTER                0.698   0.650
Notably, DCE-AMC-4 demonstrates superior robustness in adver- BERTScore                0.777   0.693
sarial paraphrase classification (semantic consistency) achieving
a relatively large improvement (+4.6% in QQP and +9.9% in             DCE-AMC-3.5      0.788   0.770
                                                                       DCE-AMC-4       0.823   0.792
PAWSQQP ) compared to BERTScore.
Factual Consistency Evaluation. While advanced NLG models
are capable of generating high-quality responses, LLMs are known to occasionally produce non-
factual statements or hallucinat facts, which can undermine trust in their output. Recent work
(Manakul et al., 2023) has been conducted to identify such inconsistencies in terms of factuality. To
verify the effectiveness of our method in evaluating hallucination, we test it on the QAGS benchmark,
which includes two summarization datasets: QAGS-CNN and QAGS-XSUM. Table 4 provides
a comprehensive comparison of various metrics based on Pearson, Spearman, and Kendall-Tau
correlations. We observe that BARTScore performs competitively on the extractive subset (QAGS-
CNN) but fails to demonstrate a high correlation on the abstractive subset (QAGS-XSUM). UniEval
exhibits a better correlation than G-Eval-3.5 but is comparable to G-Eval-4. Our proposed DCE-
AMC-4 outperforms all the baseline methods on both subsets, particularly by a significant margin on
QAGS-XSUM. Unlike the G-Eval method, which shows a larger gap between GPT-3.5 and GPT-4,
our DCE-AMC method remains relatively stable when switching between LLMs.
It’s crucial to note that QAGS-XSUM is an abstrac- Table 3: Correlation (ρ and τ ) results of different
tive dataset, and its summaries are typically one metrics on SummEval benchmark.
sentence long. This contrasts with the extractive
                                                                         SummEval-Consistency
database of QAGS-CNN, where summaries are             Metrics
composed of multiple sentences. Consequently,                        Spearman  (ρ)    Kendall-Tau (τ )
our method operates at a sentence level for QAGS-    ROUGE-2             0.187              0.155
XSUM, and our final score is always either 0 or      ROUGE-L             0.115              0.092
1. Furthermore, the binary label in QAGS-XSUM
                                                     BARTScore           0.382              0.315
implies that we achieve the same correlation score BERTScore             0.110              0.090
using different correlation methods.                 MoverScore          0.152              0.127
Summarization Consistency Evaluation. We              UniEval            0.446              0.371
follow the setting of previous work (Zhong et al., GPT-Score             0.449                -
2022) to evaluate different summarization con- G-Eval-3.5                0.386              0.318
sistency using summary-level Spearman (ρ) and         G-Eval-4           0.507              0.425
Kendall-Tau (τ ) correlation. As shown in Table
                                                    DCE-AMC-3.5          0.592              0.563
3, baseline metrics using semantic similarity, such DCE-AMC-4       0.700 (+19.3%) 0.668 (+24.3%)
as ROUGE and BERTScore, perform poorly on
consistency evaluations. While LLM-based evalu-
ators like GPT-Score and G-Eval exhibit higher correlations, they still underperformed compared to


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


our proposed method. DCE-AMC-4 achieves much higher human correspondence compared to DCE-
AMC-3.5 on both Spearman and Kendall-Tau correlation, which indicates that the larger size of GPT-4
model is beneficial for sentence-level consistency checking in summarization tasks. DCE-AMC-4 with
stronger correlations of ρ = 0.7 and τ = 0.668, substantially improves upon the G-Eval-4 baseline
by a large margin (+19.3% and +24.3% respectively).
Table 4: Pearson (r), Spearman (ρ), and Kendall-Tau (τ ) correlations of different baseline metrics on
QAGS-CNN and QAGS-XSUM benchmark.
                                  QAGS-CNN                                        QAGS-XSUM
   Metrics
                  Pearson (r)   Spearman (ρ)   Kendall-Tau (τ )    Pearson (r)   Spearman (ρ)     Kendall-Tau (τ )
 ROUGE-2             0.459         0.418            0.333            0.097              0.083         0.068
 ROUGE-L             0.357         0.324            0.254            0.024             -0.011         -0.009
 BARTScore           0.735         0.680            0.557            0.184             0.159           0.130
 BERTScore           0.576         0.505            0.399            0.024             0.008           0.006
 MoverScore          0.414         0.347            0.271            0.054             0.044           0.036
  UniEval            0.682         0.662            0.532            0.461             0.488           0.399
 G-Eval-3.5          0.477         0.516            0.410            0.211             0.406           0.343
  G-Eval-4           0.631         0.685            0.591            0.558             0.537           0.472
DCE-AMC-3.5          0.699         0.648            0.596            0.573             0.573           0.573
 DCE-AMC-4           0.782         0.760            0.706            0.602             0.602           0.602

4.4     R ESULTS FOR C ONSISTENCY I MPROVEMENT (RAI)

After implementing DCE and AMC, we can quantitatively determine whether each candidate is
consistent (score = 1) to the reference or not (score <1). Table 5 offers a statistical analysis of the
number of inconsistent data after evaluations (DCE-AMC), revealing 286, 111, and 86 inconsistent
candidates for the SummEval, QAGS-CNN, and QAGS-XSUM benchmarks respectively. Identifying
these inconsistent candidates is valuable but the more critical objective is how to improve these
responses to align with the references. To achieve this goal, we re-generate a new response by
implementing RAI based on the reasons provided by DCE, and then use DCE to re-evaluate these
improved responses. We observe a significant improvement, with most inconsistencies corrected,
specifically 84 out of 86 examples on the QAGS-XSUM benchmark. The rate of consistency
improvement is 86.71%, 88.29%, and 97.67% on SummEval, QAGS-CNN and QAGS-XSUM
respectively. These impressive results demonstrate that our reasoning approach RAI not only
provides better consistency evaluation metrics that align more closely with human judgments, but
also sheds light on improving consistency beyond evaluation. This finding is particularly crucial for
mitigating hallucination once we detect non-factual statements via consistency checks. It’s worth
noting that our reasoning method RAI is a generic component that can also be applied directly at the
paragraph level, and the improvement in this context is significant as well, as illustrated in Table 5.
      Table 5: Performance of consistency improvement with RAI on three benchmark datasets.
           Dataset (size)             SummEval (1600)             QAGS-CNN (236)           QAGS-XSUM (239)
                                    Sentence   Paragraph      Sentence       Paragraph     Sentence   Paragraph
         Inconsistent data            286         209           111             68            86         90
      Corrected data with RAI         248         198            89             64            84         82
 Consistency improvement rate       86.71%       94.73%       88.29%          94.11%        97.67%     91.11%

4.5     A NALYSIS

Why DCR Prefers Sentence-level Evaluation? To further assess the potential advantage of the
sentence-level approach in consistency checking, we employed the same logic of outputting decisions
and reasons as used in DCE and developed an evaluator at the paragraph level, with prompts provided
in Appendix (Table 11). The comparative results between paragraph level and sentence level can
be viewed in Fig. 3. While the recall of paragraph-level evaluation is higher on SummEval and
QAGS-CNN benchmarks, its overall performance in terms of the F1 score and precision is lower
than that of sentence-level evaluations, particularly on the QAGS benchmark. This combination of
higher recall and lower precision implies that more candidates are incorrectly marked as consistent.
In the task of consistency checking, a metric with low recall and high precision (sentence level) is


                                                       7
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


 preferable as it contributes to higher safety compared to a metric with high recall and low precision
 (paragraph level), erring on the side of caution.


  Figure 3: F1 score, precision, and recall performance of our method on sentence-level and paragraph-
  level evaluations. We also verify the effectiveness of the auto-metric converter.

 In addition to superior accuracy, sentence-level evaluations can facilitate more thorough inconsistency
 remediation when integrating with RAI. We compared the performance improvement between our
 sentence level DCE and paragraph level, as indicated in Table 5. Despite the higher recall of the
 paragraph-level approach, fewer items are flagged as inconsistent, resulting in fewer candidates being
 corrected, even though the improvement rate is higher. In fact sentence level DCE leads to 25.25% and
 39.05% more corrections compared to the paragraph-level approach in SummEval and QAGS-CNN
 respectively. Therefore, our sentence-level approach not only outperforms in terms of F1 score and
 precision during consistency checks, but also facilitates comprehensive improvements through RAI.
 Is Auto-metric Converter Necessary? We present a comparison of our method, both with and
 without AMC, as shown in Fig. 3. We observe that our method with only the DCE (red bar) performs
 marginally better on the SummEval dataset but underperforms DCE-AMC (orange bar) on all other
 benchmarks. Although DCE plays a key role in our method, the AMC component is still desirable
 and highly necessary not only because it shows better performance, but also because it facilitates
 the conversion of reasons outputted by DCE to a numeric system. This conversion is both user-
 friendly and practical, making it easy for humans to understand and apply. Furthermore, it provides a
 straightforward means of evaluating the effectiveness of the DCE component.
                                                                                                                                            QAGS-CNN
                   1.0
                                                                                                    Computational cost (s)



                                                                    80         Round 0                                                                 GPT-3.5
Consistency Rate


                                                                               Round 1                                       103                       GPT-4
                                                                    60
                                                        Frequency


                   0.8                                                         Round 2
                                          SummEval                  40                                                       102
                                          QAGS-CNN                  20
                   0.6                    QAGS-XSUM
                                                                     0                                                       101
                         0            1             2                    0.0   0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8                                     14 8 16    32             64
                             Number of RAI Rounds                               Consistency Score                                       Number of Threads
           Figure 4: Multi-round consistency improvement                Figure 5: Computational cost.
 Multi-round Consistency Improvement. Table 5 showcases encouraging results on consistency
 improvement via RAI. This naturally leads to the question: can we further enhance the consistency
 through multiple rounds of RAI? Fig. 4 shows our investigation on multi-round consistency improve-
 ment by iteratively applying RAI. It is noteworthy that the convergence of consistency improvement
 is remarkably swift, achieving nearly 100% in just two rounds. The convergence rate on the QAGS
 datasets is highly consistent across both subsets, slightly surpassing SummEval due to its high
 initial rate after the first round of RAI. This is also corroborated by the frequency distribution of the
 consistency score (Fig. 4 (right)). As the number of rounds increases, the lower consistency scores
 (<1) gradually decrease, and more inconsistent candidates tend to be consistent, where the score is 1.
 The Effect of LLM models. We evaluated the performance of our method using different LLMs
 across all three benchmarks. It is noteworthy that DCE-AMC-4 generally outperforms DCE-AMC-3.5
 across most datasets. The performance gap between the two LLM models is relatively minor in terms
 of semantic consistency (QQP and PAWSQQP in Table 2), and the abstractive subset (QAGS-XSUM in
 Table 4) in factual consistency, but a significant difference is observed in summarization consistency
 in Table 3. This suggests that GPT-4 can further enhance performance, especially for more complex
 evaluation tasks. As such, we applied RAI with GPT-4 directly to verify its superior capability
 in consistency improvement. Nonetheless, the benefits of GPT-3.5, such as higher computational
 efficiency and lower API costs, should not be overlooked.
 Computational Cost. We assessed the computational cost of our method based on wall-clock time,
 which is primarily consumed by LLMs inference. However, the divide-conquer strategy we employed


                                                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


is scalable and easily implemented in parallel. Fig. 5 illustrates the computational cost of GPT-3.5
and GPT-4 with varying numbers of threads on the QAGS-CNN benchmark. A clear reduction in
computational cost is observed as the number of threads increases. It’s important to note that the
decrease in time is more significant when transitioning from a single thread to four threads, but tends
to plateau as more threads are utilized. While GPT-3.5, being the smaller LLM, is a more efficient
option, GPT-4 often delivers better performance.
5   R ELATED W ORK
LLM-based Evaluations. Unlike conventional evaluating metrics leveraging token-level or similar-
ity embeddings, such as BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002), ROUGE (Lin, 2004), or BERTScore (Zhang
et al., 2020), recent proposed LLM-based evaluators (Wang et al., 2023), such as GPTScore (Jinlan
et al., 2023) and G-Eval (Liu et al., 2023b), have demonstrated competitive performance on multiple
NLG tasks. Their idea is to utilize the LLMs to score the candidate output under the assumption that
the LLMs have learned to assign higher probabilities to fluent and high-quality contexts. However,
these LLM evaluators often exhibit lower correlations with human judgments, and their reliability,
robustness, and validity remain under-explored (Liu et al., 2023b). Specifically, LLM evaluators
may pose potential risks of producing hallucinated or overconfidence scores if the LLM model is not
well calibrated for complex tasks (Kadavath et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2023). This results in limited
confidence in using LLM evaluators to directly evaluate paragraph-level responses. Our proposed
DCR framework addresses these challenges through a divide-conquer strategy (DCE) coupled with a
numeric score system (AMC). Our method quantitatively evaluates paragraphs sentence-by-sentence
and does not rely on LLMs to directly output numeric scores, thus providing a more accurate and
comprehensive score that better aligns with human feedback.
Consistency Evaluations. Consistency checking plays an essential role in a wide range of NLG
tasks, including question-answering (Durmus et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020), factual knowledge
extraction (Elazar et al., 2021), summarization (Durmus et al., 2020) and hallucination detection
(Manakul et al., 2023). However, due to various limitations of existing methods, such as reliance on
additional pre-trained models or question sets (Durmus et al., 2020), it is highly desirable to develop
a unified and automatic consistency metric (Wang et al., 2022). Our proposed framework successfully
fills this gap and demonstrates superior performance compared to state-of-the-art baselines (Jinlan
et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023b; Wang et al., 2023). More importantly, our proposed RAI enables
consistency improvement where the re-generated candidate response significantly helps mitigate LLM
hallucinations (Dhuliawala et al., 2023; Mündler et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023) in summarization,
and open-book QA tasks (Li et al., 2023).
6   C ONCLUSION AND D ISCUSSION
We proposed a general evaluation framework based on a divide-and-conquer strategy for assessing
the consistency between the LLM-generated output and the reference texts across various NLG
tasks. Moreover, the proposed method can leverage analytical reasoning to generate revised text
with improved consistency. Through comprehensive and systematic empirical study across multiple
benchmarks in semantic, factual, and summarization consistency tasks, we demonstrated that our
approach significantly outperforms existing methods in evaluating and enhancing the consistency of
LLM-generated content. Despite these advancements, we acknowledge several potential limitations
of our proposed method:
Not a Silver Bullet. While our sentence-level approach (DCE-AMC) excels in evaluating consistency
and detecting hallucination, it may not be universally effective for all dimensions of text evaluation,
even with updated criteria in prompts. For instance, dimensions such as coherence, which pertains to
the collective quality of all generated sentences, or relevance, which involves selecting important
information and eliminating redundant content from the reference text, require a holistic focus on the
entire candidate. These dimensions may not be ideally suited for our DCE-AMC approach. However, if
a different evaluator that outputs reasons for action is used, our AMC and RAI could still be employed
to quantify and improve performance on such dimensions.
Garbage in, Garbage Out. The DCR framework requires two inputs: a reference paragraph and a
candidate paragraph. As we use the reference paragraph as the target for consistency and hallucination
checks, any non-factual statements present in the reference paragraph would not be detected by our
method. Therefore, for tasks such as retrieval-augmented generation (RAG), the accuracy of our
method is inherently limited by the correctness of the input paragraphs.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
Yuan Zhang amd Jason Baldridge and Luheng He. Paws: Paraphrase adversaries from word scram-
  bling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.01130, 2019.
Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar,
  Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, et al. Sparks of artificial general intelligence:
  Early experiments with gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712, 2023.
Angelica Chen, Jason Phang, Alicia Parrish, Vishakh Padmakumar, Chen Zhao, Samuel R Bowman,
  and Kyunghyun Cho. Two failures of self-consistency in the multi-step reasoning of llms. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.14279, 2023.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton aLee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2019.
Shehzaad Dhuliawala, Mojtaba Komeili, Jing Xu, Roberta Raileanu, Xian Li, Asli Celikyilmaz, and
  Jason Weston. Chain-of-verification reduces hallucination in large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2309.11495, 2023.
Esin Durmus, He He, and Mona Diab. Feqa: A question answering evaluation framework for
  faithfulness assessment in abstractive summarization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.03754, 2020.
Yanai Elazar, Nora Kassner, Shauli Ravfogel, Abhilasha Ravichander, Eduard Hovy, Hinrich Schütze,
  and Yoav Goldberg. Measuring and improving consistency in pretrained language models. Trans-
  actions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 9:1012–1031, 2021.
Alexander R. Fabbri, Wojciech Kryscinski, Bryan McCann, Caiming Xiong, Richard Socher,
  and Dragomir Radev. Summeval: Re-evaluating summarization evaluation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2007.12626, 2021.
Michael Hanna and Ondřej Bojar. A fine-grained analysis of bertscore. In Proceedings of the Sixth
 Conference on Machine Translation, pp. 507–517, 2021.
Karl Moritz Hermann, Tomas Kocisky, Edward Grefenstette, Lasse Espeholt, Will Kay, Mustafa
  Suleyman, and Phil Blunsom. Teaching machines to read and comprehend. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 28, 2015.
Shankar Iyer, Nikhil Dandekar, and Kornel Csernai. First quora dataset release: Question pairs. 2017.
Ziwei Ji, Nayeon Lee, Rita Frieske, Tiezheng Yu, Dan Su, Yan Xu, Etsuko Ishii, Ye Jin Bang,
  Andrea Madotto, and Pascale Fung. Survey of hallucination in natural language generation. ACM
  Computing Surveys, 55(12):1–38, 2023.
Dongfu Jiang, Xiang Ren, and Bill Yuchen Lin. Llm-blender: Ensembling large language models
 with pairwise ranking and generative fusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.02561, 2023.
Fu Jinlan, Ng See-Kiong, Jiang Zhengbao, and Liu Pengfei. Gptscore: Evaluate as you desire. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2302.04166, 2023.
Saurav Kadavath, Tom Conerly, Amanda Askell, Tom Henighan, Dawn Drain, Ethan Perez, Nicholas
  Schiefer, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Nova DasSarma, Eli Tran-Johnson, et al. Language models (mostly)
  know what they know. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05221, 2022.
Ehsan Kamalloo, Nouha Dziri, Charles LA Clarke, and Davood Rafiei. Evaluating open-domain
  question answering in the era of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06984, 2023.
Lorenz Kuhn, Yarin Gal, and Sebastian Farquhar. Semantic uncertainty: Linguistic invariances for
  uncertainty estimation in natural language generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.09664, 2023.
Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal,
  Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, et al. Retrieval-augmented genera-
  tion for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
  9459–9474, 2020.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Junyi Li, Xiaoxue Cheng, Wayne Xin Zhao, Jian-Yun Nie, and Ji-Rong Wen. Halueval: A large-scale
  hallucination evaluation benchmark for large language models. arXiv e-prints, pp. arXiv–2305,
  2023.
Chin-Yew Lin. Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text summarization
  branches out, pp. 74–81, 2004.
Jiongnan Liu, Jiajie Jin, Zihan Wang, Jiehan Cheng, Zhicheng Dou, and Ji-Rong Wen. Reta-llm: A
   retrieval-augmented large language model toolkit. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.05212, 2023a.
Yang Liu, Dan Iter, Yichong Xu, Shuohang Wang, Ruochen Xu, and Chenguang Zhu. Gpteval: Nlg
  evaluation using gpt-4 with better human alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.16634, 2023b.
Potsawee Manakul, Adian Liusie, and Mark JF Gales. Selfcheckgpt: Zero-resource black-box
  hallucination detection for generative large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08896,
  2023.
Niels Mündler, Jingxuan He, Slobodan Jenko, and Martin Vechev. Self-contradictory hallucinations
  of large language models: Evaluation, detection and mitigation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15852,
  2023.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and WeiJing Zhu. Bleu: a method for automatic
  evaluation of machine translation. Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics, pages 311–318., 2002.
Vipula Rawte, Amit Sheth, and Amitava Das. A survey of hallucination in large foundation models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.05922, 2023.
Derek Tam, Anisha Mascarenhas, Shiyue Zhang, Sarah Kwan, Mohit Bansal, and Colin Raffel.
  Evaluating the factual consistency of large language models through summarization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2211.08412, 2022.
Alex Wang, Kyunghyun Cho, and Mike Lewis. Asking and answering questions to evaluate the
  factual consistency of summaries. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.04228, 2020.
Jiaan Wang, Yunlong Liang, Fandong Meng, Haoxiang Shi, Zhixu Li, Jinan Xu, Jianfeng Qu, and
   Jie Zhou. Is chatgpt a good nlg evaluator? a preliminary study. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.04048,
   2023.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdh-
  ery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11171, 2022.
Jingfeng Yang, Hongye Jin, Ruixiang Tang, Xiaotian Han, Qizhang Feng, Haoming Jiang, Bing Yin,
   and Xia Hu. Harnessing the power of llms in practice: A survey on chatgpt and beyond. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2304.13712, 2023.
Weizhe Yuan, Graham Neubig, and Pengfei Liu. Bartscore: Evaluating generated text as text
 generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:27263–27277, 2021.
Muru Zhang, Ofir Press, William Merrill, Alisa Liu, and Noah A Smith. How language model
 hallucinations can snowball. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13534, 2023.
Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. Bertscore: Evaluating
  text generation with bert. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09675, 2020.
Wei Zhao, Maxime Peyrard, Fei Liu, Yang Gao, Christian M. Meyer, and Steffen Eger. Moverscore:
 Text generation evaluating with contextualized embeddings and earth mover distance. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:1909.02622, 2019.
Ming Zhong, Yang Liu, Da Yin, Yuning Mao, Yizhu Jiao, Pengfei Liu, Chenguang Zhu, Heng Ji,
 and Jiawei Han. Towards a unified multi-dimensional evaluator for text generation. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2210.07197, 2022.
Kaitlyn Zhou, Dan Jurafsky, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Navigating the grey area: Expressions of
  overconfidence and uncertainty in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13439, 2023.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   I MPROVEMENT I TERATIONS E XAMPLE

                       Table 6: SummEval Improvement Iteration Example

              Usain Bolt will compete at the IAAF/BTC World Relays in the Bahamas next month , the
              Jamaica Athletics Administrative Association has announced . The six-time Olympic gold
              medallist will compete at the relay championship on May 2 and 3 as part of the Jamaican
              team . ’ I ’m happy to be part of the Jamaican team for the IAAF / BTC World Relays in
              the Bahamas . I am fit , healthy and ready to run , ’ said Bolt . Usain Bolt has confirmed he
              will be part of Jamaica ’s team at the World Relays in the Bahamas Bolt reacts as he wins
 Original
              4x100m gold at the London Olympic Games in 2012 ’ I hear the meet was a lot of fun
 Article
              last year and there was a great atmosphere . Jamaica has a long and successful tradition
              in relays and when we put on the national colours we always do our best to make the
              country proud , ’ he added . JAAA General Secretary Garth Gayle commented , ’We were
              extremely pleased that Usain was available for selection and that the world ’s fastest man
              will be running for Jamaica . We can expect some sprint magic on the track in the Bahamas
              on 2nd and 3rd May . ’ ...
              Usain bolt will compete at the relay championship on may 2 and 3 as part of the jamaican
 Original     team . The six-time olympic gold medalist will be part of jamaica ’s team at the iaaf/btc
 Summary      world . Bolt is the iaaf/btc general secretary garth gayle said he always does ‘ best to make
              his country proud ’ . ...

              • This sentence is consistent with the article. The article states that Usain Bolt will compete
                at the IAAF/BTC World Relays in the Bahamas next month as part of the Jamaican team
 Divide-
              • This sentence is consistent with the article. The article confirms that Usain Bolt, a
 Conquer
                six-time Olympic gold medallist, will be part of Jamaica’s team at the IAAF/BTC World
 Evaluator
                Relays
 Evalu-
 ation        • This sentence is not consistent with the article. The article does not state that Bolt is
 Reasons        the IAAF/BTC General Secretary. The General Secretary is Garth Gayle. However, the
                article does mention that Bolt always does his best to make his country proud
              ...
 First        Usain bolt will compete at the relay championship on may 2 and 3 as part of the jamaican
 Round        team. The six-time olympic gold medalist will be part of jamaica ’s team at the iaaf/btc
 Improved     world. Bolt, as stated by the IAAF/BTC General Secretary Garth Gayle, always does his
 Answer       best to make his country proud. ...

            • This sentence is consistent with the article. The article states that Usain Bolt will
              compete at the IAAF/BTC World Relays in the Bahamas next month, which is the relay
              championship mentioned in the summary. The dates and his participation as part of the
 Divide-      Jamaican team are also mentioned in the article
 Conquer
            • This sentence is consistent with the article. The article mentions that Usain Bolt, a
 Evalua-
              six-time Olympic gold medallist, will be part of the Jamaican team at the IAAF/BTC
 tor   Re-
              World Relays.
 Evaluation
 Reasons    • This sentence is not consistent with the article. The article does mention that Bolt always
              does his best to make his country proud, but it is Bolt himself who says this, not the
              IAAF/BTC General Secretary Garth Gayle.’
              ...
 Second
              Usain bolt will compete at the relay championship on may 2 and 3 as part of the jamaican
 Round
              team. The six-time olympic gold medalist will be part of jamaica ’s team at the iaaf/btc
 Improved
              world. Bolt, as stated by himself, always does his best to make his country proud. ...
 Answer


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.2   F ULL SETS OF P ROMPTS


                Table 7: Semantic Consistency Divide-Conquer Evaluator Prompt

   You are an evaluator. You will be given a true answer and an attempt answer.
   True answer is the ground truth answer. Attempt answer is the answer you want to evaluate.

   Criteria:
   Your task is to evaluate whether the attempt answer is consistent with the true answer. You
   will evaluate it by:

   * Listing all the aspects in the attempt answer
   * Compare if each aspects exist in the true answer
   * If it does, compare if the information in attempt answer is consistent with what is in the true
   answer
   * It is OK that not all information from true answer exist in attempt answer

   Given:
   True Answer
   {true answer}
   Attempt Answer
   {answer to evaluate}

   Task
   Work in a step by step way to make sure we get the right answer. You will format the output
   in json as follows:
   {"reason": [{"sentence": "original sentence", "reason": "why this sentence is or is not
   consistent with the true answer"}], "is_consistent" : true/false}

   Here is the evaluation in JSON format:


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


             Table 8: Summarization Consistency Divide-Conquer Evaluator Prompt

   You are an evaluator. You will be given an article and a summary.
   Summary contains a summarized version of the article.

   Criteria:
   Your task is to evaluate whether the summary is consistent with the article. You will evaluate
   it by going through each sentence of the summary and check against the following procedures:

   * Understands all the aspects in the sentence, who is doing what at when and where and what
   are the impact etc.
   * Compare if each aspects exist in the article
   * If it does, compare if the information in this sentence is consistent with what is in the article
   * Compare if all the information in this sentence can be directly inferred or entailed from what
   is in the article, including but not limited to who, what, when, where etc.
   * It is OK that not all information from article exist in this summary

   Given:
   Article
   {article}
   Summary
   {summary}

   Task
   Work in a step by step way to make sure we get the right answer. You will format the output
   in json as follows:
   {"reason": [{"sentence": "original sentence", "reason": "why this sentence is or is not
   consistent with the article. You should start with ẗhis sentence is consistent with the articleör
                                                    ¨ "is_consistent" : true/false}
   ẗhis sentence is not consistent with the article"}],

   Here is the evaluation in JSON format:


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                               Table 9: Auto-Metric Converter Prompt

   You are an evaluator. You will be given a list of paragraphs about "attempt answer". Your job
   is to:
   * Identify whether each paragraph is positive or negative
   * If the paragraph is positive, mark it as 1,
   * If the paragraph is negative, mark it as -1.
   * Output the mark for each paragraph in a json array

   Example
   Given paragraphs:
   *"The attempt answer is incorrect as it states that employees in the US are not eligible to
   participate in the ESPP, which contradicts the true answer. So it is incorrect",
   *"The attempt answer adds a new aspect that is not in the true answer.",
   *"Yet it does list the correct article.And that is helpful."

   Thought:
   The first paragraph is negative as it mentions the attempt answer is wrong. Thus mark -1
   The second paragraph is negative as it adds something that is not in true answer. Thus mark -1
   The third paragraph is positive. Thus mark 1

   Answer:
   {"reason": ["The first paragraph is negative as it mentions the attempt answer is wrong. Thus
   mark -1", "The second paragraph is negative as it adds something that is not in true answer.
   Thus mark -1", "The third paragraph is positive. Thus mark +1"], "answer": [ -1, -1, 1]}

   Given:
   Attempt Answer:
   {attempt answer}

   Answer:


                            Table 10: Reason-Assisted Improver Prompt

   You are a good writer. You will be given:
   * An article
   * A list of objects, each have two fields: sentence and reason
     ** sentence: These sentences are summaries for the given article.
     ** reason: These are the reasons why the sentence is consistent with the article or not.

   Your job is to rewrite these sentences:
   * If the sentence is consistent with the article, you can keep it as it is
   * If the sentence is not consistent with the article, you can re-write it to make it consistent with
   the article based on the reasons given.

   Article
   {article}
   Sentences
   {sentences}

   Task
   Work in a step by step way to make sure we get the right answer. You will format the output
   in json as follows:
   [ {"sentence": "original sentence", "improved_sentence": "improved sentence", "reason": "if
   it is improved, how it is improved. if not, say ’ALREADY CONSISTENT’"}]



                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                            Table 11: Paragraph Level Evaluator Prompt

   You are an evaluator. You will be given an article and a summary.
   Summary contains a summarized version of the article.

   Criteria:
   Your task is to evaluate whether the summary is consistent with the article. You will evaluate
   it by going through the summary and check against the following procedures:

   * Understands all the aspects in the summary, who is doing what at when and where and what
   are the impact etc.
   * Compare if each aspects exist in the article
   * If it does, compare if the information in this summary is consistent with what is in the article
   * Compare if all the information in this summary can be directly inferred or entailed from
   what is in the article, including but not limited to who, what, when, where etc.
   * It is OK that not all information from article exist in this summary

   Given:
   Article
   {article}
   Summary
   {summary}

   Task
   Work in a step by step way to make sure we get the right answer. You will format the output
   in json as follows:
   {"reason": {"sentence": "original sentence", "reason": "why this summary is or is not consis-
   tent with the article. You should start with ẗhis summary is consistent with the articleör ẗhis
                                              ¨ "is_consistent" : true/false}
   summary is not consistent with the article"},

   Here is the evaluation in JSON format:

                   Table 12: Paragraph Level Reason Assisted Improver Prompt

   You are a good writer. You will be given:
   * an article
   * a summary of the article
   * a reason listing why the summary is or is not consistent with the article

   Your job is to rewrite this summary:
   * if the summary is consistent with the article, you can keep it as it is
   * if the summary is not consistent with the article, you can rewrite it to make it consistent with
   the article based on the reasons given.

   Article
   {article}
   Summary
   {summary}
   Reason
   {reason}

   Task
   Work in a step by step way to make sure we get the right answer. You will format the output
   in json as follows:
   {"sentence": "original summary", "improved_summary"": "improved summary"", "reason":
   "if it is improved, how it is improved. if not, say ’ALREADY CONSISTENT’"}



                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.3   D IVIDE -C ONQUER E VALUATOR E XAMPLES

                                  Table 13: QQP Evaluation Example

  True Answer                Attempt Answer              Is_Consistent   Reasons
                                                                         The sentence is asking the
                                                                         same question as the true an-
  How do I read and
                             How can I see all my                        swer, just phrased differently.
  find my YouTube                                        True
                             Youtube comments?                           Both are asking about how
  comments?
                                                                         to view one’s own comments
                                                                         on YouTube

                                                                         • This sentence is consistent
                                                                           with the true answer as
                             What are the laws                             it asks about the laws to
  What are the laws                                                        change status from a stu-
                             to change your sta-
  to change your status                                                    dent visa to a green card in
                             tus from a student
  from a student visa                                                      the US.
                             visa to a green card
  to a green card in the                                 False           • This sentence is not consis-
                             in the US? How do
  US, how do they com-                                                     tent with the true answer.
                             they compare to the
  pare to the immigra-                                                     The true answer asks for
                             immigration laws in
  tion laws in Canada?                                                     a comparison with the im-
                             Japan?
                                                                           migration laws in Canada,
                                                                           not Japan."


                                                                         • This sentence is not consis-
                                                                           tent with the true answer
                                                                           because it is asking about
                                                                           the speed of bullets in rela-
                                                                           tion to the speed of sound,
                                                                           not about the direction of
                                                                           a bullet when fired from a
                                                                           fast-moving aircraft.
                                                                         • This sentence is not con-
                             Do bullets travel                             sistent with the true an-
                             faster than the speed                         swer because it is asking
  If I fire a bullet back-
                             of sound when shot                            about the possibility of bul-
  ward from an aircraft
                             from a gun? If not,                           lets traveling faster than
  going faster than the                                  False
                             is it possible? If they                       the speed of sound, not
  bullet; will the bullet
                             do, what gun and how                          about the direction of a bul-
  be going backwards?
                             much       devastation                        let when fired from a fast-
                             occurs?                                       moving aircraft.
                                                                         • This sentence is not consis-
                                                                           tent with the true answer
                                                                           because it is asking about
                                                                           the type of gun and the
                                                                           amount of devastation, not
                                                                           about the direction of a bul-
                                                                           let when fired from a fast-
                                                                           moving aircraft.


                                                    17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                Table 14: PAWS Evaluation Example

  True Answer               Attempt Answer            Is_Consistent   Reasons
                                                                      The sentence is not consis-
                                                                      tent with the true answer be-
                                                                      cause it reverses the order of
  What were the ma-                                                   the earthquakes. The true
                            What were the major
  jor effects of the cam-                                             answer asks about the ef-
                            effects of the Iquique
  bodia earthquake ,                                                  fects of the Cambodia earth-
                            earthquake , and how
  and how do these ef-                                False           quake and compares it to
                            do these effects com-
  fects compare to the                                                the Iquique earthquake in
                            pare to the cambodia
  Iquique earthquake in                                               1877, while the attempt an-
                            earthquake in 1877 ?
  1877 ?                                                              swer asks about the effects of
                                                                      the Iquique earthquake and
                                                                      compares it to the Cambodia
                                                                      earthquake in 1877.

                                                                      • This sentence is consistent
  How do I start learn-     How do I begin learn-                       with the true answer. The
  ing electronic music      ing electronic music                        only difference is the use
  production ? Should       production ? Should                         of the word ’begin’ instead
  I begin with books or     I start with books or                       of ’start’, but they mean
  videos ? I have logic     videos ? I have logic                       the same thing.
  pro 9 and I already       pro 9 and I already       True            • This sentence is consistent
  made some songs but       made some songs but                         with the true answer. It is
  I would like to start     I would like to start                       exactly the same.
  from scratch ( as if      from scratch ( as if                      • This sentence is consistent
  I did not know any-       I did not know any-                         with the true answer. It is
  thing ) .                 thing ) .                                   exactly the same.


                                                 18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           Table 15: SummEval Evaluation Example

                  Paul Merson has restarted his row with Andros Townsend after the Tottenham
                  midfielder was brought on with only seven minutes remaining in his team ’s
                  0-0 draw with Burnley on Sunday . ’Just been watching the game , did you
                  miss the coach ? RubberDub 7minutes , ’ Merson put on Twitter . Merson
                  initially angered Townsend for writing in his Sky Sports column that ’if Andros
                  Townsend can get in ( the England team ) then it opens it up to anybody . ’ Paul
                  Merson had another dig at Andros Townsend after his appearance for Tottenham
                  against Burnley Townsend was brought on in the 83rd minute for Tottenham as
                  they drew 0-0 against Burnley Andros Townsend scores England ’s equaliser
                  in their 1-1 friendly draw with Italy in Turin on Tuesday night The former
                  Arsenal man was proven wrong when Townsend hit a stunning equaliser for
                  England against Italy and he duly admitted his mistake . ’It ’s not as though I
 Original Arti-
                  was watching hoping he would n’t score for England , I ’m genuinely pleased
 cle
                  for him and fair play to him ‚Äì it was a great goal , ’ Merson said . ’It ’s just
                  a matter of opinion , and my opinion was that he got pulled off after half an
                  hour at Manchester United in front of Roy Hodgson , so he should n’t have
                  been in the squad . ’When I ’m wrong , I hold my hands up . I do n’t have a
                  problem with doing that - I ’ll always be the first to admit when I ’m wrong
                  . ’ Townsend hit back at Merson on Twitter after scoring for England against
                  Italy Sky Sports pundit Merson ( centre ) criticised Townsend ’s call-up to the
                  England squad last week Townsend hit back at Merson after netting for England
                  in Turin on Wednesday , saying ’Not bad for a player that should be ’nowhere
                  near the squad ’ ay @ PaulMerse ? ’ Any bad feeling between the pair seemed
                  to have passed but Merson was unable to resist having another dig at Townsend
                  after Tottenham drew at Turf Moor .

                  • Paul merson was brought on with only seven minutes remaining in his team
                    ’s 0-0 draw with burnley.
 Original
                  • Andros townsend scored the tottenham midfielder in the 89th minute .
 Summary
 Divided into     • Paul merson had another dig at andros townsend after his appearance .
 Bullet Points    • The midfielder had been brought on to the england squad last week .
                  • Click here for all the latest arsenal news news .



                  • This sentence is not consistent with the article because it was Andros
                    Townsend, not Paul Merson, who was brought on with only seven minutes
                    remaining in the game.
                  • This sentence is not consistent with the article because it does not mention
                    that Andros Townsend scored in the 89th minute. Also, the phrase ’scored the
                    Tottenham midfielder’ is not clear.
 Reasons          • This sentence is consistent with the article. The article mentions that Paul
                    Merson had another dig at Andros Townsend after his appearance.
                  • This sentence is not consistent with the article because it does not mention
                    that Andros Townsend was brought onto the England squad last week.
                  • This sentence is not consistent with the article because the article does not
                    provide any latest Arsenal news.

 Is_Consistent    False


                                                19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          Table 16: QAGS-XSUM Evaluation Example

                  London ’s first history day will be held on the anniversary of big ben ’s first day
                  in operation . It will be first celebrated on 31 may in 2017 with celebrations
                  and events run by historic england . The date was decided upon after a poll
                  involving 1,000 londoners . It was closely followed by 5 september - the date of
                  the great fire of london . The yougov questionnaire also declared the houses of
                  parliament as the building that best sums up london . People voted for the queen
                  as their favourite historic london hero for the moment she secretly joined the
                  crowds to celebrate victory in europe day . The results of the poll were released
 Original Arti-   to mark the launch of historic england ’s “ keep it london ” campaign . People
 cle              were asked to select a date to celebrate the capital ’s history , their historic hero
                  and the building that sums up london . Big ben ’s first day in operation was
                  31 may 1859 . The campaign is intended to encourage londoners to notice ,
                  celebrate and speak up for the heritage of their city , historic england said . The
                  public body has also launched a film entitled i am london , which celebrates the
                  historic buildings and places that have borne witness to the capital ’s history .
                  Duncan wilson , chief executive of historic england , said : “ our heritage is a
                  source of pride , a reminder of the city ’s past , a foundation for its present and
                  the building blocks for its future .
 Original
 Summary          • Big ben ’s 150th anniversary has been chosen as the date to celebrate london
 Divided into       ’s history .
 Bullet Points


                  • This sentence is not consistent with the article. The article states that London’s
                    first history day will be held on the anniversary of Big Ben’s first day in
 Reasons            operation, which is 31 May 1859. However, it does not mention that this date
                    is the 150th anniversary of Big Ben.

 Is_Consistent    False


                                                 20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                           Table 17: QAGS-CNN Evaluation Example

                A southern iowa chiropractor accused of accepting sex as payment for his
                services and performing exorcisms on patients has surrendered his state license .
                The iowa board of chiropractic released a report wednesday detailing charges
                against charles manuel , of lamoni . Manuel signed an agreement last month
                admitting his misdeeds and pledging not to apply for reinstatement for at least
                10 years . Patient satisfaction : a chiropractor in iowa has surrendered his license
                to practice and admitted to swapping services for sex and performing exorcisms
                on some patients . Nonetheless , he ’s received outstanding evaluations for
                patient satisfaction on healthgrades . Com . The agreement requires that
                manuel prove any circumstances surrounding the revocation of his license no
                longer exist before he can resume practicing chiropractic in the state . Those
 Original Arti-
                circumstances included bartering sex for services with some patients . Manuel
 cle
                also recommended that patients stop taking medication he prescribed to them .
                A woman who answered a call to manuel ’s home from the des moines register
                declined to comment on the case . A woman at his former practice said he had
                n’t worked there for some time . A lamoni address listed on the yelp page for
                manuel ’s practice appears to be a home on a residential street . While maneul
                has received just three patient survey responses on healthgrades . Com , those
                responses were quite positive . The disgraced chiropractor received a perfect
                five out of five stars in patient satisfaction . Strange practice : charles manuel ,
                who admitted wrongdoing to the iowa board of chiropractic , listed his practice
                ’s addresses on this residential street in the small agricultural town of lamoni in
                southern iowa .

                  • A chiropractor in iowa has surrendered his license to practice and admitted to
                    swapping services for sex and performing exorcisms on some patients.
 Original
 Summary          • Manuel also recommended that patients stop taking medication no longer
 Divided into       exist before he can resume practicing chiropractic in the state .
 Bullet Points    • The disgraced chiropractor received a perfect five out of five stars in patient
                    satisfaction .



                  • This sentence is consistent with the article. The article states that Charles
                    Manuel, a chiropractor in Iowa, surrendered his license and admitted to
                    accepting sex as payment for his services and performing exorcisms on
                    patients.
                  • This sentence is not consistent with the article. The article does mention that
 Reasons            Manuel recommended patients stop taking medication he prescribed to them,
                    but it does not state that this condition must be met before he can resume
                    practicing.
                  • This sentence is consistent with the article. The article mentions that despite
                    his misdeeds, Manuel received outstanding evaluations for patient satisfaction
                    on healthgrades.com, including a perfect five out of five stars.’]

 Is_Consistent    False


                                                21
    Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


    A.4     E XAMPLE OF SETTING α AND β IN EQUATION 3

    α and β are added to ensure we are using a fully sentence level analysis. Below we give an example
    on how to use them to achieve this goal.
    Suppose the output from Divide-Conquer Evaluator with customized prompt is:

1   {
2       " i s _ c o n s i s t e n t " : False ,
3       " reasons " : [
4           " The two p a r a g r a p h s a r e n o t c o n s i s t e n t . " ,
5           " This sentence i s c o n s i s t e n t . "
6           " This sentence i s not c o n s i s t e n t . "
7       ]
8   }



    After inspecting the reasons we notice that the first entry is not a sentence level analysis, but a
    paragraph level one. Thus when calculating scores we should remove the impact of this line.
    Since in this case the first entry is negative, it will be given -1 score, thus we should set α = 1 to
    mitigate this effect. Similarly, because we only have one entry that is not sentence level, we would
    set β = −1.
    Thus for this particular case, equation 3 will be:

                                    k
                                                 !
                                    X
                           Z=             zi + 1 /(k − 1),           Ẑ = (Z + 1)/2,   Ẑ ∈ [0, 1]     (5)
                                    i=1


                                                                22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.5   W HAT DOES LLM THINK OF SENTENCE LEVEL APPROACH ?

To have some more fun, we asked different LLMs on what they think the best approach to evaluate
consistency is, token level, paragraph level, or sentence by sentence level. We have a unanimous
decision :)

                    Table 18: LLM’s opinion on our sentence level approach

                  Given a reference, we have a generated paragraph from LLM. Our objective is
                  to check whether the generated text is consistent to the reference or not. Can
 Input
                  you you tell me, to achieve the best accuracy, would you choose to compare
 Prompt
                  them token-by-token, direct check of paragraphs as a whole, or sentence by
                  sentence check on the semantic meaning?

                  To achieve the best accuracy in checking the consistency of generated text
                  with a reference, it is recommended to compare them sentence by sentence on
                  the semantic meaning. This approach allows for a more nuanced analysis of
                  the generated text and can identify inconsistencies that may not be apparent
 GPT 3.5
                  when comparing them token-by-token or as a whole paragraph. Additionally,
                  comparing them sentence by sentence allows for a more efficient and targeted
                  review of the generated text, as inconsistencies can be identified and addressed
                  on a sentence-by-sentence basis.

                  To achieve the best accuracy, it would be most effective to check sentence by
                  sentence on the semantic meaning. This is because language can be complex
                  and nuanced, and a direct token-by-token or whole paragraph comparison might
 GPT 4
                  miss subtle differences in meaning. By checking sentence by sentence, you can
                  ensure that the generated text accurately reflects the reference in both content
                  and context.

                  To achieve the best accuracy in checking whether a generated paragraph from
                  LLM is consistent with a reference, it would be best to compare them sentence
                  by sentence on the semantic meaning. This is because comparing token-by-
                  token would be too time-consuming and would not take into account the overall
 PaLM2            meaning of the sentences. Direct check of paragraphs as a whole would also
                  not be as effective, as it would not identify specific inconsistencies between
                  the sentences. Comparing them sentence by sentence on the semantic meaning
                  would allow for a more thorough and accurate check of the consistency between
                  the generated paragraph and the reference.

                  Overall, I would recommend the sentence-by-sentence semantic comparison
                  approach. By checking the semantic consistency at a sentence level, it provides
                  a good balance between catching inconsistencies in meaning while allowing for
 Claude 2         minor paraphrasing and word order changes. The paragraph-level comparison
                  is too holistic while the token-by-token approach is too strict. Focusing on
                  sentence-level meaning comparisons allows catching semantic inconsistencies
                  with reasonably high accuracy.


                                               23
