Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D OCK G AME : C OOPERATIVE G AMES FOR
M ULTIMERIC R IGID P ROTEIN D OCKING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                 A BSTRACT

             Protein interactions and assembly formation are fundamental to most biological
             processes. Predicting the assembly structure from constituent proteins – referred
             to as the protein docking task – is thus a crucial step in protein design applications.
             Most traditional and deep learning methods for docking have focused mainly on
             binary docking, following either a search-based, regression-based, or generative
             modeling paradigm. In this paper, we focus on the less-studied multimeric (i.e.,
             two or more proteins) docking problem. We introduce D OCK G AME, a novel
             game-theoretic framework for docking – we view protein docking as a coop-
             erative game between proteins, where the final assembly structure(s) constitute
             stable equilibria w.r.t. the underlying game potential. Since we do not have access
             to the true potential, we consider two approaches - i) learning a surrogate game
             potential guided by physics-based energy functions and computing equilibria
             by simultaneous gradient updates, and ii) sampling from the Gibbs distribution
             of the true potential by learning a diffusion generative model over the action
             spaces (rotations and translations) of all proteins. Empirically, on the Docking
             Benchmark 5.5 (DB5.5) dataset, D OCK G AME has much faster runtimes than
             traditional docking methods, can generate multiple plausible assembly structures,
             and achieves comparable performance to existing binary docking baselines,
             despite solving the harder task of coordinating multiple protein chains.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Protein function is often dictated by interactions with other proteins, forming assemblies that reg-
ulate most biological processes. Predicting these assembly structures from constituent proteins –
referred to as the (multimeric) protein docking task – is crucial in protein engineering applications.
Traditional and deep learning methods for protein docking have largely focused on binary docking
(i.e., two proteins). These methods either use a scoring function to rank millions of candidate as-
semblies, or model assembly structure prediction as a regression (Ganea et al., 2022) or generative
modeling problem (Ketata et al., 2023) over the space of rotations and translations.
Only a handful of approaches exist for the harder multimeric docking task (i.e. involving more than
two proteins). A key challenge here is that the space of possible actions – rotational, translational and
optionally conformational changes, grows combinatorially with the number of proteins. Traditional
methods for this task therefore first generate pairwise docking candidates and then combine them
using combinatorial optimization algorithms, making them very inefficient and slow. Deep learning
approaches for multimeric docking, while faster, still utilize some aspect of pairwise decomposition
in their architectures – either in generating multiple sequence alignments (Evans et al., 2021), or
pairwise roto-translation predictions (Ji et al., 2023). Moreover, they are both limited to predicting
a single assembly structure1 (while in fact there might be multiple plausible structures).
In this work, we introduce D OCK G AME, a novel game-theoretic framework for the rigid multimeric
docking problem: we view docking as a game between protein chains or their relevant subassem-
blies (smaller assemblies made up of chains), where the final assembly structure(s) constitute stable
equilibria. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first approach connecting game theory with
protein docking. In particular, we model docking as a cooperative game, where all proteins have
    1
        A LPHA F OLD -M ULTIMER uses an ensemble of 5 models, each with a single assembly structure prediction.


                                                        1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


               DOCKGAME: Cooperative Games for Multimeric Docking

  Gradient-based learning with a surrogate potential        Diﬀusion model over joint roto-translation spaces

                                                            Ri                                Assembly structure
                 {    (Ri,ri ) f }i=1
                                  N


                                              f                           ...                ...
                                                                 ri


                                                                  T =1             T =t               T =0
                     Assembly structure

  SUPERVISED                                               SELF-SUPERVISED


Figure 1: Overview of D OCK G AME. We introduce a game-theoretic framework for rigid multimeric
docking: we view assembly structures as equilibria w.r.t to the potential of an underlying coopera-
tive game. In practice, however, we do not have access to such potential function. We propose two
approaches to tackle this. Left: We learn a surrogate potential using supervision from traditional
physics-based scoring functions, and compute equilibria via a gradient-based scheme. Right: View-
ing assembly structures as samples from the Gibbs distribution of the underlying potential, we learn
a diffusion generative model over the roto-translation action spaces of all game agents.


aligned interests (e.g., improved assembly energetics) described through an underlying potential,
and the action space for each protein corresponds to the continuous space of rotations and trans-
lations. Intuitively, this allows us to simultaneously model interactions between all proteins, and
decouple the combinatorial action space into individual ones.
In practice however, we do not have access to the true underlying potential. To tackle this
problem, we propose two approaches which we summarize in Figure 1. Our first approach employs
supervised learning, learning a differentiable analogue of traditional (and black-box) physics-based
scoring functions. This allows us to compute equilibria via a gradient-based scheme over the
space of roto-translations w.r.t the learnt potential. While simple, efficient, and generalizable to
various objectives, it crucially relies on the supervision signal, which may not accurately reflect the
game structure underlying observed assemblies. Our second approach, instead is self-supervised,
learning solely from assembly structures in the data by interpreting them as samples from the Gibbs
distribution of the underlying potential. To this end, we then define a diffusion generative model
(DGM) over the joint roto-translation spaces of all players (relative to a fixed player), which can
then be trained with standard denoising score-matching objectives.
To summarize, we make the following contributions:

       • We formulate (rigid) multimeric protein docking as a cooperative game between proteins,
         where the final assembly structure(s) constitute equilibria w.r.t a underlying potential. To
         the best of our knowledge, this is the first work connecting game theory to protein docking.
         The game-theoretic framework also allows us to compute multiple equilibria.
       • To compute plausible equilibria, we propose two different approaches. Our first approach
         utilizes supervision from scoring functions, e.g. physics-based, to learn a surrogate game
         potential and computes equilibria via gradient-based learning updates. Our second ap-
         proach, instead, is self-supervised in that only uses observed assemblies data to train a
         DGM that can efficiently sample from the game equilibria distribution.
       • We evaluate D OCK G AME on the Docking Benchmark 5.5 (DB5.5) dataset. While DB5.5
         has been traditionally used for binary docking evaluation, many proteins in the dataset con-
         tain multiple chains, allowing us to evaluate multimeric docking. Despite the harder task,
         D OCK G AME generates multiple plausible assemblies, and achieves comparable (or better)
         performance on the commonly used Complex-RMSD (C-RMSD) and TM-score metrics,
         while exhibiting orders of magnitude faster runtimes than traditional docking methods.


                                                       2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


2   R ELATED W ORK

Protein Docking Traditional protein docking methods (Chen et al., 2003; Mashiach et al., 2010;
Kozakov et al., 2017; de Vries et al., 2015; Yan et al., 2020) have largely focused on the binary
docking setting. These methods typically generate a large number (possibly millions) of candidate
complexes, which are then ranked using a scoring function. Finally, top-ranked candidates can un-
dergo further refinement using other energetic models. Deep learning approaches for protein dock-
ing have also mainly focused on the rigid binary docking setting, learning the best roto-translation
of one protein (ligand) relative to the other protein (receptor) (Ganea et al., 2022), or a distribution
thereof (Ketata et al., 2023). Different from all these works, we focus on the less explored (rigid)
multimeric docking setting, where the goal is to the predict the assembly structure of 2 proteins.
A key challenge in the multimeric docking task, is to efficiently explore the combinatorial space
of possible relative motions between proteins. Traditional approaches, such as M ULTI -LZ ER D
(Esquivel-Rodrı́guez et al., 2012), achieve this by generating pairwise docking candidates, which
are then combined with combinatorial assembly algorithms, with a similar algorithm in more
recent works (Bryant et al., 2022). The only deep learning approaches for multimeric docking,
A LPHA F OLD -M ULTIMER (Evans et al., 2021), and S YN D OCK (Ji et al., 2023), also adopt pairwise
decompositions, either in generating paired multiple sequence alignments, or in predicting pairwise
roto-translations. In contrast, we propose a novel game-theoretic framework for multimeric
docking based on cooperative games, and compute assembly structures (equilibria) efficiently using
gradient-based schemes that decouple the search space over individual proteins. Additionally,
game-theory offers a natural way to compute multiple equilibria, while previous multimer docking
methods are limited to predicting a single assembly structure.

Diffusion Generative Models for Proteins and Molecules Diffusion generative models have be-
coming increasingly popular in the molecular modeling community, used in tasks like conformer
generation (Xu et al., 2022; Jing et al., 2022), molecular and protein docking (Qiao et al., 2022;
Corso et al., 2023; Ketata et al., 2023), protein backbone generation (Watson et al., 2022; Yim et al.,
2023), and generative structure prediction (Jing et al., 2023). The closest related work to ours are
(Corso et al., 2023; Ketata et al., 2023), of which our diffusion generative model for the cooperative
game can be interpreted as a multi-agent extension. To our best knowledge, this is the first approach
of a ”multi-agent” diffusion generative model in the context of multimeric docking (and cooperative
games). In this regard, our score network is parameterized such that it can handle a varying number
of proteins during training and inference – a fact of potentially more general interest.


3   P RELIMINARIES AND BACKGROUND

In this section, we introduce relevant preliminaries and background that form the basis for the re-
mainder of the paper. Throughout, we use the term protein to denote both individual protein chains,
and any subassemblies made up of protein chains. We also use [N ] to denote the set {1, 2, . . . , N }.

Problem Definition. In the multimeric protein docking task, the goal is to predict the protein
assembly structure, given 3D structures of the constituent protein chains. The 3D structure of each
protein chain i 2 [N ] is described by a point cloud Xi 2 Rni ⇥3 where ni is the number of chain’s
residues, and the residue position corresponds to the coordinates of its C↵ atom.

Game-Theoretic Concepts. Game theory provides a natural framework to model and analyze
systems composed of multiple self-interested agents. Formally, a game can be described by N
agents, indexed i 2 [N ]. Each agent i is equipped with an action set Ai , and a cost function
     QN
fi : i=1 Ai ! R, that maps the actions chosen by all agents to a scalar cost for agent i. Solution
concepts to games are defined by equilibria, where no agent has an incentive to deviate from their
equilibrium strategy. In the most general setting (general-sum games), agents can have differing
objectives, i.e. fi are not the same. In this work, we focus on cooperative games, in which case
agents’ interests are perfectly aligned towards a common goal i.e. f1 = f2 · · · fN = f . In this case,
f is also referred to as the game’s potential (Monderer & Shapley, 1996).


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Diffusion Generative Models. Diffusion generative models (DGMs) are a class of models that
generate data by defining a diffusion process that transforms the data distribution into a tractable
prior, and learning the time-reversal of this process. More formally, let the data distribution
be pdata (x) that is transformed into a tractable prior pprior (x) through a diffusion process dx =
f (x, t)dt + g(t)dw,⇥ where dw denotes the Wiener   ⇤ process. The time-reversal of this process is de-
scribed by dxt = f (xt , t) g(t)2 rxt log p(xt ) dt + g(t)dw, where rxt log p(xt ) is the score of
the time-evolving distribution. This quantity is approximated by DGMs using neural networks s✓ by
first sampling from the transition kernel p(xt |x0 ) defined by the forward diffusion process, comput-
ing the score rxt log p(xt |x0 ) for x0 ⇠ pdata and then regressing s✓ (xt ) against rxt log p(xt |x0 ).


4     M ETHOD

In this section, we first formalize our game-theoretic view on multimeric protein docking. We then
present the proposed methods and discuss their limitations (Sections 4.2-4.3). Finally, we describe
the used learning architectures (Section 4.4).

Multimeric Protein Docking as a Game. In multimeric protein docking, proteins interact with
each other through a combination of relative motions and structural changes to form the assembly
structure. Notably, the space of their relative motions grows combinatorially with the number of
proteins, making it challenging to compute plausible docking structures. Previous methods tackle
this by modeling the relative motions between pairs of proteins followed by a global synchronization
or a combinatorial assembly step. Instead, we argue that game theory provides a natural approach
to simultaneously model the associated interactions and differing objectives between proteins.
In this work, we model (rigid) protein docking as a cooperative game, where agents’ interests are
aligned towards a common potential function f . In accordance, we view the constituted assembly
structures as the underlying game equilibria, i.e. stable outcomes from which no agent has an
incentive to deviate. We note that our game-theoretic framework is agnostic to whether the agents
are protein chains, sub-assemblies as long as agents’ incentives are modeled appropriately.

4.1   OVERVIEW

Modeling docking as a cooperative game requires three components – i) an appropriate definition
of the action set Ai for each protein i, ii) the game potential function f (either specified or learnt)
capturing relevant properties of the assembly, and iii) a strategy for computing equilibria. In the
rigid docking setting, we can define the action set to be the continuous space of roto-translations, i.e
Ai = SO(3) ⇥ T(3), where SO(3) corresponds to the 3D rotation group, and T(3) corresponds to
the 3D translation group. In principle, this allows us to simultanously steer the proteins to equilibria
configurations and thus efficiently scale to a large number of proteins.
In practice however, we do not have access to the underlying game potential f . To circumvent this
difficulty, we describe two viable approaches in subsequent sections – i) learning an approximation
of f via supervised learning, using traditional physics-based scoring functions in P Y ROSETTA, and
computing equilibria via simultaneous gradient descent (Section 4.2), and ii) viewing equilibria as
samples from the Gibbs distribution of f , and learning a diffusion generative model over the roto-
translation action spaces of all players (Section 4.3). Intuitively, the former approach corresponds to
learning a differentiable analogue of traditional scoring functions to facilitate gradient-based equi-
librium computation, while the latter approach can be viewed as a multi-agent extension of the de-
noising score-matching paradigm. A key feature of our parameterization is that the learned (reverse)
diffusion can handle varying number of proteins across training and inference.
Before describing our methods, we summarize the following useful notation. As defined pre-
viously, the action space for each protein i is Ai = SO(3) ⇥ T(3). The joint action space of
all proteins [N ] is thus the product space A = (SO(3) ⇥ T(3))P          N
                                                                           . However, all our models
                                                                           N
operate directly on the protein
                            PN
                                 point clouds X = [X1 , . . . , XN ] 2 R   i=1 ni ⇥3
                                                                                     and residue features
H = [H1 , . . . , HN ] 2 R i=1    n i ⇥n H
                                           . Accordingly, we can obtain the new point clouds Xi+ of
protein i after applying rotation R and translation r, via the transformation Xi+ = R(Xi X̄i ) + r,
where X̄i denotes its (unweighted) center of mass.


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.2   G RADIENT- BASED L EARNING WITH S URROGATE P OTENTIALS

Learning the Potential Function For each assembly structure in the training set, we generate a
given number of decoys by sampling random rotations and translations and applying these to each
protein. We then score each decoy Xj by its potential f (Xj , H) which in the context of this work
we assume is represented by the commonly employed P Y ROSETTA (Chaudhury et al., 2010) energy
function.2 This constitutes our training dataset D for learning a surrogate game potential. To back
up our choice of using P Y ROSETTA, we have observed assembly structures in the data to exhibit the
lowest P Y ROSETTA energy compared to the other structures in D (see Figure 3 in Appendix B). To
learn f , we employ a parametrized architecture f✓ which is invariant to permutations, translations
and rotations of the input assembly, as discussed in Section 4.4.
Each protein can have a different size, number and type of atoms, and thus, the range of energy
values produced for different protein assemblies can vary widely. We observed this fact hinders
model generalization across different proteins when training f✓ using a simple regression (e.g., l2
error norm) objective. For this reason, we propose to train f✓ solely based on energy comparisons,
employing the widely used ranking loss:
                                           ⇥                                ⇤
                      L(✓) =         E       log (f✓ (Xh , H) f✓ (Xl , H))                      (1)
                                  Xl ,Xh ⇠D
where Xh , Xl are random pairs of decoys such that f (Xh , H) > f (Xl , H), i.e. Xl has lower
(true) energy than Xh , and is the logistic function. This is a widely-used loss in preference-
based learning and corresponds to maximum likelihood under a Bradley-Terry reward model, see
e.g. (Bradley & Terry, 1952; Rafailov et al., 2023).

Equilibrium Computation via Gradient-Based Learning Once f✓ has been trained, we
can compute assembly structures by randomly initializing each protein and updating their roto-
translation actions via simultaneous gradient descent. In a potential game, this ensures convergence
to equilibria (which are local minima of f✓ ), but in case of general-sum games more sophisticated
update rules could be employed, see e.g., (Balduzzi et al., 2018). A caveat of P Y ROSETTA scores,
though, – which is also inherited by f✓ – is that assembly structures where constituent proteins are
far away (in 3D space) from each other also have low energy, which is undesirable as a docking
outcome. This was also observed empirically in our early experiments. To discourage this behavior,
we thus add a distance-based penalty d(Xi , XJ ) := ReLU(dres (Xi , XJ ) dths ) which computes
the minimum Euclidean distance between any pair of residues belonging to proteins i and j and
penalizes the agents only when this distance is greater than a threshold dths (in our experiments, this
was 5Å). Overall, the action updates for proteins’ reads as:
                                                         h                X              i
       (Rit+1 , rit+1 ) = (Rit , rit ) + ⌘ t · r(Ri ,ri ) f✓ (Xt , H) + ·   d(Xit , Xjt ) , i 2 [N ], (2)
                                                                    j6=i
where ⌘ is a (decreasing) learning rate, r(Ri ,ri ) is the Riemannian gradient (i.e. living in the
        t

tangent space of SO(3) and T(3)) and is a tunable weight. In practice, the above updates need not
necessarily be simultaneous as one could also update proteins sequentially in a round-robin fashion.

Discussion On one hand, the above approach is quite general and flexible: The discussed gradient-
based update scheme can be carried with any potential function (also fully specified, and not nec-
essarily trained) as long as it is differentiable. Moreover, it can also be easily extended to the case
where each protein has its own objective fi by adding penalty terms that are specific to each protein.
In addition, while not the focus of this work, f✓ can also be used beyond equilibrium computa-
tion, e.g. to characterize the associated energy landscape (see Jin et al. (2023)). On the other hand,
though, it heavily relies on the supervision signal used to train f✓ , which may not accurately reflect
the true underlying game structure. In the next section, we propose an alternative approach that
circumvents the need to utilize this supervision and learns solely from the observed assemblies.

4.3   D IFFUSION G ENERATIVE M ODELS OVER THE P ROTEINS ’ ACTION S PACES

Section 4.2 views assembly structures as local minima of f wrt roto-translation gradients of all
proteins. An equivalent characterization of the assembly structures is interpreting them as sample(s)
    2
      The approach is evidently more general and any scoring/ranking function can be applied. We stick to
P Y ROSETTA because it is the one we use in our experiments.


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


from the mode(s) of the Gibbs distribution p / exp ( f ). Furthermore, it is easy to see that for
any protein i, r(Ri ,ri ) log p = r(Ri ,ri ) f where r(Ri ,ri ) log p 2 TRi SO(3) Tri T(3) are the
Riemannian gradients in the tangent space of SO(3) and T(3) at Ri , ri respectively. This implies
an equivalence between the roto-translation scores of p and the roto-translation gradients wrt f ,
and connects equilibrium computation to sampling for cooperative games. We can thus frame rigid
multimeric docking as a generative modeling problem over the joint roto-translation action space
A using the framework of diffusion generative models. Intuitively, this corresponds to learning f
implicitly through the (perturbed) scores of p.

DGMs over the joint action space A De Bortoli et al. (2022) showed that the theoretical frame-
work of DGMs for standard Euclidean spaces (Section 3) also holds for compact Riemannian man-
ifolds with minor modifications, with the drift function f (xt , t) and the score rxt log p(xt ) being
elements of the tangent space, and the reverse diffusion corresponding to a geodesic random walk
on the manifold. Furthermore, following the arguments in Corso et al. (2023); Rodolà et al. (2019);
Yim et al. (2023) – since A is a product space (more precisely manifold), the forward diffusion pro-
cess proceeds independently on each component manifold, and the tangent space is a direct sum -
             LN
T(R,r) A = i=1 TRi SO(3) Tri T(3), where R = (R1 , R2 , · · · , RN ) and r = (r1 , r2 , · · · , rN ).
This allows us to apply standard denoising score matching objectives (Song & Ermon, 2019; Song
et al., 2020) independently for each component. Moreover, to ensure translation invariance, we keep
one protein fixed with its COM at the origin, and define the diffusion model only over the joint
action space of the remaining N 1 proteins.

Diffusion Processes over SO(3) and T(3) For both SO(3) and T(3), we use the Variance
Exploding qSDE (VE-SDE) formulation (Song et al., 2020) to define the forward noising process
            d[ 2 (t)]                                                                 1 t t
dxt =          dt     dw, where is defined as an exponential schedule (t) = min           max , with
appropriate values for SO(3) and T(3). The transition kernel on SO(3) is the IGSO(3) dis-
tribution (Nikolayev et al., 1997; Leach et al., 2022), which can be sampled in the axis-angle
parameterization of SO(3) as described in (Corso et al., 2023; Yim et al., 2023), by sampling a unit
vector !ˆ uniformly and a ! according to:
                                             X1
               1   cos !                                                  sin ((l + 1/2)!)
      p(!) =             f (w) where f (!) =   (2l + 1) exp( l(l + 1) 2 )                          (3)
                   ⇡                                                          sin(!/2)
                                              l=0

The score of the transition kernel is given by d!   d
                                                                ˆ , which can be precomputed by trun-
                                                      log f (!) !
cating an infinite sum. Sampling from the transition kernel can be accomplished by interpolating
the CDF of p(!). For T(3), the transition kernel is simply the standard Gaussian with variance
  2
    (t) and the score of the transition kernel is simply rt2 / 2 (t).

Computing Equilibria Under the DGM paradigm, computing equilibria is equivalent to sam-
pling using reverse diffusion guided by the learnt score. The reverse diffusion, as mentioned above,
corresponds to a discretized geodesic random walk on the joint action space A.
We note that connections between sampling, SDEs and games (Chen et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2022)
have also been explored in previous works, assuming either an infinite-player setting or a homoge-
nous player one. In contrast, our approach is designed for a finite-player setting and places no
restriction on player types. Furthermore, as discussed in Section 4.4, the parameterization of our
score-network allows us to handle a varying number of players across training and inference.

4.4    A RCHITECTURES

In this section, we summarize the data representations and network architectures utilized by the
proposed approaches. We defer more formal descriptions and additional details to Appendix A.
All our architectures take as inputs the protein point clouds X and residue features A. The point
clouds are then used to dynamically build graphs based on appropriate distance cutoffs between
residues of the same and different proteins. Residue representations are then learnt using message-
passing. The potential network and the score network share similar architectures for the message-
passing layers, with the only differences in the output layers. The potential network predicts a


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


SE(3)-invariant scalar, while the score-network predicts an output in the tangent space T(R,r) A =
LN
  i=1 TRi SO(3)    Tri T(3), where all outputs are SE(3)-equivariant vectors.

Residue Representations Residue representations are learnt using message-passing layers based
on tensor products. These message-passing layers are based on SE(3) convolutions using tensor
products, as implemented in the e3nn library (Geiger & Smidt, 2022). We use separate message-
passing layers for edges within the same protein and between different proteins. These messages are
then aggregated to produce scalar and vector representations for each residue.

Potential Network The output of the potential network f✓ is a SE(3)-invariant scalar, which can
be interpreted as the energy of the system. We first generate edge representations by concatenating
the scalar components of the corresponding residue representations, which are then passed to fully
connected layers followed by a mean-pooling step to compute edge energy contributions. The edge
and residue contributions (computed similarly) are added up to predict the energy.

Score Network For each protein i (except the fixed protein), the score network s✓ takes the corre-
sponding learnt residue representations as input and computes the rotational and translational scores
(i.e. two SE(3)-equivariant outputs) via a tensor-product convolution with the COM of protein i,
as done in Corso et al. (2023). This parameterization allows the score network to handle varying
number of agents across training and inference, and could be of independent interest.

5   E XPERIMENTS
Datasets We use two datasets in our experiments: Docking Benchmark 5.5 (DB5.5) and the
Database of Interacting Protein Structures (DIPS). DB5.5 is a standard dataset used in benchmarking
docking methods and contains 253 assembly structures. DIPS is a larger dataset containing 42826
assembly structures, but only consists of single-chain proteins. While DB5.5 has been traditionally
used in the context of binary protein docking, many examples consist of proteins made up of multi-
ple chains, allowing us to evaluate D OCK G AME for multimeric docking. We use the same splits for
DIPS and DB5.5 datasets as Ganea et al. (2022) for our experiments.

Experimental Setup Following Ganea et al. (2022), we first train our models on the DIPS dataset,
and finetune it on the DB5.5 dataset. Unlike Ganea et al. (2022), however, we train our models at
the granularity of protein chains. For the DIPS dataset, this implies no difference as all examples
comprise two single-chain proteins. However, on the DB5.5 dataset, the examples comprise proteins
with 2-8 chains. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first usage of the DB5.5 dataset for
multimeric docking experiments. More experimental details can be found in Appendix B, with code
available at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/iclr24-dockgame.

Baselines We compare D OCK G AME against traditional binary docking methods ATTRACT,
C LUS P RO, PATCH D OCK, the traditional multimeric docking method M ULTI -LZ ER D, and recent
deep learning methods for binary docking, E QUI D OCK and D IFF D OCK -PP. All baselines except
M ULTI -LZ ERD are binary docking methods. Among other multimeric docking methods, we do not
include any comparisons to A LPHA F OLD -M ULTIMER and S YN D OCK as the DB5.5 dataset is part
of A LPHA F OLD -M ULTIMER’s training set, while S YN D OCK has no open-source implementation
available at the time of writing. More details regarding the baselines can be found in Appendix B.4.

Evaluation DB5.5 has traditionally been used for benchmarking binary docking methods, where
the task is to predict the best relative orientation (or a set thereof) between two proteins (referred to
as ligand and receptor). For such binary docking baselines, we utilize the evaluations as provided
with code in Ganea et al. (2022). However, many examples in DB5.5 consist of proteins that are
subassemblies of multiple chains. This fact is neglected by the aforementioned binary docking,
where the relative configuration between all chains in the subassembly is assumed constant and
already specified. Here, we test D OCK G AME on the significantly harder multimeric docking setting,
where the relative configuration even between chains in the same subassembly needs to be inferred.
Notably, this task has many more degrees of freedom than its binary counterpart, and, to the best of
our knowledge, it has not been considered in the literature.


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Table 1: Assembly Structure Prediction on DB5.5 Dataset. For the first five baselines, the inputs
consist of two proteins, with the goal of predicting their assembly structure (binary docking). In-
stead, D OCK G AME and M ULTI LZ ERD take as input constituent protein chains, and are faced with
the harder multimeric docking task. D OCK G AME -E refers to the D OCK G AME model with the learnt
potential function (Section 4.2), while D OCK G AME -SM, refers to the D OCK G AME model with the
learnt score network (Section 4.3). We use both methods to compute multiple (20 and 40, resp.) as-
semblies for each complex. The rule “(X, filtered by TM-score)” implies that, among the X generated
assemblies, we identify the one with the highest TM-score to the test data and consider all other
generated assemblies within a 0.05 TM-score absolute difference. This copes with the fact that,
while D OCK G AME (and D IFF D OCK -PP) can generate multiple plausible equilibria, DB5.5 test set
contains only a single assembly structure per example. The rule “(X, best C-RMSD)” implies that,
among the X generated assemblies, we consider the one with the smallest C-RMSD.


 Method                        Avg. Runtime            C-RMSD                      TM-score
                                  (in [s])     Mean     Median     Std     Mean     Median      Std
 Binary Docking
 ATTRACT                             570       10.63     12.71    10.05   0.8317    0.8256    0.1668
 C LUS P RO                        15507       8.26      3.38      7.92   0.8318    0.8938    0.1535
 PATCH D OCK                        3290       18.01     18.26    10.12   0.7270    0.7335    0.1237
 E QUI D OCK                          5        14.72      14.1     5.3    0.7191    0.7107    0.1078
 D IFF D OCK -PP
 (40, filtered by TM-score)⇤        80         17.19     16.29     6.79   0.7086    0.7312    0.1142
 (40, best RMSD)                    80         12.81     11.79     4.61   0.7014    0.6773    0.1125
 Multimeric Docking
 D OCK G AME -E
 (20, filtered by TM-score)         182        19.28     17.74     7.37   0.6714    0.6820    0.1543
 (20, best C-RMSD)                  182        14.18     11.54     9.24   0.6182    0.6257    0.1795
 D OCK G AME -SM
 (40, filtered by TM-score)         157        14.12     9.44      4.75   0.7173    0.7773    0.1419
 (40, best C-RMSD)                  157         8.73     8.72      4.68   0.7246    0.7681    0.1578
  M ULTI -LZ ER D                  82753       21.23     20.89     6.82   0.6312    0.6266    0.1352



Metrics Docking methods are commonly evaluated by the Complex Root Mean Squared Devia-
tion (C-RMSD) metric, which measures the deviation between the predicted and ground truth as-
sembly structure after Kabsch alignment (details in Ganea et al. (2022)). We also utilize TM-score
(Zhang & Skolnick, 2005) as an alternative metric to quantify structural alignment.
A fundamental evaluation problem for D OCK G AME and D IFF D OCK -PP is that they can both gener-
ate multiple plausible equilibria, while the test set of DB5.5 only has a single assembly structure per
example. We thus compute summary statistics (as described by Mean, Median and Std. deviation of
C-RMSD and TM-score) on a filtered set of the predicted assemblies, constructed in two ways:
 • Identifying the predicted assembly with the highest TM-score (as an effective measure of struc-
   tural alignment) to the ground truth, and considering all predicted assemblies within a TM-score
   (to ground truth) radius of 0.05. We adopted this heuristic to extract predicted assemblies close
   to the equilibrium present in the data, and filter out different (but still potentially plausible)
   equilibria generated by D OCK G AME.
 • Identifying the predicted assembly with the lowest C-RMSD to the ground truth.


Results and Discussion Despite the harder multimeric docking task, D OCK G AME -SM, trained
only with assembly structures, achieves comparable performance to binary docking methods on both
the C-RMSD and TM-score metrics (Table 1). In particular, the median C-RMSD (more robust to
outliers) for D OCK G AME -SM across both filtered sets is better than all baselines except C LUS P RO
(which however requires a significantly higher runtime). Furthermore, when compared with the
traditional multimeric docking method M ULTI -LZ ER D, both D OCK G AME -E and D OCK G AME -


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                         (a)                                                  (b)

Figure 2: (a) Learned vs. True P Y ROSETTA energy differences, over 50 random decoy pairs for
each complex in DB5.5 test. (b) P Y ROSETTA energetics during game rounds. Median, 25-75th
percentiles, over 20 games for each complex in DB5.5 test.


SM achieve significantly better performance (both in terms of C-RMSD and TM-score), with almost
3 orders of magnitude faster runtimes.
To better assess the performance of D OCK G AME -E, in Figure 2(a) we plot the energy differ-
ences predicted by the trained potential network, versus the respective differences computed by
P Y ROSETTA. We can see that a good approximation of the P Y ROSETTA energy is achieved from
our training set containing only 10 pairs of roto-translation perturbed structures per example. Fur-
thermore, in Figure 2(b) we observe that D OCK G AME -E reduces the P Y ROSETTA energetics during
gradient-based equilbrium computation as desired. This demonstrates the utility of D OCK G AME -E
as a faster, differentiable alternative for traditional scoring methods. However, the improved per-
formance of D OCK G AME -SM relative to D OCK G AME -E highlights that P Y ROSETTA might not
offer the best supervision signal if the goal is predict assembly structures close to the ground truth.
D OCK G AME -SM might be the more preferred alternative, especially in data-rich settings.
Finally, we highlight that while D OCK G AME can naturally predict different assembly structures
(equilibria) for every example, we utilized the aforementioned filtering schemes to compare these to
the only assembly structure present in the dataset. An exciting avenue for future work would be to
explore ways to assess the plausibility of multiple generated equilibria, which is currently lacking.


6   C ONCLUSION

In this work, we presented D OCK G AME, a novel game-theoretic framework for rigid multimeric
protein docking. We view protein docking as a cooperative game between protein chains, described
by a underlying potential whose equilibria constitute the assembly structures. To learn the unknown
game potential and compute equilibria, we propose two approaches – i) a supervised approach using
traditional scoring functions to learn a surrogate potential function, ii) a self-supervised approach
based on diffusion generative models, that learns solely from observed assembly structures. Both
our methods can efficiently decouple the combinatorial docking space into individual protein’s ac-
tion spaces. Moreover, our game-theoretic framework allows us to compute multiple assembly
structures as plausible equilibria. We evaluated D OCK G AME on the harder multimeric docking task
(compared to binary docking baselines) using the DB5.5 dataset, and achieve comparable (or better)
performance on C-RMSD and TM-score metrics, while exhibiting significantly faster runtimes.
While the focus of this work is on cooperative games, the presented ideas are general and can be
extended to general-sum games, allowing us to model the flexibility of proteins, which is missing in
this work. Potential ways to do so would be addition of protein structure specific penalty terms, or
combining diffusion bridges (Holdijk et al., 2022; Somnath et al., 2023) with the proposed diffusion
generative model. Other interesting avenues of future work would be in the evaluation of multiple
equilibria, and developing new metrics in this regard.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


R EFERENCES
David Balduzzi, Sebastien Racaniere, James Martens, Jakob Foerster, Karl Tuyls, and Thore Grae-
  pel. The mechanics of n-player differentiable games. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 354–363, 2018.
Ralph Allan Bradley and Milton E Terry. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the method
  of paired comparisons. Biometrika, 39(3/4):324–345, 1952.
Patrick Bryant, Gabriele Pozzati, Wensi Zhu, Aditi Shenoy, Petras Kundrotas, and Arne Elofsson.
  Predicting the structure of large protein complexes using alphafold and monte carlo tree search.
  Nature communications, 13(1):6028, 2022.
Sidhartha Chaudhury, Sergey Lyskov, and Jeffrey J Gray. Pyrosetta: a script-based interface for im-
  plementing molecular modeling algorithms using rosetta. Bioinformatics, 26(5):689–691, 2010.
Rong Chen, Li Li, and Zhiping Weng. Zdock: an initial-stage protein-docking algorithm. Proteins:
  Structure, Function, and Bioinformatics, 52(1):80–87, 2003.
Tianrong Chen, Ziyi O Wang, Ioannis Exarchos, and Evangelos Theodorou. Large-scale multi-agent
  deep fbsdes. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1740–1748. PMLR, 2021.
Gabriele Corso, Hannes Stärk, Bowen Jing, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Diffdock: Dif-
  fusion steps, twists, and turns for molecular docking. International Conference on Learning
  Representations (ICLR), 2023.
Valentin De Bortoli, Emile Mathieu, Michael Hutchinson, James Thornton, Yee Whye Teh, and
  Arnaud Doucet. Riemannian score-based generative modelling. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 35:2406–2422, 2022.
Sjoerd J de Vries, Christina EM Schindler, Isaure Chauvot de Beauchêne, and Martin Zacharias. A
  web interface for easy flexible protein-protein docking with attract. Biophysical journal, 108(3):
  462–465, 2015.
Juan Esquivel-Rodrı́guez, Yifeng David Yang, and Daisuke Kihara. Multi-lzerd: multiple protein
  docking for asymmetric complexes. Proteins: Structure, Function, and Bioinformatics, 80(7):
  1818–1833, 2012.
Richard Evans, Michael O’Neill, Alexander Pritzel, Natasha Antropova, Andrew Senior, Tim Green,
  Augustin Žı́dek, Russ Bates, Sam Blackwell, Jason Yim, et al. Protein complex prediction with
  alphafold-multimer. biorxiv, pp. 2021–10, 2021.
Octavian-Eugen Ganea, Xinyuan Huang, Charlotte Bunne, Yatao Bian, Regina Barzilay, Tommi S.
  Jaakkola, and Andreas Krause. Independent SE(3)-equivariant models for end-to-end rigid protein
  docking. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://
  openreview.net/forum?id=GQjaI9mLet.
Mario Geiger and Tess Smidt. e3nn: Euclidean neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.09453,
 2022.
Lars Holdijk, Yuanqi Du, Ferry Hooft, Priyank Jaini, Bernd Ensing, and Max Welling. Path integral
  stochastic optimal control for sampling transition paths. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.02149, 2022.
Yuanfeng Ji, Yatao Bian, Guoji Fu, Peilin Zhao, and Ping Luo. Syndock: N rigid protein docking
  via learnable group synchronization, 2023.
Wengong Jin, Siranush Sarkizova, Xun Chen, Nir Hacohen, and Caroline Uhler. Unsupervised
 protein-ligand binding energy prediction via neural euler’s rotation equation. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2301.10814, 2023.
Bowen Jing, Gabriele Corso, Jeffrey Chang, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Torsional dif-
  fusion for molecular conformer generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  35:24240–24253, 2022.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Bowen Jing, Ezra Erives, Peter Pao-Huang, Gabriele Corso, Bonnie Berger, and Tommi Jaakkola.
  Eigenfold: Generative protein structure prediction with diffusion models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2304.02198, 2023.
Mohamed Amine Ketata, Cedrik Laue, Ruslan Mammadov, Hannes Stärk, Menghua Wu, Gabriele
 Corso, Céline Marquet, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi S Jaakkola. Diffdock-pp: Rigid protein-
 protein docking with diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.03889, 2023.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Dima Kozakov, David R Hall, Bing Xia, Kathryn A Porter, Dzmitry Padhorny, Christine Yueh,
  Dmitri Beglov, and Sandor Vajda. The cluspro web server for protein–protein docking. Nature
  protocols, 12(2):255–278, 2017.
Adam Leach, Sebastian M Schmon, Matteo T Degiacomi, and Chris G Willcocks. Denoising diffu-
  sion probabilistic models on so (3) for rotational alignment. In ICLR 2022 Workshop on Geomet-
  rical and Topological Representation Learning, 2022.
Guan-Horng Liu, Tianrong Chen, Oswin So, and Evangelos Theodorou. Deep generalized
  schrödinger bridge. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:9374–9388, 2022.
Efrat Mashiach, Dina Schneidman-Duhovny, Aviyah Peri, Yoli Shavit, Ruth Nussinov, and Haim J
  Wolfson. An integrated suite of fast docking algorithms. Proteins: Structure, Function, and
  Bioinformatics, 78(15):3197–3204, 2010.
Dov Monderer and Lloyd S Shapley. Potential games. Games and economic behavior, 14(1):124–
  143, 1996.
Dmitry I Nikolayev, Tatjana I Savyolov, et al. Normal distribution on the rotation group so (3).
 Texture, Stress, and Microstructure, 29:201–233, 1997.
Zhuoran Qiao, Weili Nie, Arash Vahdat, Thomas F Miller III, and Anima Anandkumar. Dynamic-
  backbone protein-ligand structure prediction with multiscale generative diffusion models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2209.15171, 2022.
Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Stefano Ermon, Christopher D Manning, and Chelsea
  Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2305.18290, 2023.
Emanuele Rodolà, Zorah Lähner, Alexander M Bronstein, Michael M Bronstein, and Justin
  Solomon. Functional maps representation on product manifolds. In Computer Graphics Forum,
  volume 38, pp. 678–689. Wiley Online Library, 2019.
Vignesh Ram Somnath, Matteo Pariset, Ya-Ping Hsieh, Maria Rodriguez Martinez, Andreas Krause,
  and Charlotte Bunne. Aligned diffusion Schrödinger bridges. In Robin J. Evans and Ilya Shpitser
  (eds.), Proceedings of the Thirty-Ninth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, vol-
  ume 216 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1985–1995. PMLR, 31 Jul–04 Aug
  2023.
Yang Song and Stefano Ermon. Generative modeling by estimating gradients of the data distribution.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2011.13456, 2020.
Raphael Townshend, Rishi Bedi, Patricia Suriana, and Ron Dror. End-to-end learning on 3d protein
  structure for interface prediction. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Thom Vreven, Iain H Moal, Anna Vangone, Brian G Pierce, Panagiotis L Kastritis, Mieczyslaw
  Torchala, Raphael Chaleil, Brian Jiménez-Garcı́a, Paul A Bates, Juan Fernandez-Recio, et al.
  Updates to the integrated protein–protein interaction benchmarks: docking benchmark version 5
  and affinity benchmark version 2. Journal of molecular biology, 427(19):3031–3041, 2015.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Joseph L Watson, David Juergens, Nathaniel R Bennett, Brian L Trippe, Jason Yim, Helen E Eise-
  nach, Woody Ahern, Andrew J Borst, Robert J Ragotte, Lukas F Milles, et al. Broadly applicable
  and accurate protein design by integrating structure prediction networks and diffusion generative
  models. BioRxiv, pp. 2022–12, 2022.
Minkai Xu, Lantao Yu, Yang Song, Chence Shi, Stefano Ermon, and Jian Tang. Geodiff: A geo-
 metric diffusion model for molecular conformation generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.02923,
 2022.
Yumeng Yan, Huanyu Tao, Jiahua He, and Sheng-You Huang. The hdock server for integrated
  protein–protein docking. Nature protocols, 15(5):1829–1852, 2020.
Jason Yim, Brian L Trippe, Valentin De Bortoli, Emile Mathieu, Arnaud Doucet, Regina Barzilay,
  and Tommi Jaakkola. Se (3) diffusion model with application to protein backbone generation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.02277, 2023.
Yang Zhang and Jeffrey Skolnick. Tm-align: a protein structure alignment algorithm based on the
  tm-score. Nucleic acids research, 33(7):2302–2309, 2005.


                                                12
