Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


STARC: A G ENERAL F RAMEWORK F OR Q UANTIFYING
D IFFERENCES B ETWEEN R EWARD F UNCTIONS
 Joar Skalse                                                   Lucy Farnik
 Department of Computer Science                                University of Bristol
 Future of Humanity Institute                                  Bristol AI Safety Centre
 Oxford University                                             lucy.farnik@bristol.ac.uk
 joar.skalse@cs.ox.ac.uk

 Sumeet Ramesh Motwani                                     Erik Jenner
 Berkeley Artificial Intelligence Research                 Berkeley Artificial Intelligence Research
 University of California, Berkeley                        University of California, Berkeley
 motwani@berkeley.edu                                      jenner@berkeley.edu

 Adam Gleave                                 Alessandro Abate
 FAR AI, Inc.                                Department of Computer Science
 adam@far.ai                                 Oxford University
                                             aabate@cs.ox.ac.uk



                                             A BSTRACT

         In order to solve a task using reinforcement learning, it is necessary to first for-
         malise the goal of that task as a reward function. However, for many real-world
         tasks, it is very difficult to manually specify a reward function that never incen-
         tivises undesirable behaviour. As a result, it is increasingly popular to use reward
         learning algorithms, which attempt to learn a reward function from data. How-
         ever, the theoretical foundations of reward learning are not yet well-developed. In
         particular, it is typically not known when a given reward learning algorithm with
         high probability will learn a reward function that is safe to optimise. This means
         that reward learning algorithms generally must be evaluated empirically, which is
         expensive, and that their failure modes are difficult to anticipate in advance. One of
         the roadblocks to deriving better theoretical guarantees is the lack of good methods
         for quantifying the difference between reward functions. In this paper we provide
         a solution to this problem, in the form of a class of pseudometrics on the space
         of all reward functions that we call STARC (STAndardised Reward Comparison)
         metrics. We show that STARC metrics induce both an upper and a lower bound
         on worst-case regret, which implies that our metrics are tight, and that any metric
         with the same properties must be bilipschitz equivalent to ours. Moreover, we
         also identify a number of issues with reward metrics proposed by earlier works.
         Finally, we evaluate our metrics empirically, to demonstrate their practical efficacy.
         STARC metrics can be used to make both theoretical and empirical analysis of
         reward learning algorithms both easier and more principled.



1   I NTRODUCTION

To solve a sequential decision-making task with reinforcement learning or automated planning, we
must first formalise that task using a reward function (Sutton & Barto, 2018; Russell & Norvig, 2020).
However, for many tasks, it is extremely difficult to manually specify a reward function that captures
the task in the intended way. To resolve this issue, it is increasingly popular to use reward learning,
which attempts to learn a reward function from data. There are many techniques for doing this. For
example, it is possible to use preferences between trajectories (e.g. Christiano et al., 2017), expert
demonstrations (e.g. Ng & Russell, 2000), or a combination of the two (e.g. Ibarz et al., 2018).


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To evaluate a reward learning method, we must quantify the difference between the learnt reward
function and the underlying true reward function. However, doing this is far from straightforward.
A simple method might be to measure their L2 -distance. However, this is unsatisfactory, because
two reward functions can have a large L2 -distance, even if they induce the same ordering of policies,
or a small L2 -distance, even if they induce the opposite ordering of policies.1 Another option is to
evaluate the learnt reward function on a test set. However, this is also unsatisfactory, because it can
only guarantee that the learnt reward function is accurate on a given data distribution, and when
the reward function is optimised we necessarily incur a distributional shift (after which the learnt
reward function may no longer match the true reward function). Yet another option is to optimise
the learnt reward function, and evaluate the obtained policy according to the true reward function.
However, this is also unsatisfactory, both because it is very expensive, and because it makes it difficult
to separate issues with the policy optimisation process from issues with the reward learning algorithm.
Moreover, because this method is purely empirical, it cannot be used for theoretical work. These
issues make it challenging to evaluate reward learning algorithms in a way that is principled and
robust. This in turn makes it difficult to anticipate in what situations a reward learning algorithm
might fail, or what their failure modes might look like. It also makes it difficult to compare different
reward learning algorithms against each other, without getting results that may be heavily dependent
on the experimental setup. These issues limit the applicability of reward learning in practice.
In this paper, we introduce STAndardised Reward Comparison (STARC) metrics, which is a family of
pseudometrics that quantify the difference between reward functions in a principled way. Moreover,
we demonstrate that STARC metrics enjoy strong theoretical guarantees. In particular, we show that
STARC metrics induce an upper bound on the worst-case regret that can be induced under arbitrary
policy optimisation, which means that a small STARC distance guarantees that two reward functions
behave in a similar way. Moreover, we also demonstrate that STARC metrics induce a lower bound
on worst-case regret. This has the important consequence that any reward function distance metric
which induces both an upper and a lower bound on worst-case regret must be bilipschitz equivalent
to STARC metrics, which in turn means that they (in a certain sense) are unique. In particular, we
should not expect to be able to improve on them in any substantial way. In addition to this, we also
evaluate STARC metrics experimentally, and demonstrate that their theoretical guarantees translate
into compelling empirical performance. STARC metrics are cheap to compute, which means that they
can be used for empirical evaluation of reward learning algorithms. Moreover, they can be calculated
from a closed-form expression, which means that they are also suitable for use in theoretical analysis.
As such, STARC metrics enable us to evaluate reward learning methods in a way that is both easier
and more theoretically principled than relevant alternatives. Our work thus contributes towards
building a more rigorous foundation for the field of reward learning.

1.1    R ELATED W ORK

There are two existing papers that study the problem of how to quantify the difference between
reward functions. The first is Gleave et al. (2020), which proposes a distance metric that they call
Equivalent-Policy Invariant Comparison (EPIC). They show that the EPIC-distance between two
reward functions induces a regret bound for optimal policies. The second paper is Wulfe et al. (2022),
which proposes a distance metric that they call Dynamics-Aware Reward Distance (DARD). Unlike
EPIC, DARD incorporates information about the transition dynamics of the environment. This means
that DARD might give a tighter measurement, in situations where the transition dynamics are known.
Unlike Gleave et al. (2020), they do not derive any regret bound for DARD.
Our work extends the work by Gleave et al. (2020) and Wulfe et al. (2022) in several important
ways. First of all, Wulfe et al. (2022) do not provide any regret bounds, which is unsatisfactory for
theoretical work, and the upper regret bound that is provided by Gleave et al. (2020) is both weaker
and less general than ours. In particular, their bound only considers optimal policies, whereas our
bound covers all pairs of policies (with optimal policies being a special case). Moreover, we also
argue that Gleave et al. (2020) have chosen to quantify regret in a way that fails to capture what we
care about in practice. In Appendix A, we provide an extensive theoretical analysis of EPIC, and show
    1
      For example, given an arbitrary reward function R and an arbitrary constant c, we have that R and c ¨ R
have the same ordering of policies, even though their L2 -distance may be arbitrarily large. Similarly, for any ϵ,
we have that ϵ ¨ R and ´ϵ ¨ R have the opposite ordering of policies, unless R is constant, even though their
L2 -distance may be arbitrarily small.


                                                        2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


that it lacks many of the important theoretical guarantees enjoyed by STARC metrics. In particular,
we demonstrate that EPIC fails to induce either an upper or lower bound on worst-case regret (as we
define it). We also include an extensive discussion and criticism of DARD in Appendix B. Moreover,
in Section 4, we provide experimental data that shows that STARC metrics in practice can have a
much tighter correlation with worst-case regret than both EPIC and DARD. This means that STARC
metrics both can attain better empirical performance and give stronger theoretical guarantees than the
pseudometrics proposed by earlier work.
It is important to note that EPIC is designed to be independent of the environment dynamics, whereas
both STARC and DARD depend on the transition dynamics. This issue is discussed in Section 2.3.
The question of what happens if one reward function is optimised instead of a different reward
function is considered by many previous works. A notable example is Ng et al. (1999), which
shows that if two reward functions differ by a type of transformation they call potential shaping,
then they have the same optimal policies in all environments. Potential shaping is also studied by
e.g. Jenner et al. (2022). Another example is Skalse et al. (2022b), which shows that if two reward
functions R1 , R2 have the property that there are no policies π1 , π2 such that J1 pπ1 q ą J1 pπ2 q and
J2 pπ1 q ă J2 pπ2 q, then either R1 and R2 induce the same ordering of policies, or at least one of them
assigns the same reward to all policies. Zhuang & Hadfield-Menell (2021) consider proxy rewards
that depend on a strict subset of the features which are relevant to the true reward, and then show that
optimising such a proxy in some cases may be arbitrarily bad, given certain assumptions. Skalse et al.
(2022a) derive necessary and sufficient conditions for when two reward functions are equivalent, for
the purposes of computing certain policies or other mathematical objects. Also relevant is Everitt
et al. (2017), which studies the related problem of reward corruption, and Pan et al. (2022), which
considers natural choices of proxy rewards for several environments. Unlike these works, we are
interested in the question of quantifying the difference between reward functions.

1.2    P RELIMINARIES

A Markov Decision Processes (MDP) is a tuple pS, A, τ, µ0 , R, γq where S is a set of states, A is a
set of actions, τ : SˆA Ñ ∆pSq is a transition function, µ0 P ∆pSq is an initial state distribution,
R : SˆAˆS Ñ R is a reward function, and γ P p0, 1q is a discount rate. A policy is a function
π : S Ñ ∆pAq. A trajectory ξ “ xs0 , a0 , s1 , a1 . . . y is a possible path in     ř8an MDP. The return
function G gives the cumulative discounted reward of a trajectory, Gpξq “ t“0 γ t Rpst , at , st`1 q,
and the evaluation function J gives the expected trajectory return given a policy, Jpπq “ Eξ„π rGpξqs.
A policy maximising J is an optimal policy. The value function V π : S Ñ R of a policy encodes the
expected future discounted reward from each state when following that policy. We use R to refer to
the set of all reward functions. When talking about multiple rewards, we give each reward a subscript
Ri , and use Ji , Gi , and Viπ , to denote Ri ’s evaluation function, return function, and π-value function.
In this paper, we assume that all states are reachable under τ and µ0 . Note that if this is not the case,
then all unreachable states can simply be removed from S. Our theoretical results also assume that S
and A are finite. However, STARC metrics can still be computed in continuous environments.
Given a set X, a function d : X ˆ X Ñ R is called a pseudometric if dpx1 , x1 q “ 0, dpx1 , x2 q ě 0,
dpx1 , x2 q “ dpx2 , x1 q, and dpx1 , x3 q ď dpx1 , x2 q ` dpx2 , x3 q, for all x1 , x2 , x2 P X. Given two
pseudometrics d1 , d2 on X, if there are constants ℓ, u such that ℓ ¨ d1 px1 , x2 q ď d2 px1 , x2 q ď
u ¨ d1 px1 , x2 q for all x1 , x2 P X, then d1 and d2 are bilipschitz equivalent. Given a vector space V ,
a function n : V Ñ R is a norm if npv1 q ě 0, npv1 q “ 0 ðñ v1 “ 0, npc ¨ v1 q “ |c| ¨ npv1 q,
and npv1 ´ v2 q ď npv1 q ` npv2 q for all v1 , v2 P V , c P R. Given a norm n, we can define a
(pseudo)metric m as mpx, yq “ np|x ´ y|q. In a mild abuse of notation, we will often denote this
metric using n directly, so that npx, yq “ np|x ´ y|q. For any p P N, Lp is the norm given by
Lp pvq “ p |vi |p q1{p . A norm n is a weighted version of n1 if n “ n1 ˝ M for a diagonal matrix M .
             ř

We will use potential shaping, which was first introduced by Ng et al. (1999). First, a potential
function is a function Φ : S Ñ R. Given a discount γ, we say that R1 and R2 differ by potential
shaping if for some potential Φ, we have that R2 ps, a, s1 q “ R1 ps, a, s1 q ` γ ¨ Φps1 q ´ Φpsq. We
also use S 1 -redistribution (as defined by Skalse et al., 2022a). Given a transition function τ , we say
that R1 and R2 differ by S 1 -redistribution if ES 1 „τ ps,aq rR2 ps, a, S 1 qs “ ES 1 „τ ps,aq rR1 ps, a, S 1 qs.
Finally, we say that R1 and R2 differ by positive linear scaling if R2 ps, a, s1 q “ c ¨ R1 ps, a, s1 q for
some positive constant c. We will also combine these transformations. For example, we say that R1


                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


and R2 differ by potential shaping and S 1 -redistribution if it is possible to produce R2 from R1 by
applying potential shaping and S 1 -redistribution (in any order). The cases where R1 and R2 differ by
(for example) potential shaping and positive linear scaling, etc, are defined analogously. Finally, we
will use the following result, proven by Skalse & Abate (2023) in their Theorem 2.6:
Proposition 1. pS, A, τ, µ0 , R1 , γq and pS, A, τ, µ0 , R2 , γq have the same ordering of policies if and
only if R1 and R2 differ by potential shaping, positive linear scaling, and S 1 -redistribution.

The “ordering of policies” is the ordering induced by the policy evaluation function J.
EPIC (Gleave et al., 2020) is defined relative to a distribution DS over S and a distribution DA
over A, which must give support to all states and actions. It is computed in several steps. First, let
C EPIC : R Ñ R be the function where C EPIC pRqps, a, s1 q is equal to
                     Rps, a, s1 q ` ErγRps1 , A, S 1 q ´ Rps, A, S 1 q ´ γRpS, A, S 1 qs,
where S, S 1 „ DS and A „ DA . Note that S and S 1 are sampled independently.
                                                                           a               Next, let the
“Pearson distance” between two random variables X and Y be defined as p1 ´ ρpX, Y qq{2, where
ρ denotes the Pearson correlation. Then the EPIC-distance DEPIC pR1 , R2 q is defined to be the
Pearson distance between C EPIC pR1 qpS, A, S 1 q and C EPIC pR2 qpS, A, S 1 q, where again S, S 1 „ DS
and A „ DA .2 Note that DEPIC is implicitly parameterised by DS and DA .
To better understand how EPIC works, it is useful to know that it can be equivalently expressed as
                                              C EPIC pR1 q          C EPIC pR2 q
                                        ˆ                                           ˙
               EPIC             1
             D      pR1 , R2 q “ ¨ L2,D                       ,                       ,
                                2          L2,D pC EPIC pR1 qq L2,D pC EPIC pR2 qq
where L2,D is a weighted L2 -norm. For details, see Appendix E. Here C EPIC maps all reward
functions that differ by potential shaping to a single representative in their equivalence class. This,
combined with the normalisation step, ensures that reward functions which only differ by potential
shaping and positive linear scaling have distance 0 under DEPIC .
DARD (Wulfe et al., 2022) is also defined relative to a distribution DS over S and a distribution DA
over A, which must give support to all actions and all reachable states, but it also requires a transition
function τ . Let C DARD : R Ñ R be the function where C DARD pRqps, a, s1 q is
                    Rps, a, s1 q ` ErγRps1 , A, S 2 q ´ Rps, A, S 1 q ´ γRpS 1 , A, S 2 qs,
where A „ DA , S 1 „ τ ps, Aq, and S 2 „ τ ps1 , Aq. Then the DARD-distance DDARD pR1 , R2 q
is defined to be the Pearson distance between C DARD pR1 qpS, A, S 1 q and C DARD pR2 qpS, A, S 1 q,
where again S, S 1 „ DS and A „ DA . Note that DDARD is parameterised by DS , DA , and τ .

2     STARC M ETRICS
In this section we formally define STARC metrics, and provide several examples of such metrics.

2.1   A F ORMAL D EFINITION OF STARC M ETRICS

STARC metrics are defined relative to an environment, consisting of a set of states S, a set of actions
A, a transition function τ , an initial state distribution µ0 , and a discount factor γ. This means that
many of our definitions and theorems are implicitly parameterised by these objects, even when this
dependency is not spelled out explicitly. Our results hold for any choice of S, A, τ , µ0 , and γ, as
long as they satisfy the assumptions given in Section 1.2. See also Section 2.3.
STARC metrics are computed in several steps, where the first steps collapse certain equivalence
classes in R to a single representative, and the last step measures a distance. The reason for this is
that two distinct reward functions can share the exact same preferences between all policies. When
this is the case, we want them to be treated as equivalent. This is achieved by standardising the reward
functions in various ways before the distance is finally measured. First, recall that neither potential
shaping nor S 1 -redistribution affects the policy ordering in any way. This motivates the first step:
    2
      Gleave et al. (2020) allow different distributions to be used when computing C EPIC pRq and when taking
the Pearson distance. However, doing this breaks some of their theoretical results. For details, see Appendix E.


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Definition 1. A function c : R Ñ R is a canonicalisation function if c is linear, cpRq and R
only differ by potential shaping and S 1 -redistribution for all R P R, and for all R1 , R2 P R,
cpR1 q “ cpR2 q if and only if R1 and R2 only differ by potential shaping and S 1 -redistribution.

Note that we require c to be linear. Note also that C EPIC and C DARD are not canonicalisation func-
tions in our sense, because we here require canonicalisation functions to simultaniously standardise
both potential shaping and S 1 -redistribution, whereas C EPIC and C DARD only standardise potential
shaping. In Section 2.2, we provide examples of canonicalisation functions. Let us next introduce the
functions that we use to compute a distance:
Definition 2. A metric m : R ˆ R Ñ R is admissible if there exists a norm p and two (positive)
constants u, ℓ such that ℓ ¨ ppx, yq ď mpx, yq ď u ¨ ppx, yq for all x, y P R.

A metric is admissible if it is bilipschitz equivalent to a norm. Any norm is an admissible metric,
though there are admissible metrics which are not norms.3 Recall also that all norms are bilipschitz
equivalent on any finite-dimensional vector space. This means that if m satisfies Definition 2 for one
norm, then it satisfies it for all norms. We can now define our class of reward metrics:
Definition 3. A function d : R ˆ R Ñ R is a STARC metric (STAndardised Reward Comparison) if
there is a canonicalisation function c, a function n that is a norm on Impcq, and a metric m that is
admissible on Impsq, such that dpR1 , R2 q “ mpspR1 q, spR2 qq, where spRq “ cpRq{npcpRqq when
npcpRqq ‰ 0, and cpRq otherwise.

Intuitively speaking, c ensures that all reward functions which differ by potential shaping and S 1 -
redistribution are considered to be equivalent, and division by n ensures that positive scaling is
ignored as well. Note that if npcpRqq “ 0, then cpRq assigns 0 reward to every transition. Note also
that Impcq is the image of c, if c is applied to the entirety of R. If n is a norm on R, then n is also a
norm on Impcq, but there are functions which are norms on Impcq but not on R (c.f. Proposition 4).
In Appendix C, we provide a geometric intuition for how STARC metrics work.

2.2      E XAMPLES OF STARC M ETRICS

In this section, we give several examples of STARC metrics. We begin by showing how to construct
canonicalisation functions. We first give a simple and straightforward method:
Proposition 2. For any policy π, the function c : R Ñ R given by
                                                “                                      ‰
                 cpRqps, a, s1 q “ ES 1 „τ ps,aq Rps, a, S 1 q ´ V π psq ` γV π pS 1 q
is a canonicalisation function. Here V π is computed under the reward function R given as input to c.
We call this function Value-Adjusted Levelling (VAL).

The proof, as well as all other proofs, are given in the Appendix. Proposition 2 gives us an easy
way to make canonicalisation functions, which are also easy to evaluate whenever V π is easy to
approximate. We next give another example of canonicalisation functions:
Definition 4. A canonicalisation function c is minimal for a norm n if for all R we have that
npcpRqq ď npR1 q for all R1 such that R and R1 only differ by potential shaping and S 1 -redistribution.

Minimal canonicalisation functions give rise to tighter regret bounds (c.f. Section 3 and Appendix F).
It is not a given that minimal canonicalisation functions exist for a given norm n, or that they are
unique. However, for any weighted L2 -norm, this is the case:
Proposition 3. For any weighted L2 -norm, a minimal canonicalisation function exists and is unique.

A STARC metric can use any canonicalisation function c. Moreover, the normalisation step can
use any function n that is a norm on Impcq. This does of course include the L1 -norm, L2 -norm,
L8 -norm, and so on. We next show that maxπ Jpπq ´ minπ Jpπq also is a norm on Impcq:
Proposition 4. If c is a canonicalisation function, then the function n : R Ñ R given by npRq “
maxπ Jpπq ´ minπ Jpπq is a norm on Impcq.
   3
       For example, the unit ball of m does not have to be convex, or symmetric around the origin.


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


For the final step we of course have that any norm is an admissible metric, though some other metrics
are admissible as well.4 To obtain a STARC metric, we then pick any canonicalisation function c,
norm n, and admissible metric m, and combine them as described in Definition 3. Which choice of
c, n, and m is best in a given situation may depend on multiple considerations, such as how easy
they are to compute, how easy they are to work with theoretically, or how well they together track
worst-case regret (c.f. Section 3 and 4).

2.3   U NKNOWN T RANSITION DYNAMICS AND C ONTINUOUS E NVIRONMENTS

STARC metrics depend on the transition function τ , through the definition of canonicalisation
functions (since S 1 -redistribution depends on τ ). Moreover, τ is often unknown in practice. However,
it is important to note that while STARC metrics depend on τ , there are STARC metrics that can be
computed without direct access to τ . For example, the VAL canonicalisation function (Proposition 2)
only requires that we can sample from τ , which is always possible in the reinforcement learning
setting. Moreover, if we want to evaluate a learnt reward function in an environment that is different
from the training environment, then we can simply use the τ from the evaluation environment. As
such, we do not consider the dependence on τ to be a meaningful limitation. Nonetheless, it is
possible to define STARC-like pseudometrics that do not depend on τ at all, and such pseudometrics
also have some theoretical guarantees (albeit guarantees that are weaker than those enjoyed by
STARC metrics). This option is discussed in Appendix F.3.
Moreover, we assume that S and A are finite, but many interesting environments are continuous.
However, it is important to note that while our theoretical results assume that S and A are finite, it is
still straightforward to compute and use STARC metrics in continuous environments (for example,
using the VAL canonicalisation function from Proposition 2). We discuss this issue in more detail in
Appendix D. In Section 4, we also provide experimental data from a continuous environment.

3     T HEORETICAL R ESULTS

In this section, we prove that STARC metrics enjoy several desirable theoretical guarantees. First, we
note that all STARC metrics are pseudometrics on the space of all reward functions, R:
Proposition 5. All STARC metrics are pseudometrics on R.

This means that STARC metrics give us a well-defined notion of a “distance” between rewards. Next,
we characterise the cases when STARC metrics assign two rewards a distance of zero:
Proposition 6. All STARC metrics have the property that dpR1 , R2 q “ 0 if and only if R1 and R2
induce the same ordering of policies.

This means that STARC metrics consider two reward functions to be equivalent, exactly when those
reward functions induce exactly the same ordering of policies. This is intuitive and desirable.
For a pseudometric d on R to be useful, it is crucial that it induces an upper bound on worst-case
regret. Specifically, we want it to be the case that if dpR1 , R2 q is small, then the impact of using R2
instead of R1 should also be small. When a pseudometric has this property, we say that it is sound:
Definition 5. A pseudometric d on R is sound if there exists a positive constant U , such that for any
reward functions R1 and R2 , if two policies π1 and π2 satisfy that J2 pπ2 q ě J2 pπ1 q, then
                  J1 pπ1 q ´ J1 pπ2 q ď U ¨ pmax J1 pπq ´ min J1 pπqq ¨ dpR1 , R2 q.
                                               π             π


Let us unpack this definition. J1 pπ1 q ´ J1 pπ2 q is the regret, as measured by R1 , of using policy π2
instead of π1 . Division by maxπ J1 pπq ´ minπ J1 pπq normalises this quantity based on the total
range of R1 (though the term is put on the right-hand side of the inequality, instead of being used
as a denominator, in order to avoid division by zero when maxπ J1 pπq ´ minπ J1 pπq “ 0). The
condition that J2 pπ2 q ě J2 pπ1 q says that R2 prefers π2 over π1 . Taken together, this means that a
pseudometric d on R is sound if dpR1 , R2 q gives an upper bound on the maximal regret that could
  4
    For example, if mpx, yq is the angle between x and y when x, y ‰ 0, and we define mp0, 0q “ 0 and
mpx, 0q “ π{2 for x ‰ 0, then m is also admissible, even though m is not a norm.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


be incurred under R1 if an arbitrary policy π1 is optimised to another policy π2 according to R2 . It is
also worth noting that this includes the special case when π1 is optimal under R1 and π2 is optimal
under R2 . Our first main result is that all STARC metrics are sound:
Theorem 1. All STARC metrics are sound.

This means that any STARC metric gives us an upper bound on worst-case regret. Next, we will
show that STARC metrics also induce a lower bound on worst-case regret. It may not be immediately
obvious why this property is desirable. To see why this is the case, note that if a pseudometric d on
R does not induce a lower bound on worst-case regret, then there are reward functions that have a
low worst-case regret, but a large distance under d. This would in turn mean that d is not tight, and
that it should be possible to improve upon it. In other words, if we want a small distance under d to
be both sufficient and necessary for low worst-case regret, then d must induce both an upper and a
lower bound on worst-case regret. As such, we also introduce the following definition:
Definition 6. A pseudometric d on R is complete if there exists a positive constant L, such that for
any reward functions R1 and R2 , there exist two policies π1 and π2 such that J2 pπ2 q ě J2 pπ1 q and
                  J1 pπ1 q ´ J1 pπ2 q ě L ¨ pmax J1 pπq ´ min J1 pπqq ¨ dpR1 , R2 q,
                                              π              π

and moreover, if both maxπ J1 pπq ´ minπ J1 pπq “ 0 and maxπ J2 pπq ´ minπ J2 pπq “ 0, then we
have that dpR1 , R2 q “ 0.

The last condition is included to rule out certain pathological edge-cases. Intuitively, if d is sound,
then a small d is sufficient for low regret, and if d is complete, then a small d is necessary for low
regret. Soundness implies the absence of false positives, and completeness the absence of false
negatives. Our second main result is that all STARC metrics are complete:
Theorem 2. All STARC metrics are complete.

Theorems 1 and 2 together imply that, for any STARC metric d, we have that a small value of d is
both necessary and sufficient for a low regret. This means that STARC metrics, in a certain sense,
exactly capture what it means for two reward functions to be similar, and that we should not expect it
to be possible to significantly improve upon them. We can make this claim formal as follows:
Proposition 7. Any pseudometrics on R that are both sound and complete are bilipschitz equivalent.

This implies that all STARC metrics are bilipschitz equivalent. Moreover, any other pseudometric on
R that induces both an upper and a lower bound on worst-case regret (as we define it) must also be
bilipschitz equivalent to STARC metrics.
In Appendix A and B, we provide an extensive analysis of both EPIC and DARD, and show that they
fail to induce similar theoretical guarantees.

4     E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
In this section we present our experimental results. First, we demonstrate that STARC metrics provide
a better estimate of regret than EPIC and DARD in randomly generated MDPs. We then evaluate a
STARC metric in a continuous environment.

4.1   L ARGE N UMBERS O F S MALL R ANDOM MDP S

Our first experiment compares several STARC metrics to EPIC, DARD, and a number of other non-
STARC baselines. In total, our experiment covered 223 different pseudometrics (including rollout
regret), derived by creating different combinations of canonicalisation functions, normalisations, and
distance metrics. For details, see Appendix G.3. For each pseudometric, we generated a large number
of random MDPs, and then measured how well the pseudometric correlates with regret across this
distribution. The regret is defined analogously to Definition 5 and 6, except that only optimal policies
are considered – for details, see Appendix G.2. We used MDPs with 32 states, 4 actions, γ “ 0.95, a
uniform initial state distribution, and randomly sampled sparse non-deterministic transition functions,
and for each MDP, we generated several random reward functions. For details on the random
generation process, see Appendix G. We compared 49,152 reward function pairs (Appendix G.4), and


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


used these to estimate how well each pseudometric correlates with regret. We show these correlations
in Figure 1, and the full data is given in a table in Appendix H. In Appendix H.1, we also provide
tables that indicate the impact of changing the metric m or the normalisation function n.
The canonicalisation functions we used were None (which simply skips the canonicalisation step),
C EPIC , C DARD , MinimalPotential (which is the minimal “canonicalisation” that removes
potential shaping but not S 1 -redistribution, and therefore is easier to compute), VALPotential
(which is given by Rps, a, s1 q ´ V π psq ` γV π ps1 q), and VAL (defined in Proposition 2). For
both C EPIC and C DARD , both DS and DA were chosen to be uniform over S and A. For both
VALPotential and VAL, π was chosen to be the uniformly random policy. Note that VAL is the
only canonicalisation which removes both potential shaping and S 1 -redistribution, and thus the only
one that meets Definition 1 — for this reason, it is listed as “STARC-VAL” in Figure 1. For the full
details about which pseudometrics were chosen, and why, see Appendix G.3

                                                                                  None
                                          0.8                                     EPIC
                                                                                  DARD
                                                                                  MinimalPotential
                                                                                  VALPotential
                                          0.6                                     STARC-VAL
                Correlation with regret


                                          0.4


                                          0.2


                                          0.0


Figure 1: This figure displays the correlation to regret for several pseudometrics. Each point represents
one pseudometric, i.e. one unique combination of canonicalisation c, normalisation n, and distance
metric m. They are grouped together based on their canonicalisation function, with each column
corresponding to a different canonicalisation function. Pseudometrics which skip canonicalisation or
normalisation are shown in grey. The versions of EPIC and DARD that use the L2 norm for both
normalisation n and distance metric m are highlighted in red, as these are the original versions given
in Gleave et al. (2020) and Wulfe et al. (2022). The STARC metrics, which are canonicalised using
VAL, are reliably better indicators of regret than the other pseudometrics.

As we can see, the STARC metrics based on VAL perform noticeably better than all pre-existing
pseudometrics – for instance, the correlation of EPIC to regret is 0.778, DARD’s correlation is 0.782,
while VAL’s correlation is 0.856 (when using L2 for both n and m, which is the same as EPIC and
DARD). Out of the 10 best pseudometrics, 8 use VAL (and the other 2 both use VALPotential).
Moreover, for each choice of n and m, we have that the VAL canonicalisation performs better than
the EPIC canonicalisation in 40 out of 42 cases.5 Taken together, these results suggest that STARC
metrics robustly perform better than the existing alternatives.
Our results also suggest that the choice of normalisation function n and metric m can have a significant
impact on the pseudometric’s accuracy. For instance, when canonicalising with VAL, it is better to
use the L1 norm than the L2 norm for both normalisation and taking the distance – this increases
the correlation with regret from 0.856 to 0.873. Another example is the EPIC canonicalisation –
when paired with the weighted L8 norm for normalisation and the (unweighted) L8 norm for taking
the distance, instead of using the L2 norm for both, its correlation decreases from 0.778 to 0.052.
As we can see in Figure 1, this effect appears to be more prominent for the non-STARC metrics.
Another thing to note is that it seems like VALPotential can perform as well as VAL despite
not canonicalising for S 1 -redistribution, but only when a (τ -)weighted norm is used. This may be
because τ -weighted norms set all impossible transitions to 0, and reduce the impact of very unlikely
transitions; plausibly, this could in practice be similar to canonicalising for S 1 -redistribution. When
using VAL, L1 was the best unweighted norm for both m and n in our experiment.
   5
     The only exceptions are when no normalisation is used and m “ L8 , and when n “ weighted-L2
and m “ weighted-L8 . However, in the first case, both the EPIC-based and the VAL-based pseudometric
perform badly (since no normalisation is used), and in the second case, the difference between them is not large.


                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


4.2   T HE R EACHER E NVIRONMENT

Our next experiment estimates the distance between several hand-crafted reward functions in the
Reacher environment from MuJoCo (Todorov et al., 2012). This is a deterministic environment with
an 11-dimensional continuous state space and a 2-dimensional continuous action space. The reward
functions we used are:
      1. GroundTruth: The Euclidean distance to the target, plus a penalty term for large actions.
      2. PotentialShaped: GroundTruth with random potential shaping.
      3. SecondPeak: We create a second target in the environment, and reward the agent based
         on both its distance to this target, and to the original target, but give a greater weight to the
         original target.
      4. Random: A randomly generated reward, implemented as an affine transformation from
         s, a, s1 to real numbers with the weights and bias randomly initialised.
      5. Negative: Returns ´GroundTruth.
We expect GroundTruth to be equivalent to PotentialShaped, similar to SecondPeak,
orthogonal to Random, and opposite to Negative. We used the VAL canonicalisation function
with the uniform policy, and normalised and took the distance with the L2 -norm. This pseudometric
was then estimated through sampling; full details can be found in Appendix D and I. The results of this
experiment are given in Table 1. As we can see, the relative ordering of the reward functions match
what we expect. However, the magnitudes of the estimated distances are noticeably larger than their
real values; for example, the actual distance between GroundTruth and PotentialShaped is
0, but it is estimated as « 0.9. The reason for this is likely that the estimation involves summing over
absolute values, which makes all noise positive. Nonetheless, for the purposes of ranking the rewards,
this is not fundamentally problematic.

                PotentialShaped            SecondPeak          Random      Negative
                0.8968                     1.2570              1.3778      1.706

Table 1: This figure displays the estimated distance (using c “ VAL, n “ L2 , and m “ L2 ) between
each reward function in the Reacher environment and the GroundTruth reward function.


5     D ISCUSSION
We have introduced STARC metrics, and demonstrated that they provide compelling theoretical
guarantees. In particular, we have shown that they are both sound and complete, which means that
they induce both an upper and a lower bound on worst-case regret. As such, a small STARC distance
is both necessary and sufficient to ensure that two reward functions induce a similar ordering of
policies. Moreover, any two pseudometrics that are both sound and complete must be bilipschitz
equivalent. This means that any pseudometric on R that has the same theoretical guarantees as
STARC metrics must be equivalent to STARC metrics. This means that we have provided what
is essentially a complete answer to the question of how to correctly measure the distance between
reward functions. Moreover, our experiments show that STARC metrics have a noticeably better
empirical performance than any existing pseudometric in the current literature, for a wide range of
environments. This means that STARC metrics offer direct practical advantages, in addition to their
theoretical guarantees. In addition to this, STARC metrics are both easy to compute, and easy to
work with mathematically. As such, STARC metrics will be useful for both empirical and theoretical
work on the analysis and evaluation of reward learning algorithms.
Our work can be extended in a number of ways. First of all, it would be desirable to establish more
conclusively which STARC metrics work best in practice. Our experiments are indicative, but not
conclusive. Secondly, our theoretical results assume that S and A are finite; it would be desirable to
generalise them to continuous environments. Third, we use a fairly strong definition of regret. We
could consider some weaker criterion, that may allow for the creation of more permissive reward
metrics. Finally, our work considers the MDP setting – it would be interesting to also consider other
classes of environments. We believe that the multi-agent setting would be of particular interest, since
it introduces new and more complex dynamics that are not present in the case of MDPs.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors wish to acknowledge and thank the financial support of the UK Research and Innovation
(UKRI) [Grant ref EP/S022937/1] and the University of Bristol.

R EFERENCES
Paul Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom B. Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
  reinforcement learning from human preferences, 2017.
Tom Everitt, Victoria Krakovna, Laurent Orseau, Marcus Hutter, and Shane Legg. Reinforcement
  learning with a corrupted reward channel. CoRR, abs/1705.08417, 2017. URL http://arxiv.
  org/abs/1705.08417.
Eugene A. Feinberg and Uriel G. Rothblum. Splitting randomized stationary policies in total-reward
  markov decision processes. Mathematics of Operations Research, 37(1):129–153, 2012. ISSN
  0364765X, 15265471. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/41412346.
Adam Gleave, Michael Dennis, Shane Legg, Stuart Russell, and Jan Leike. Quantifying differences
  in reward functions, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.13900.
Borja Ibarz, Jan Leike, Tobias Pohlen, Geoffrey Irving, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Reward
  learning from human preferences and demonstrations in Atari. In Proceedings of the 32nd
  International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 31, pp. 8022–8034,
  Montréal, Canada, 2018. Curran Associates, Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA.
Erik Jenner, Herke van Hoof, and Adam Gleave. Calculus on MDPs: Potential shaping as a gradient,
  2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.09570.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization, 2019.
Andrew Y Ng and Stuart Russell. Algorithms for inverse reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of
  the Seventeenth International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 1, pp. 663–670, Stanford,
  California, USA, 2000. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.
Andrew Y Ng, Daishi Harada, and Stuart Russell. Policy invariance under reward transformations:
 Theory and application to reward shaping. In Proceedings of the Sixteenth International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 278–287, Bled, Slovenia, 1999. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.
Alexander Pan, Kush Bhatia, and Jacob Steinhardt. The effects of reward misspecification: Mapping
  and mitigating misaligned models, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.03544.
Gavin A Rummery and Mahesan Niranjan. On-line Q-learning using connectionist systems, vol-
  ume 37. University of Cambridge, Department of Engineering Cambridge, UK, 1994.
Stuart Russell and Peter Norvig. Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach. Pearson, 4 edition,
  2020.
Joar Skalse and Alessandro Abate. Misspecification in inverse reinforcement learning, 2023.
Joar Skalse, Matthew Farrugia-Roberts, Stuart Russell, Alessandro Abate, and Adam Gleave. In-
  variance in policy optimisation and partial identifiability in reward learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2203.07475, 2022a.
Joar Skalse, Niki Howe, Krasheninnikov Dima, and David Krueger. Defining and characterizing
  reward hacking. In Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2022b.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. MIT Press, second
  edition, 2018. ISBN 9780262352703.
Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control.
 In 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 5026–5033,
 2012. doi: 10.1109/IROS.2012.6386109.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Blake Wulfe, Logan Michael Ellis, Jean Mercat, Rowan Thomas McAllister, and Adrien Gaidon.
  Dynamics-aware comparison of learned reward functions. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=CALFyKVs87.
Simon Zhuang and Dylan Hadfield-Menell. Consequences of misaligned AI. CoRR, abs/2102.03896,
  2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.03896.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A    C OMMENTS ON EPIC
In this appendix, we will show that EPIC has a number of undesirable properties. For the sake of
readability, the proofs of the theorems in this section are given in Appendix F.3, rather than here.
First of all, while EPIC does induce an upper bound on a form of regret, this is not the type of regret
that is typically relevant in practice. To demonstrate this, we will first provide a generalisation of the
regret bound given in Gleave et al. (2020):
Theorem 3. There exists a positive constant U , such that for any reward functions R1 and R2 , and
any τ and µ0 , if two policies π1 and π2 satisfy that J2 pπ2 q ě J2 pπ1 q, then we have that
                          J1 pπ1 q ´ J1 pπ2 q ď U ¨ L2 pR1 q ¨ DEPIC pR1 , R2 q.

Theorem 3 covers the special case when π1 is optimal under R1 , and π2 is optimal under R2 . This
means that this theorem is a generalisation of the bound given in Gleave et al. (2020). However, we
will next show that EPIC does not induce a regret bound of the form given in Definition 5:
Theorem 4. EPIC is not sound, for any choice of τ or µ0 .

These results may at first seem paradoxical, since the definition of soundness is quite similar to
the statement of Theorem 3. The reason why these statements can both be true simultaneously is
that L2 pR1 q can be arbitrarily large even as maxπ J1 pπq ´ minπ J1 pπq becomes arbitrarily small.
Moreover, we argue that it is more relevant to compare J1 pπ1 q´J1 pπ2 q to maxπ J1 pπq´minπ J1 pπq,
rather than L2 pR1 q. First of all, note that it is not informative to just know the absolute value of
J1 pπ1 q ´ J1 pπ2 q, since this depends on the scale of R1 . Rather, what we want to know how much
reward we might lose, relative to the total amount of reward that could be had. This quantity is
measured by maxπ J1 pπq ´ minπ J1 pπq, not L2 pR1 q. For example, if J1 pπ1 q ´ J1 pπ2 q “ ϵ, but
maxπ J1 pπq´minπ J1 pπq is just barely larger than ϵ, then this should be considered to be a large loss
of reward, even if L2 pR1 q " ϵ. For this reason, we consider the regret bound given in Definition 5 to
be more informative than the regret bound given in Gleave et al. (2020) and in Theorem 3.
Another relevant question is whether EPIC induces a lower bound on worst-case regret. We next
show that this is not the case, regardless of whether we consider the type of regret used in Gleave
et al. (2020), or the type of regret used in Theorem 3, or the type of regret used in Definition 5:
Theorem 5. There exist rewards R1 , R2 such that DEPIC pR1 , R2 q ą 0, but where R1 and R2 induce
the same ordering of policies for any choice of τ or µ0 .

This means that EPIC cannot induce a lower bound on worst-case regret, for almost any way of
defining regret. Together, we think these results show that EPIC lacks the theoretical guarantees that
we desire in a reward function pseudometric.

B    C OMMENTS ON DARD
In this appendix, we briefly discuss some of the properties of DARD. In so doing, we will criticise
some of the choices made in the design of DARD, and argue that STARC metrics offer a better way
to incorporate information about the environment dynamics.
To start with, recall that DARD uses the canonicalisation function C DARD , which is the function
where C DARD pRqps, a, s1 q is given by
                   Rps, a, s1 q ` ErγRps1 , A, S 2 q ´ Rps, A, S 1 q ´ γRpS 1 , A, S 2 qs,
where A „ DA , S 1 „ τ ps, Aq, and S 2 „ τ ps1 , Aq. Moreover, also recall that C DARD only
is designed to remove potential shaping, whereas the canonicalisation functions we specify in
Definition 1 are designed to remove both potential shaping and S 1 -redistribution.
Now, first and foremost, note that while C DARD is designed to remove potential shaping, it does this
in a somewhat strange way. In particular, while it is shown in Wulfe et al. (2022) that C DARD pR1 q “
C DARD pR2 q if R1 and R2 differ by potential shaping, it is in general not the case that R and
C DARD pRq differ by potential shaping. To see this, note that the term γRpS 1 , A, S 2 q depends on
both s and s1 , which a potential shaping function cannot do. This has a few important consequences.


                                                     12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


In particular, it is unclear if C DARD pR1 q “ C DARD pR2 q only if R1 and R2 differ by potential
shaping. It is also unclear if R and C DARD pRq in general even have the same policy ordering. Note
also that C DARD pRq is not monotonic, in the sense that C DARD pC DARD pRqq and C DARD pRq may
be different. This seems undesirable.
Another thing to note is that ErC DARD pRqpS, A, S 1 qs may not be 0. This means that it is unclear
whether or not DARD can be expressed in terms of norms, like EPIC can (c.f. Proposition 12). It is
also unclear if DARD induces an upper bound on regret, since Wulfe et al. (2022) do not provide a
regret bound. The fact that C DARD pRq is not a potential shaping function does not necessarily imply
that DARD does not induce an upper bound on regret. However, without a proof, there is a worry that
there might be reward pairs with a bounded DARD distance but unbounded regret.
Yet another thing to note is that, while DARD is designed to be used in cases where the environment
dynamics are known, it can still be influenced by the reward of transitions that are impossible
according to the environment dynamics. For example, the final term of C DARD pRqps, a, s1 q can be
influenced by impossible transitions. This gives us the following result:
Proposition 8. There exists transition functions τ and initial state distributions µ0 for which DARD
is not complete.



Proof. Consider an environment pS, A, τ, µ0 , _, γq where S “ ts1 , s2 , s3 u, A “ ta1 , a2 u, and
where the transition function is given by τ ps1 , aq “ s2 , τ ps2 , aq “ s3 , and τ ps3 , aq “ s1 , for any
a P A. We may also suppose µ0 “ s1 , and γ “ 0.9.
Next, let R1 “ R2 “ 0 for all transitions which are possible under τ , but let R1 ps, a1 , s1 q “ 1,
R1 ps, a2 , s1 q “ 0, R2 ps, a1 , s1 q “ 0, and R2 ps, a2 , s1 q “ 1 for all transitions which are impossible
under τ . Now DDARD pR1 , R2 q ą 0, even though pS, A, τ, µ0 , R1 , γq and pS, A, τ, µ0 , R2 , γq have
exactly the same policy ordering.



Together, the above leads us to worry that DARD might lead to misleading measurements. Therefore,
we believe that STARC metrics offer a better way to incorporate knowledge about the transition
dynamics into the reward metric, especially in the light of our results from Section 3.


C    A G EOMETRIC I NTUITION FOR STARC M ETRICS

In this section, we will provide a geometric intuition for how STARC metrics work. This will help to
explain why STARC metrics are designed in the way that they are, and how they work. It may also
make it easier to understand some of our proofs.
First of all, note that the space of all reward functions R forms an |S||A||S|-dimensional vector
space. Next, recall that if two reward functions R1 and R2 differ by (some combination of) potential
shaping and S 1 -redistribution, then R1 and R2 induce the same ordering of policies. Moreover, both
of these transformations are additive. In other words, they correspond to a set of reward functions
tR0 u, such that R1 and R2 differ by a combination of potential shaping and S 1 -redistribution if and
only if R1 ´ R2 P tR0 u. This means that tR0 u is a linear subspace of R, and that for any reward
function R, the set of all reward functions that differ from R by a combination of potential shaping
and S 1 -redistribution together form an affine subspace of R.
A canonicalisation function is a linear map that removes the dimensions that are associated with
tR0 u. In other words, they map R to an |S|p|A| ´ 1q-dimensional subspace of R in which no reward
functions differ by potential shaping or S 1 -redistribution. The null space of a canonicalisation function
is always tR0 u. The canonicalisation function that is minimal for the L2 -norm is the orthogonal map
that satisfies these properties, whereas other canonicalisation functions are non-orthogonal.
When we normalise the resulting reward functions by dividing by a norm n, we project the entire
vector space onto the unit ball of n (except the zero reward, which remains at the origin). The metric
m then measures the distance between the resulting reward functions on the surface of this sphere:


                                                    13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To make this more clear, it may be worth considering the case of non-sequential decision making.
Suppose we have a finite set of choices C, and a utility function U : C Ñ R. Given two distributions
D1 , D2 over C, we say that we prefer D1 over D2 if Ec„D1 rU pcqs ą Ec„D2 rU pcqs. The set of
all utility functions over C forms a |C|-dimensional vector space. Moreover, in this setting, it is
well-known that two utility functions U1 , U2 induce the same preferences between all possible
distributions over C if and only if they differ by an affine transformation. Therefore, if we wanted
to represent the set of all non-equivalent utility functions over C, we may consider requiring that
U pc0 q “ 0 for some c0 P C, and that L2 pU q “ 1 unless U pcq “ 0 for all c P C. Any utility function
over C is equivalent to some utility function in this set, and this set can in turn be represented as the
surface of a p|C| ´ 1q-dimensional sphere, together with the origin.
This is essentially analogous to the normalisation that the canonicalisation function c and the normali-
sation function n perform for STARC metrics. Here C is analogous to the set of all trajectories, the
trajectory return function G is analogous to U , and a policy π induces a distribution over trajectories.
It is worth knowing that affine transformations of the trajectory return function, G, correspond exactly
to potential shaping and positive linear scaling of R (see Skalse et al., 2022a, their Theorem 3.12).
However, while the cases are analogous, it is not a direct correspondence, because not all distributions
over trajectories can be realised as a policy in a given MDP.
Another perspective that may help with understanding STARC metrics comes from considering
occupancy measures. Specifically, for a given policy π, let its occupancy measure η π be the |S||A||S|-
dimensional vector in which the value of the ps, a, s1 q’th dimension is


                               8
                               ÿ
                                    γ t Pξ„π pSt “ s, At “ a, St`1 “ s1 q.
                              t“0


Now note that Jpπq “ η π ¨ R. Therefore, by computing occupancy measures, we can divide the
computation of J into two parts, the first of which is independent of R, and the second of which is a
linear function. Moreover, let Ω “ tη π : π P Πu be the set of all occupancy measures. We now have
that the policy value function J of a reward function R can be visualised as a linear function on this
set. Moreover, if we have two reward functions R1 , R2 , then they can be visualised as two different
linear functions on this set:


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Ω is located in a |S|p|A| ´ 1q-dimensional affine subspace of R|S||A||S| , and contains a set which is
open in this space (Skalse & Abate, 2023). Moreover, it can be represented as the convex hull of a
finite set of points (Feinberg & Rothblum, 2012). It is thus a polytope.
From this image, it is visually clear that the worst-case regret of maximising R1 instead of R2 , should
be proportional to the angle between the projections of R1 and R2 onto Ω. Moreover, this is what
STARC metrics measure; any STARC metric is bilipschitz equivalent to the angle between reward
functions projected onto Ω. This in should in turn give an intuition for why the STARC distance
between two rewards provide both an upper and lower bound on their worst-case regret.

D    A PPROXIMATING STARC M ETRICS IN L ARGE E NVIRONMENTS
In small MDPs, STARC metrics can be computed exactly (in time that is polynomial in |S| and |A|).
However, most realistic MDPs are too large for this to be feasible. As such, we will here discuss how
to approximate STARC metrics in large environments, including continuous environments.
First, recall the VAL canonicalisation function (Proposition 2), given by
                                                  “                                     ‰
                   cpRqps, a, s1 q “ ES 1 „τ ps,aq Rps, a, S 1 q ´ V π psq ` γV π pS 1 q ,
where π can be any (fixed) policy. This canonicalisation function is straightforward to approximate
in any environment where reinforcement learning can be used, including large-scale environments.
To do this, first pick an arbitrary policy π, such as e.g. the uniformly random policy. Then compute
an approximation of V π – this can be done using a neural network updated with on-policy Bellman
updates (Sutton & Barto, 2018). Note that π should not be updated, and must remain fixed. Then
simply estimate the expected value of Rps, a, S 1 q ´ V π psq ` γV π pS 1 q by sampling from τ . This
approximation can be computed in any environment where it is possible to sample from τ and
approximate V π (which is to say, any environment where reinforcement learning is applicable). Note
that we do not require direct access to τ , we only need to be able to sample from it.
Next, note that if v is an n-dimensional vector, and U is the uniform distribution over t1 . . . nu, then
                                                      1{p
                        Lp pvq “ pn ¨ Ei„U r|vi |p sq       “ n1{p ¨ Ei„U r|vi |p s1{p .
This in turn means that
                ˆ               ˙       «ˇ                                       ˇp ff1{p
                    v      w             ˇ       vi                  wi          ˇ
             Lp         ,
                                         ˇ                                       ˇ
                                  “ Ei„U ˇ                   ´
                                         ˇ Ej„U r|vj |p s1{p   Ej„U r|wj |p s1{p ˇ
                                                                                 ˇ
                  Lp pvq Lp pwq

since the n1{p -terms cancel out. Therefore, the normalisation step and distance step can also be
estimated through sampling; simply sample enough random transitions to approximate each of the
expectations in the expression above. Indeed, this can even be done if the state space and action space
are continuous. Recall that the Lp -norm of an infinite-dimensional vector v is defined as
                                                ˆż             ˙1{p
                                    Lp,X pvq “        |vx |p dx
                                                        X
               n
where X Ď R . This value can also be approximated through sampling.


                                                     15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


It is also possible to approximate division by n and taking the distance with m using the Pear-
son distance, which is what EPIC does. In particular, let D be a distribution over S ˆ A ˆ S
that assigns positive probability to all transitions, and let R1 , R2 be reward functions such
                               1                             1
          a1 „D rR1 pS, A, S qs “ ES,A,S 1 „D rR1 pS, A, S qs “ 0. We then
that ES,A,S                                                                       have that the Pearson
distance p1 ´ ρpR1 pS, A, S q, R2 pS, A, S qqq{2 between R1 pS, A, S 1 q and R2 pS, A, S 1 q, where
                                  1             1
S, A, S 1 „ D, is equal to                   ˆ                       ˙
                                    1             R1           R2
                                      ¨ L2,W             ,              ,
                                    2          L2,W pR1 q L2,W pR2 q
where W is a weight matrix depending on D, and ρ denotes the Pearson correlation. For details, see
the proof of Proposition 12. For this identity to hold, it is crucial that ES,A,S 1 „D rR1 pS, A, S 1 qs “
ES,A,S 1 „D rR1 pS, A, S 1 qs “ 0. However, this can easily be ensured; for an arbitrary canonicalisation
function c1 , let c2 pRq “ c1 pRq ´ ES,A,S 1 „D rc1 pRqpS, A, S 1 qs. If c1 is a valid canonicalisation
function, then so is c2 . The Pearson correlation can of course be estimated through sampling.

E    P ROOFS OF M ISCELLANEOUS C LAIMS
In this Appendix, we provide proofs for several miscellaneous claims and minor propositions made
throughout the paper, especially in Section 2.2.
Proposition 9. For any policy π, the function c : R Ñ R given by
                                                 “                                      ‰
                  cpRqps, a, s1 q “ ES 1 „τ ps,aq Rps, a, S 1 q ´ V π psq ` γV π pS 1 q
is a canonicalisation function.

Proof. To prove that c is a canonicalisation function, we must show

      1. that c is linear,
      2. that cpRq and R only differ by potential shaping and S 1 -redistribution, and
      3. that cpR1 q “ cpR2 q if and only if R1 and R2 only differ by potential shaping and S 1 -
         redistribution.

We first show that c is linear. Given a state s, let vs be the |S||A||S|-dimensional vector where
                                              8
                                              ÿ
                         vs rs1 , a, s2 s “         γ i ¨ PpSi “ s1 , Ai “ a, Si`1 “ s2 q,
                                              i“0
where the probability is given for a trajectory that is generated from π and τ , starting in s. Now note
that V π psq “ vs ¨ R, where R is represented as a vector. Using these vectors tvs u, it is possible to
express c as a linear transformation.
To see that cpRq and R differ by potential shaping and S 1 -redistribution, it is sufficient to note that
V π acts as a potential function, and that setting R2 ps, a, s1 q “ ES 1 „τ ps,aq rR1 ps, a, S 1 qs is a form of
S 1 -redistribution.
To see that cpR1 q “ cpR2 q if R1 and R2 differ by potential shaping and S 1 -redistribution, first note
that if R1 and R2 differ by potential shaping, so that R2 ps, a, s1 q “ R1 ps, a, s1 q ` γΦps1 q ´ Φpsq for
some Φ, then V2π psq “ V1π psq ´ Φpsq (see e.g. Lemma B.1 in Skalse et al., 2022a). This means that
cpR2 qps, a, s1 q “ ErR2 ps, a, S 1 q ` γ ¨ V2π pS 1 q ´ V2π psqs
                 “ ErR1 ps, a, S 1 q ` γ ¨ ΦpS 1 q ´ Φpsq ` γ ¨ pV1π pS 1 q ´ ΦpS 1 qq ´ pV1π psq ´ Φpsqqs
                 “ ErR1 ps, a, S 1 q ` γ ¨ V1π pS 1 q ´ V1π psqs
                 “ cpR1 qps, a, s1 q.
To see that cpR1 q “ cpR2 q only if R1 and R2 differ by potential shaping and S 1 -redistribution, first
note that we have already shown that R and cpRq differ by potential shaping and S 1 -redistribution for
all R. This implies that R1 and cpR1 q differ by potential shaping and S 1 -redistribution, and likewise
for R2 and cpR2 q. Then if cpR1 q “ cpR2 q, we can combine these transformations, and obtain that
R1 and R2 also differ by potential shaping and S 1 -redistribution. This completes the proof.


                                                           16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Note that this holds regardless of which environment V π is calculated in. Therefore, V π could be
computed in an environment that is entirely distinct from the training environment. For example,
V π could be computed in an environment (and using a policy) designed specifically to make this
computation easy.
Proposition 10. For any weighted L2 -norm, a minimal canonicalisation function exists and is unique.

Proof. Let R0 be the reward function that is 0 for all transitions. First note that the set of all reward
functions that differ from R0 by potential shaping and S 1 -redistribution form a linear subspace of
R. Let this space be denoted by Y, and let X denote the orthogonal complement of Y in R. Now
any reward function R P R can be uniquely expressed in the form RX ` RY , where RX P X
and RY P Y. Consider the function c : R Ñ R where cpRq “ RX . Now this function is a
canonicalisation function such that npcpRqq ď R1 for all R1 such that cpRq “ cpR1 q, assuming that
n is a weighted L2 -norm.
To see this, we must show that

      1. c is linear,
      2. cpRq and R differ by potential shaping and S 1 -redistribution,
      3. cpR1 q “ cpR2 q if R1 and R2 differ by potential shaping and S 1 -redistribution, and
      4. npcpRqq ď npR1 q for all R1 such that cpRq “ cpR1 q.

It follows directly from the construction that c is linear. To see that cpRq and R differ by potential
shaping and S 1 -redistribution, simply note that cpRq “ R ´ RY , where RY is given by a combination
of potential shaping and S 1 -redistribution of R0 . To see that cpR1 q “ cpR2 q if R1 and R2 differ
by potential shaping and S 1 -redistribution, let R2 “ R1 ` R1 , where R1 is given by potential
shaping and S 1 -redistribution of R0 , and let R1 “ RX ` RY , where RX P X and RY P Y. Now
cpR1 q “ RX . Moreover, R2 “ RX ` RY ` R1 . We also have that R1 P Y. We can thus express
R2 as RX ` pRY ` R1 q, where RX P X and pRY ` R1 q P Y, which implies that cpR2 q “ RX .
Therefore, if R1 and R2 differ by potential shaping and S 1 -redistribution, then cpR1 q “ cpR2 q. To
see that cpR1 q “ cpR2 q only if R1 and R2 differ by potential shaping and S 1 -redistribution, first note
that we have already shown that R and cpRq differ by potential shaping and S 1 -redistribution for all
R. This implies that R1 and cpR1 q differ by potential shaping and S 1 -redistribution, and likewise for
R2 and cpR2 q. Then if cpR1 q “ cpR2 q, we can combine these transformations, and obtain that R1
and R2 also differ by potential shaping and S 1 -redistribution.
To see that npcpRqq ď npR1 q for all R1 such that cpRq “ cpR1 q, first note that if cpRq “ cpR1 q,
then R “ RX ` RY and R1 “ RX ` RY         1
                                            , where RX P X and RY , RY  1
                                                                           P Y. This means that
                            1               1
npcpRqq “ npRX q, and npR q “ npRX ` RY q. Moreover, since n is a weighted L2 -norm, and since
          1
                                                         a
RX and RY    are orthogonal, we have that npRX ` RY q “ npRX q2 ` npRY q2 ě npRX q. This
means that npcpRqq ď npR1 q.
To see that this canonicalisation function is the unique minimal canonicalisation function for any
weighted L2 -norm n, consider an arbitrary reward function R. Now, the set of all reward functions
that differ from R by potential shaping and S 1 -redistribution forms an affine space of R, and a
minimal canonicalisation function must map R to a point R1 in this space such that npR1 q ď npR2 q
for all other points R2 in that space. If n is a weighted L2 -norm, then this specifies a convex
optimisation problem with a unique solution.

Note that this proof only shows that a minimal canonicalisation function exists and is unique when n
is a (weighted) L2 -norm. It does not show that such a canonicalisation function only exists for these
norms, nor does it show that it is unique for all norms.
Proposition 11. If c is a canonicalisation function, then the function n : R Ñ R given by npRq “
maxπ Jpπq ´ minπ Jpπq is a norm on Impcq.

Proof. To show that a function n is a norm on Impcq, we must show that it satisfies:


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      1. npRq ě 0 for all R P Impcq.
      2. npRq “ 0 if and only if R “ R0 for all R P Impcq.
      3. npα ¨ Rq “ α ¨ npRq for all R P Impcq and all scalars α.
      4. npR1 ` R2 q ď npR1 q ` npR2 q for all R1 , R2 P Impcq.

Here R0 is the reward function that is 0 everywhere. It is trivial to show that Axioms 1 and 3 are
satisfied by n. For Axiom 2, note that npRq “ 0 exactly when maxπ Jpπq “ minπ Jpπq. If R is R0 ,
then Jpπq “ 0 for all π, and so the “if” part holds straightforwardly. For the “only if” part, let R
be a reward function such that maxπ Jpπq “ minπ Jpπq. Then R and R0 induce the same policy
ordering under τ and µ0 , which means that they differ by potential shaping, S 1 -redistribution, and
positive linear scaling (see Proposition 1). Moreover, since R0 is 0 everywhere, this means that R
and R0 in fact differ by potential shaping and S 1 -redistribution. However, from the definition of
canonicalisation functions, if R1 , R2 P Impcq differ by potential shaping and S 1 -redistribution, then
it must be that R1 “ R2 . Hence Axiom 2 holds as well.
We can show that Axiom 4 holds algebraically:
              npR1 ` R2 q “ maxpJ1 pπq ` J2 pπqq ´ minpJ1 pπq ` J2 pπqq
                                π                          π
                            ď max J1 pπq ` max J2 pπq ´ min J1 pπq ´ min J2 pπq
                                π               π              π              π
                            “ pmax J1 pπq ´ min J1 pπqq ` pmax J2 pπq ´ min J2 pπqq
                                 π               π                 π              π
                            “ npR1 q ` npR2 q

This means that npRq “ maxπ Jpπq ´ minπ Jpπq is a norm on Impcq.

This means that we can normalise the reward functions so that maxπ Jpπq ´ minπ Jpπq “ 1, which
is nice. This proposition will also be useful in our later proofs.
Proposition 12. EPIC can be expressed as
                                            C EPIC pR1 q        C EPIC pR2 q
                                      ˆ                                          ˙
                              1
            DEPIC pR1 , R2 q “ ¨ L2,D                       ,                      ,
                              2          L2,D pC EPIC pR1 qq L2,D pC EPIC pR2 qq
where L2,D is a weighted L2 -norm.

Proof. Recall that by default, DEPIC pR1 , R2 q is defined to be the Pearson distance between
C EPIC pR1 qpS, A, S 1 q and C EPIC pR2 qpS, A, S 1 q, where S, S 1 „ DS and A a   „ DA , and where
the “Pearson distance” between two random variables X and Y be defined as p1 ´ ρpX, Y qq{2,
where ρ denotes the Pearson correlation. Recall also that C EPIC pRqps, a, s1 q is equal to
                   Rps, a, s1 q ` ErγRps1 , A, S 1 q ´ Rps, A, S 1 q ´ γRpS, A, S 1 qs.
For the sake of brevity, let R1C “ C EPIC pR1 q and R2C “ C EPIC pR2 q, and let D be the distribution
over SˆAˆS given by
   PpS,A,S 1 q„D pS “ s, A “ a, S 1 “ sq “ PS„DS pS “ sq ¨ PA„DA pA “ aq ¨ PS 1 „DS pS 1 “ s1 q.

Moreover, let X “ R1C pT q and Y “ R2C pT 1 q, where Taand T 1 are random transitions distributed
according to D. We now have that DEPIC pR1 , R2 q “ p1 ´ ρpX, Y qq{2, where ρ is the Pearson
correlation.
Next, recall that the Pearson correlation between two random variables X and Y is defined as
                                     ErpX ´ ErXsqpY ´ ErY sqs
                                                              ,
                                              σX σY
where σX and σY are the standard deviations
                                  a         of X and Y . Recall also that the standard deviation σX
of a random variable X is equal to ErX 2 s ´ ErXs2 .


                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Next, note that we in this case have that ErXs and ErY s both are equal to 0. This follows from the
way that these variables were defined, together with the linearity of expectation. Therefore, we can
rewrite ρpX, Y q as

                                               ErXY s
                                            a       a        .
                                             ErX 2 s ErY 2 s

Let W be the p|S||A||S|q ˆ p|S||A||S|q-dimensional
                                          a           diagonal matrix in whichathe diagonal value that
corresponds
    a         to transition t is equal to  P T „D pT “ tq. We now have that ErX 2 s “ L2 pW R1C q
and ErY s “ L2 pW R2 q. Moreover, we also have that ErXY s “ pW R1C q ¨ pW R2C q. Next, recall
            2              C

that the dot product v ¨ w between two vectors v and w can be written as L2 pvq ¨ L2 pwq ¨ cospθq,
where θ is the angle between v and w. This means that we can rewrite ρpX, Y q as

                              L2 pW R1C q ¨ L2 pW R2C q ¨ cospθq
                                                                 “ cospθq,
                                  L2 pW R1C q ¨ L2 pW R2C q

where θ is the angle between W R1C and W R2C .
Since the angle between two vectors is unaffected by the scale of those vectors, we have that θ is
also the angle between W R1C {L2 pW R1C q and W R2C {L2 pW R2C q. We can now apply the Law of
Cosines,a and conclude thatathe L2 -distance between W R1C {L2 pW R1C q and W R2C {L2 pW R2C q is
equal to 2 ´ 2 cospθq “ 2 ´ 2ρpX, Y q “ 2 ¨ DEPIC pR1 , R2 q. This means that

                                                            W R1C       W R2C
                                                      ˆ                             ˙
                           EPIC               1
                       D          pR1 , R2 q “ ¨ L2                  ,                  .
                                              2           L2 pW R1C q L2 pW R2C q

Rewriting this completes the proof.


The fact that EPIC can be expressed in this form is also asserted in Gleave et al. (2020), but a proof is
not given. We have provided the proof here, to make the equivalence more accessible and intuitive. It
is worth noting that this equivalence only holds when the “coverage distribution” is the same as the
distribution used to compute C EPIC , which is left somewhat ambiguous in Gleave et al. (2020).


F     M AIN P ROOFS

In this section, we give the proofs of all our results. We have divided it into four parts. In the first
part, we prove that STARC metrics are sound. In the second part, we prove that STARC metrics are
complete. In the third part, we prove that EPIC (and a class of similar metrics) all are subject to the
results discussed in Appendix A. In the final part, we prove a few remaining theorems.


F.1   S OUNDNESS

Before we can give the proof of Theorem 1, we will first state and prove several supporting lemmas.
Lemma 1. For any reward functions R1 and R2 , and any policy π, we have that
                                                    ˆ          ˙
                                                         1
                              |J1 pπq ´ J2 pπq| ď                  L8 pR1 , R2 q.
                                                        1´γ

                                                      19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. This follows from straightforward algebra:
                                      «                            ff
                                ˇ       ÿ8
                                             t
             |J1 pπq ´ J2 pπq| “ˇEξ„π       γ R1 pSt , At , St`1 q
                                ˇ
                                              t“0
                                               «                               ff
                                                   8
                                                   ÿ                          ˇ
                                                        t
                                                       γ R2 pSt , At , St`1 q ˇ
                                                                              ˇ
                                    ´ Eξ„π
                                                 t“0
                                    8
                                    ÿ
                                “         γ t |Eξ„π rR1 pSt , At , St`1 q ´ R2 pSt , At , St`1 qs|
                                    t“0
                                    ÿ8
                                ď         γ t Eξ„π r|R1 pSt , At , St`1 q ´ R2 pSt , At , St`1 q|s
                                    t“0
                                     8                          ˆ         ˙
                                    ÿ                                1
                                ď         γ t L8 pR1 , R2 q “                 L8 pR1 , R2 q.
                                    t“0
                                                                    1´γ

Here the second line follows from the linearity of expectation, and the third line follows from Jensen’s
inequality.

Thus, the L8 -distance between two rewards bounds the difference between their policy evaluation
functions. Since all norms are bilipschitz equivalent on any finite-dimensional vector space, this
extends to all norms:
Lemma 2. If p is a norm, then there is a positive constant Kp such that, for any reward functions R1
and R2 , and any policy π, |J1 pπq ´ J2 pπq| ď Kp ¨ ppR1 , R2 q.

Proof. If p and q are norms on a finite-dimensional vector space, then there are constants k and K
such that k ¨ ppxq ď qpxq ď K ¨ ppxq. Since S and A are finite, R is a finite-dimensional vector
space. This means that there is a constant K such that L8 pR1 , R2 q ď K ¨ ppR1 , R2 q. Together with
Lemma 1, this implies that
                                              ˆ        ˙
                                                   1
                          |J1 pπq ´ J2 pπq| ď            ¨ K ¨ mpR1 , R2 q.
                                                1´γ
               ´    ¯
                 K
Letting Kp “ 1´γ       completes the proof.

Note that the constant Kp given by Lemma 2 may not be the smallest value of K for which this
statement holds of a given norm p. This fact can be used to compute tighter bounds for particular
STARC-metrics.
Lemma 3. Let R1 and R2 be reward functions, and π1 , π2 be two policies. If |J1 pπq ´ J2 pπq| ď U
for π P tπ1 , π2 u, and if J2 pπ2 q ě J2 pπ1 q, then
                                          J1 pπ1 q ´ J1 pπ2 q ď 2 ¨ U.

Proof. First note that U must be non-negative. Next, note that if J1 pπ1 q ă J1 pπ2 q then J1 pπ1 q ´
J1 pπ2 q ă 0, and so the lemma holds. Now consider the case when J1 pπ1 q ě J1 pπ2 q:
                    J1 pπ1 q ´ J1 pπ2 q “ J1 pπ1 q ´ J2 pπ2 q ` J2 pπ2 q ´ J1 pπ2 q
                                        ď |J1 pπ1 q ´ J2 pπ2 q| ` |J2 pπ2 q ´ J1 pπ2 q|


Our assumptions imply that |J2 pπ2 q ´ J1 pπ2 q| ď U . We will next show that |J1 pπ1 q ´ J2 pπ2 q| ď U
as well. Our assumptions imply that
                                         |J1 pπ1 q ´ J2 pπ1 q| ď U
                                      ùñ J2 pπ1 q ě J1 pπ1 q ´ U
                                      ùñ J2 pπ2 q ě J1 pπ1 q ´ U


                                                        20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Here the last implication uses the fact that J2 pπ2 q ě J2 pπ1 q. A symmetric argument also shows that
J1 pπ1 q ě J2 pπ2 q ´ U (recall that we assume that J1 pπ1 q ě J1 pπ2 q). Together, this implies that
|J1 pπ1 q ´ J2 pπ2 q| ď U . We have thus shown that if J1 pπ1 q ě J1 pπ2 q then
                            |J1 pπ1 q ´ J2 pπ2 q| ` |J2 pπ2 q ´ J1 pπ2 q| ď 2 ¨ U,
and so the lemma holds. This completes the proof.
Lemma 4. For any linear function c : Rn Ñ Rn and any norm n, there is a positive constant Kn
such that npcpvqq ď Kn ¨ npvq for all v P Rn .

Proof. First consider the case when npvq ą 0. In this case, we can find an upper bound for npcpvqq
in terms of npvq by finding an upper bound for npcpRqq
                                                 npRq . Since c is linear, and since n is absolutely
homogeneous, we have that for any v P Rn and any non-zero α P R,
                              npcpα ¨ vqq ´ α ¯ npcpvqq      npcpvqq
                                         “                “           .
                               npα ¨ vq     α      npvq        npvq

In other words, npcpvqq
                 npvq is unaffected by scaling of v. We may thus restrict our attention to the unit
ball of n. Next, since the surface of the unit ball of n is a compact set, and since npcpvqq
                                                                                      npvq is continuous
on this surface, the extreme value theorem implies that npcpvqq
                                                         npvq must take on some maximal value Kn
on this domain. Together, the above implies that npcpvqq ď Kn ¨ npvq for all R such that npvq ą 0.
Next, suppose npvq “ 0. In this case, v is the zero vector. Since c is linear, this implies that cpvq “ v,
which means that npcpvqq “ 0 as well. Therefore, if npvq “ 0, then the statement holds for any Kn .
In particular, it holds for the value Kn selected above.
Lemma 5. Let c be a linear function c :´R Ñ R,
                                            ¯ and let n be a norm on Impcq. Let R be any reward
                                       RC
function, let RC “ cpRq, and let RS “ npR Cq
                                               if npRC q ą 0, and RC otherwise. Assume there is a
constant B such that JC pπq “ Jpπq`B for all π. Then Jpπ1 q´Jpπ2 q “ npcpRqq¨JS pπ1 q´JS pπ2 q.

Proof. Let us first consider the case where npRq “ 0. Since n is a norm, R must be the reward
function that is 0 everywhere. Since c is linear, this also implies that npcpRqq “ 0. In that case, both
Jpπ1 q ´ Jpπ2 q “ 0 for all π1 and π2 , and npcpRqq ¨ x “ 0 for all x. Therefore, the statement holds.
Let us next consider the case when npRq ą 0. Since c is linear, this means that npcpRqq ą 0.
Moreover, since RS “ RC {npRC q, and since JC pπq “ Jpπq ` B, we have that
                                        ˆ         ˙
                                             1
                               JS pπq “             pJpπq ` Bq
                                          npcpRqq
This further implies that
                                                 ˆ             ˙
                                                        1
                         JS pπ1 q ´ JS pπ2 q “                     pJpπ1 q ´ Jpπ2 qq
                                                     npcpRqq
since the B-terms cancel out. By rearranging, we get that
                            Jpπ1 q ´ Jpπ2 q “ npcpRqqpJS pπ1 q ´ JS pπ2 qq.
This completes the proof.
Lemma 6. If R1 and R2 differ by potential shaping with Φ, then for any τ and µ0 , we have that
J2 pπq “ J1 pπq ´ ES0 „µ0 rΦpS0 qs. Moreover, if R1 and R2 differ by potential shaping with Φ and
S 1 -redistribution for τ , then for any µ0 , we have that J2 pπq “ J1 pπq ´ ES0 „µ0 rΦpS0 qs.

Proof. The first part follows from Lemma B.1 in Skalse et al. (2022a). The second part then follows
straightforwardly from the properties of S 1 -redistribution.
Theorem 1. Any STARC metric is sound.


                                                      21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. Consider any transition function τ and any initial state distribution µ0 , and let d be a STARC
metric. We wish to show that there exists a positive constant U , such that for any R1 and R2 , and any
pair of policies π1 and π2 such that J2 pπ2 q ě J2 pπ1 q, we have that

                  J1 pπ1 q ´ J1 pπ2 q ď pmax J1 pπq ´ min J1 pπqq ¨ Kd ¨ dpR1 , R2 q.
                                           π              π


Recall that dpR1 , R2 q “ mpspR1 q, spR2 qq, where m is an admissible metric. Since m is admissible,
we have that ppspR1 q, spR2 qq ď Km ¨mpspR1 q, spR2 qq for some norm p and constant Km . Moreover,
since p is a norm, we can apply Lemma 2 to conclude that there is a constant Kp such that for any
policy π, we have that
                              |J1S pπq ´ J2S pπq| ď Kp ¨ ppspR1 q, spR2 qq,

where J1S is the policy evaluation function of spR1 q, and J2S is the policy evaluation function of
spR2 q. Combining this with the fact that ppspR1 q, spR2 qq ď Km ¨ mpspR1 q, spR2 qq, we get

                          |J1S pπq ´ J2S pπq| ď Kp ¨ ppspR1 q, spR2 qq
                                              ď Kp ¨ Km ¨ mpspR1 q, spR2 qq
                                              “ Kmp ¨ dpR1 , R2 q

where Kmp “ Kp ¨ Km . We have thus established that, for any π, we have

                                |J1S pπq ´ J2S pπq| ď Kmp ¨ dpR1 , R2 q.

Let π1 and π2 be any two policies such that J2 pπ2 q ě J2 pπ1 q. Note that J2 pπ2 q ě J2 pπ1 q if and
only if J2S pπ2 q ě J2S pπ1 q. We can therefore apply Lemma 3 and conclude that

                              J1S pπ1 q ´ J1S pπ2 q ď 2 ¨ Kmp ¨ dpR1 , R2 q.

By Lemma 6, there is a constant B such that J1C “ J1 ` B. We can therefore apply Lemma 5:

                         J1 pπ1 q ´ J1 pπ2 q ď npcpR1 qq ¨ 2 ¨ Kmp ¨ dpR1 , R2 q.

We have that n is a norm on Impcq. Moreover, maxπ J1 pπq ´ minπ J1 pπq is also a norm on Impcq
(Proposition 4). Since Impcq is a finite-dimensional vector space, this means that there is a constant
Ks such that npcpR1 qq ď Ks ¨ pmaxπ J1 pπq ´ minπ J1 pπqq for all R1 P R. Let U “ 2 ¨ Kmp ¨ Ks .
We have now established that, for any π1 and π2 such that J2 pπ2 q ě J2 pπ1 q, we have

                   J1 pπ1 q ´ J1 pπ2 q ď pmax J1 pπq ´ min J1 pπqq ¨ U ¨ dpR1 , R2 q.
                                           π              π

This completes the proof.

F.2   C OMPLETENESS

In this section we give the proofs that concern completeness. We will need the following lemma:
Lemma 7. Let S Ă Rn be the boundary of a bounded convex set whose interior includes the origin.
Then there is an α ą 0 such that for any x, y P S, the angle between x and y ´ x is at least α.


Proof. Let L be the largest sphere which is centred around the origin, and whose interior does not
intersect S. Note that since the interior of S contains the origin, the radius of L is positive. Similarly,
let U be the smallest sphere which is centred around the origin, and whose exterior does not intersect
S. (In other words, L and U are two spheres such that S lies “between” L and U . Note that if S is a
sphere centred around the origin, then L “ U .)
Let x and y be two arbitrary points in S, and let θ be the angle between ´x and y ´ x:


                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Consider the line that passes through x and y. This line cannot intersect the interior of L, since S is
the boundary of a convex set. Note also that θ gets bigger if we reduce the magnitude of x. Thus, let
x1 be the vector that results from reducing the magnitude of x until the line between x1 and y is a
tangent of L:


Now the angle θ between ´x and y ´ x is at most as big as the angle θ1 between ´x1 and y ´ x1 .
Next, let the point where the line between x1 and y intersects L be called A, and the point where it
intersects U be called B. Consider the line segment between A and B:


This line segment is a compact set, which means that there is a point x2 along this line which
maximises the angle between ´x2 and y ´ x2 (note that this point in fact is equal to B, but we will
not need this fact in our proof). Let this angle be θ2 . We now have that θ ą θ1 ą θ2 . Moreover, the
value of θ2 does not depend on x or y, which means that the angle θ between ´x and y ´ x is at most
θ for all points x, y P S. This in turn means that the angle between x and y ´ x is at least α “ π ´ θ,
which completes the proof.


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Using this, we can now show that we can get a lower bound on the angle between two standardised
reward functions in terms of their STARC-distance:
Lemma 8. For any STARC metric d, there exist an ℓ1 P R` such that the angle θ between spR1 q
and spR2 q satisfies ℓ1 ¨ dpR1 , R2 q ď θ for all R1 , R2 for which neither spR1 q or spR2 q is 0.

Proof. Let d be an arbitrary STARC-metric, and let R1 and R2 be two arbitrary reward functions
for which neither spR1 q or spR2 q is 0. Recall that dpR1 , R2 q “ mpspR1 q, spR2 qq, where m is a
metric that is bilipschitz equivalent to some norm. Since all norms are bilipschitz equivalent on any
finite-dimensional vector space, this means that m is bilipschitz equivalent to the L2 -norm. Thus,
there are positive constants p, q such that
                   p ¨ mpspR1 q, spR2 qq ď L2 pspR1 q, spR2 qq ď q ¨ mpspR1 q, spR2 qq.
In particular, the L2 -distance between spR1 q and spR2 q is at least ϵ “ p ¨ dpR1 , R2 q. For the rest of
our proof, it will be convenient to assume that ϵ ă L2 pspR1 qq; this can be ensured by picking a p
that is sufficiently small.
Let us plot the plane which contains spR1 q, spR2 q, and the origin, and orient it so that spR1 q points
straight up, and so that spR2 q is not on the left-hand side:


Since the distance between spR1 q and spR2 q is at least ϵ, and since spR2 q is not on the left-hand
side, we know that spR2 q cannot be inside of the region shaded grey in the figure above (though it
may be on the boundary). Moreover, as per Lemma 7, we know that the angle between spR1 q and
spR2 q ´ spR1 q is at least α, where α ą 0. This means that we also can rule out the following region:


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Moreover, let v be the element of Impsq that is perpendicular to spR1 q, lies on a plane with spR1 q,
spR2 q, and the origin, and points in the same direction as spR2 q within this plane. Since Impsq is
convex, we know that spR2 q cannot lie within the triangle formed by the x-axis, the y-axis, and the
line between spR1 q and v:


Since Impsq is closed and convex, we know that there is a vector a in Impsq whose L2 -norm is bigger
than all other vectors in Impsq, and a (non-zero) vector b in Impsq whose L2 -norm is smaller than
all other (non-zero) vectors in Impsq. From this, we can infer that the angle between spR1 q and
v ´ spR1 q is at least β “ arctanpb{aq. Also note that β ą 0.
We now have everything we need to derive a lower bound on the angle θ between spR1 q and spR2 q.
First note that this angle can be no greater than the angle between spR1 q and the points marked A
and B in the figure below (whichever is smaller):


                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To make things easier, replace both α and β with γ “ minpα, βq. Since this makes the shaded region
smaller, we still have that spR2 q cannot be in the interior of the new shaded region. Moreover, in
this case, we know that the angle between spR1 q and spR2 q is no smaller than the angle θ1 between
spR1 q and the point marked A:


Deriving this angle is now just a matter of trigonometry. Letting z denote L2 pAq, we have that:
                                     ϵ             z           z
                                          “              “
                                  sinpxq      sinpπ ´ γq    sinpγq
From this, we get that
                                                ´´ ϵ ¯       ¯
                                    θ1 “ arcsin        sinpγq
                                          ´ϵ¯      z
                                       ě      sinpγq
                                           z
Moreover, it is also straightforward to find an upper bound z 1 for z. Specifically, we have that
z 2 “ L2 pspR1 qq2 ` ϵ2 ´ 2L2 pspR1 qqϵ cospπ ´ γq. Since ϵ ă L2 pspR1 qq, this means that
                              a
                         z ă 2L2 pspR1 qq2 ´ 2L2 pspR1 qq2 cospπ ´ γq.
Moreover, since Impsq is compact, there is a vector a in Impsq whose L2 -norm is bigger than all
other vectors in Impsq. We thus know that
                                    a
                           z ă z 1 “ 2L2 paq2 ´ 2L2 paq2 cospπ ´ γq.
Putting this together, we have that
                               ´ϵ¯                                       ˆ        ˙
                                                                           sinpγq
                    θ ě θ1 ě        sinpγq  “ mpspR  1 q, spR 2 qq ¨ p ¨            .
                                 z1                                          z1
                 ´      ¯
Setting ℓ1 “ p ¨ sinpγq
                     z1    thus completes the proof.

Finally, before we can give the full proof, we will also need the following:


                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma 9. For any invertible matrix M : Rn Ñ Rn there is an ℓ2 P p0, 1s such that for any
v, w P Rn , the angle θ1 between M v and M w satisfies θ1 ě ℓ2 ¨ θ, where θ is the angle between v
and w.

Proof. We will first prove that this holds in the 2-dimensional case, and then extend this proof to the
general n-dimensional case.
Let M be an arbitrary invertible matrix R2 Ñ R2 . First note that we can factor M via Singular Value
Decomposition into three matrices U , Σ, V , such that M “ U ΣV J , where U and V are orthogonal
matrices, and Σ is a diagonal matrix with non-negative real numbers on the diagonal. Since M is
invertible, we also have that Σ cannot have any zeroes along its diagonal. Next, recall that orthogonal
matrices preserve angles. This means that we can restrict our focus to just Σ.6
Let α and β be the singular values of M . We may assume, without loss of generality, that
                                              ˆ      ˙
                                                α 0
                                          Σ“           .
                                                0 β
Moreover, since scaling the x and y-axes uniformly will not affect the angle between any vectors
after multiplication, we can instead equivalently consider the matrix
                                               ˆ        ˙
                                                 α{β 0
                                          Σ“               .
                                                  0    1

Let v, w P R2 be two arbitrary vectors with angle θ, and let θ1 be the angle between Σv and Σw. We
will derive a lower bound on θ1 expressed in terms of θ. Moreover, since the angle between v and w
is not affected by their magnitude, we will assume (without loss of generality) that both v and w have
length 1 (under the L2 -norm).
First, note that if θ “ π then v “ ´w. This means that Σv “ ´Σw, since Σ is a linear transformation,
which in turn means that θ1 “ π. Thus θ1 ě ℓ2 ¨ θ as long as ℓ2 ď 1. Next, assume that θ ă π.
We may assume (without loss of generality) that the angle between v and the x-axis is no bigger than
the angle between w and the x-axis. Let ϕ be the angle between the x-axis and the vector that is
in the middle between v and w. This means that we can express v as pcospϕ ´ θ{2q, sinpϕ ´ θ{2qq
and w as pcospϕ ` θ{2q, sinpϕ ` θ{2qq. Moreover, since reflection along either of the axes will not
change the angle between either v and w or Σv and Σw, we may assume (without loss of generality)
that ϕ P r0, π{2s. For convenience, let σ “ α{β.


   6
     If there are vectors x, y such that the angle between x and y is θ and the angle between M x and M y is θ1 ,
then there are vectors v, w such that the angle between x and y is θ and the angle between Σv and Σw is θ1 , and
vice versa.


                                                      27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


(Note that we can visualise the action of Σ as scaling the x-axis in the figure above by σ.)
We now have that Σv “ pσ cospϕ ´ θ{2q, sinpϕ ´ θ{2qq and Σw “ pσ cospϕ ` θ{2q, sinpϕ ` θ{2qq.
Using the dot product, we get that
                         σ 2 cospϕ ´ θ{2q cospϕ ` θ{2q ` sinpϕ ´ θ{2q sinpϕ ` θ{2q
       cospθ1 q “ b                                   b                                    .
                   σ 2 cos2 pϕ ´ θ{2q ` sin2 pϕ ´ θ{2q σ 2 cos2 pϕ ` θ{2q ` sin2 pϕ ` θ{2q

We next note that if θ P r0, πq and ϕ P r0, π{2s, then the derivative of this expression with respect to
ϕ can only be 0 when ϕ P t0, π{2u.7 This means that cospθ1 q must be maximised or minimised when
ϕ is either 0 or π{2, which in turn means that the angle θ1 must be minimised or maximised when ϕ
is either 0 or π{2.
It is now easy to see that if σ ą 1 then θ1 is minimised when ϕ “ 0, and that if σ ă 1 then θ1 is
minimised when ϕ “ π{2. Moreover, if ϕ “ π{2, then
                                 ˆ                  ˙
                    1              σ cospπ{2 ´ θ{2q
                   θ “ 2 arctan                        “ 2 arctan pσ tanpθ{2qq ,
                                    sinpπ{2 ´ θ{2q
which in turn is greater than θ ¨ σ when σ ă 1. Similarly, if ϕ “ 0, then
                                    ˆ            ˙
                                       sinpθ{2q                 `          ˘
                     θ1 “ 2 arctan                 “ 2 arctan σ ´1 tanpθ{2q ,
                                      σ cospθ{2q
which is in turn greater than σ ´1 ¨ θ when σ ą 1. In either case, we thus have that
                               θ1 ě θ ¨ minpσ, σ ´1 q “ θ ¨ minpβ{α, α{βq.
We have therefore show that, for any invertible matrix M : R2 Ñ R2 , there exists a positive constant
minpβ{α, α{βq, where α and β are the singular values of M , such that if v, w P R2 have angle θ,
then the angle between M v and M w is at least θ ¨ minpβ{α, α{βq.
To generalise this to the general n-dimensional case, let v, w P Rn be two arbitrary vectors. Consider
the 2-dimensional linear subspace given by S “ spanpv, wq, and note that M pSq also is a 2-
dimensional linear subspace of Rn (since M is linear and invertible). The linear transformation
which M induces between S and M pSq is isomorphic to a linear transformation M 1 : R2 Ñ R2 .8
We can thus apply our previous result for the two-dimensional case, and conclude that if the angle
between v and w is θ, then the angle between M v and M w is at least θ ¨ minpβ{α, α{βq, where α
and β are the singular values of M 1 . Next, note that the singular values of M 1 cannot be smaller than
the smallest singular values of M or bigger than the biggest singular values of M . We can therefore
let ℓ2 “ α{β, where α is the smallest singular value of M and β is the greatest singular value of M ,
and conclude that the angle between M v and M w must be at least ℓ2 ¨ θ. Since the value of ℓ2 does
not depend on v or w, this completes the proof.

With these lemmas, we can now finally prove that all STARC metrics are complete:
Theorem 2. Any STARC metric is complete.

Proof. Let d be an arbitrary STARC metric. We need to show that there exists a positive constant L
such that, for any reward functions R1 and R2 , there are two policies π1 , π2 with J2 pπ2 q ě J2 pπ1 q
and
                   J1 pπ1 q ´ J1 pπ2 q ě L ¨ pmax J1 pπq ´ min J1 pπqq ¨ dpR1 , R2 q,
                                                  π               π
and moreover, if both maxπ J1 pπq ´ minπ J1 pπq “ 0 and maxπ J2 pπq ´ minπ J2 pπq “ 0, then we
have that dpR1 , R2 q “ 0.
   7
     For example, this may be verified using tools such as Wolfram Alpha.
   8
     To see this, let A be an orthonormal matrix that rotates R2 to align with S, and let B be an orthonormal
matrix that rotates M pSq to align with R2 . Now M 1 “ BM A is an invertible linear transformation R2 Ñ R2 .
Moreover, since orthonormal matrices preserve the angles between vectors, we have that v, w P S have angle θ
and M v, M w P M pSq have angle θ1 , if and only if A´1 v, A´1 w P R2 have angle θ and BM v, BM w P R2
have angle θ1 . Note that M 1 A´1 v “ BM v and M 1 A´1 w “ BM w. This means that there are v, w P S such
that v, w have angle θ and M v, M w have angle θ1 , if and only if there are v 1 , w1 P R2 such that v 1 , w1 have
angle θ and M 1 v 1 and M 1 w1 have angle θ1 (with v 1 “ A´1 v and w1 “ A´1 w).


                                                       28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We first note that the last condition holds straightforwardly. If maxπ J1 pπq ´ minπ J1 pπq “ 0 and
maxπ J2 pπq ´ minπ J2 pπq “ 0 then R1 and R2 have the same policy order, which means that
Proposition 6 implies that dpR1 , R2 q “ 0. This condition is therefore satisfied.
For the first condition, first note that if maxπ J1 pπq ´ minπ J1 pπq “ 0, then the statement holds
trivially for any non-negative L (since the other two terms on the right-hand side of the inequality are
strictly non-negative).
Let us next consider the case where both maxπ J1 pπq ´ minπ J1 pπq ą 0 and maxπ J1 pπq ´
minπ J1 pπq ą 0. We need to introduce a new definition. Let m : ΠřÑ    R|S||A||S| be the function that
                                                                   8
takes a policy π, and returns the vector where mpπqrs, a, s s “ t“0 γ t PpSt , At , St`1 “ s, a, s1 q,
                                                           1

where the probability is for a trajectory sampled from π under τ and µ0 . In other words, m returns
the long-run discounted cumulative probability with which π visits each transition. Next, note that
Jpπq “ mpπq ¨ R. This means that m can be used to decompose J into two steps, the first of which
is independent of the reward function, and the second of which is a linear function.
We will use d to derive a lower bound on the angle θ between the level sets of J1 and J2 in Impmq.
We will then show that Impmq contains an open set with a certain diameter. From this, we can find
two policies that incur a certain amount of regret.
First, by Lemma 8, there exists an ℓ1 such that for any non-trivial R1 and R2 , the angle between
spR1 q and spR2 q is at least ℓ1 ¨ dpR1 , R2 q. To make our proof easier, we will assume that we pick an
ℓ1 that is small enough to ensure that ℓ1 ¨ dpR1 , R2 q ď π{2 for all R1 , R2 .
Note that spR1 q and spR2 q may not be parallel with Impmq, which means that the angle between
spR1 q and spR2 q may not be the same as the angle between the level sets of J1 and J2 in Impmq.
Therefore, consider the matrix M that projects Impcq onto the linear subspace of R that is parallel to
Impmq, where c is the canonicalisation function of d. Now the angle between M spR1 q and M spR2 q
is the same as the angle between the level sets of the linear functions which J1 and J2 induce on
Impmq. Moreover, note that M is invertible, since any two reward functions in Impcq induce different
policy orderings except when they differ by positive linear scaling (Proposition 1). We can therefore
apply Lemma 8, and conclude that there exists an ℓ2 P p0, 1s, such that the angle θ between the level
sets of J1 and J2 in Impmq is at least ℓ2 ¨ ℓ1 ¨ dpR1 , R2 q. Moreover, since ℓ1 ¨ dpR1 , R2 q is at most
π{2, and since ℓ2 ď 1, we have that ℓ2 ¨ ℓ1 ¨ dpR1 , R2 q is at most π{2.
This gives us that, for any two policies π1 , π2 , we have:



                 J1 pπ1 q ´ J1 pπ2 q “ J1C pπ1 q ´ J1C pπ2 q
                                     “ cpR1 qmpπ1 q ´ cpR1 qmpπ2 q
                                     “ cpR1 qpmpπ1 q ´ mpπ2 qq
                                     “ M pcpR1 qqpmpπ1 q ´ mpπ2 qq
                                     “ L2 pM pcpR1 qqq ¨ L2 pmpπ1 q ´ mpπ2 qq ¨ cospϕq


where ϕ is the angle between M pcpR1 qq and mpπ1 q ´ mpπ2 q, and J1C is the evaluation function
of cpR1 q. Note that the first line follows from Lemma 6. We can thus derive a lower bound on
worst-case regret by deriving a lower bound for the greatest value of this expression.
We have that Impmq contains a set that is open in the smallest affine space which contains Impmq
(see Skalse et al., 2022b). This means that there is an ϵ such that Impmq contains a sphere of
diameter ϵ. We will show that we always can find two policies within this sphere that incur a certain
amount of regret. Consider the 2-dimensional cut which goes through the middle of this sphere and
is parallel with the normal vectors of the level sets of J1 and J2 . The intersection between this cut
and the ϵ-sphere forms a 2-dimensional circle with diameter ϵ. Let π1 , π2 be the two policies for
which mpπ1 q and mpπ2 q lie opposite to each other on this circle, and satisfy that J2 pπ1 q “ J2 pπ2 q
(or, equivalently, that M cpR1 q ¨ mpπ1 q “ M cpR1 q ¨ mpπ2 q). Without loss of generality, we may
assume that J1 pπ1 q ě J1 pπ2 q.


                                                   29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Now note that L2 pmpπ1 q ´ mpπ2 qq “ ϵ. Moreover, recall that the angle θ between M cpR1 q and
M cpR2 q is at least θ1 “ ℓ1 ¨ ℓ2 ¨ dpR1 , R2 q, and that this quantity is at most π{2. This means that the
angle ϕ is at most π{2 ´ θ1 , and so cospϕq is at least cospπ{2 ´ θ1 q “ cospπ{2 ´ ℓ1 ¨ ℓ2 ¨ dpR1 , R2 qq.
This means that we have two policies π1 , π2 where J2 pπ2 q “ J2 pπ1 q and such that
              J1 pπ1 q ´ J1 pπ2 q “ L2 pM pcpR1 qqq ¨ L2 pmpπ1 q ´ mpπ2 qq cospϕq
                                  “ L2 pM pcpR1 qqq ¨ ϵ ¨ cospπ{2 ´ ℓ2 ¨ ℓ1 ¨ dpR1 , R2 qq.
Note that cospπ{2 ´ xq ě x ¨ 2{π when x ď π{2, and that ℓ2 ¨ ℓ1 ¨ dpR1 , R2 q ď π{2. Putting this
together, we have that there must exist two policies π1 , π2 with J2 pπ2 q “ J2 pπ1 q such that
                                                           ˆ                     ˙
                                                               ϵ ¨ ℓ1 ¨ ℓ2 ¨ 2
                 J1 pπ1 q ´ J1 pπ2 q ě L2 pM pcpR1 qqq ¨                             ¨ dpR1 , R2 q.
                                                                      π
Next, note that, if p is a norm and M is an invertible matrix, then p ˝ M is also a norm. Furthermore,
recall that maxπ J1 pπq ´ minπ J1 pπq is a norm on Impcq, when c is a canonicalisation function
(Proposition 4). Since all norms are equivalent on a finite-dimensional vector space, this means that
there must exist a positive constant ℓ3 such that L2 pM pcpR1 qqq ě ℓ3 ¨ pmaxπ J1 pπq ´ minπ J1 pπqq.
We can therefore set L “ pϵ ¨ ℓ1 ¨ ℓ2 ¨ ℓ3 ¨ 2{πq, and obtain the result that we want:
                   J1 pπ1 q ´ J1 pπ2 q ě L ¨ pmax J1 pπq ´ min J1 pπqq ¨ dpR1 , R2 q.
                                               π                 π

Finally, we must consider the case where R2 is trivial under τ and µ0 , but where R1 is not. In this case,
J2 pπ2 q ě J2 pπ1 q for all π1 and π2 , which means that maxπ1 ,π2 :J2 pπ2 qěJ2 pπ1 q J1 pπ1 q ´ J1 pπ2 q “
maxπ J1 pπq ´ minπ J1 pπq. Therefore, the statement holds for any L as long as we ensure that
L ¨ dpR1 , R0 q ď 1 for all R1 and R2 . This completes the proof.

F.3   I SSUES WITH EPIC, AND S IMILAR M ETRICS

In this appendix, we prove the results from in Appendix A. Moreover, we state and prove versions of
these theorems that are more general than the versions given in the main text. First, we need a few
new definitions:
Definition 7. A function c : R Ñ R is an EPIC-like canonicalisation function if c is linear, cpRq and
R differ by potential shaping, and cpR1 q “ cpR2 q if and only if R1 and R2 only differ by potential
shaping.
Definition 8. A function d : R ˆ R Ñ R is an EPIC-like metric if there is an EPIC-like canon-
icalisation function c, a function n that is a norm on Impcq, and a metric m that is admissible on
Impcq, such that dpR1 , R2 q “ mpspR1 q, spR2 qq, where spRq “ cpRq{npcpRqq when npcpRqq ‰ 0,
and cpRq otherwise.

Note that C EPIC is an EPIC-like canonicalisation function, and that EPIC is an EPIC-like metric.


                                                   30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 3. For any EPIC-like metric d there exists a positive constant U , such that for any reward
functions R1 and R2 , if two policies π1 and π2 satisfy that J2 pπ2 q ě J2 pπ1 q, then we have that
                             J1 pπ1 q ´ J1 pπ2 q ď U ¨ L2 pR1 q ¨ dpR1 , R2 q.

Proof. We wish to show that there is a positive constant U , such that for any R1 and R2 , and any
pair of policies π1 and π2 such that J2 pπ2 q ě J2 pπ1 q, we have
                             J1 pπ1 q ´ J1 pπ2 q ď U ¨ L2 pR1 q ¨ dpR1 , R2 q.
Moreover, this must hold for any choice of τ and µ0 .
Recall that dpR1 , R2 q “ mpspR1 q, spR2 qq, where m is an admissible metric. Since m is admissible,
we have that ppspR1 q, spR2 qq ď Km ¨mpspR1 q, spR2 qq for some norm p and constant Km . Moreover,
since p is a norm, we can apply Lemma 2 to conclude that there is a constant Kp such that for any
policy π, any transition function τ , and any initial state distribution µ0 , we have that
                              |J1S pπq ´ J2S pπq| ď Kp ¨ ppspR1 q, spR2 qq.
Combining this with the fact that ppspR1 q, spR2 qq ď Km ¨ mpspR1 q, spR2 qq, we get
                        Kp ¨ ppspR1 q, spR2 qq ď Kp ¨ Km ¨ mpspR1 q, spR2 qq
                                               “ Kmp ¨ dpR1 , R2 q
where Kmp “ Kp ¨ Km . We have thus established that, for any π, τ , and µ0 , we have

                                |J1S pπq ´ J2S pπq| ď Kmp ¨ dpR1 , R2 q.
Consider an arbitrary transition function τ and initial state distribution µ0 , and let π1 and π2 be any
two policies such that J2 pπ2 q ě J2 pπ1 q under τ and µ0 . Note that J2 pπ2 q ě J2 pπ1 q if and only if
J2S pπ2 q ě J2S pπ1 q. We can therefore apply Lemma 3 and conclude that
                              J1S pπ1 q ´ J1S pπ2 q ď 2 ¨ Kmp ¨ dpR1 , R2 q.
By Lemma 6, there is a constant B such that J1C “ J1 ` B. We can therefore apply Lemma 5:
                         J1 pπ1 q ´ J1 pπ2 q ď npcpR1 qq ¨ 2 ¨ Kmp ¨ dpR1 , R2 q.
By Lemma 4, there is a positive constant Kn such that npcpRqq ď Kn ¨ npRq for all R P R.
                       J1 pπ1 q ´ J1 pπ2 q ď Kn ¨ npR1 q ¨ 2 ¨ Kmp ¨ dpR1 , R2 q.
Moreover, since n is a norm, and since R is a finite-dimensional vector space, we have that there is a
constant K2 such that npRq ď K2 ¨ L2 pRq for all R P R. Let U “ 2 ¨ Kn ¨ Kmp ¨ K2 . We have now
established that, for any π1 and π2 such that J2 pπ2 q ě J2 pπ1 q, we have that
                             J1 pπ1 q ´ J1 pπ2 q ď U ¨ L2 pR1 q ¨ dpR1 , R2 q.
Note that U does not depend on τ or µ0 . This completes the proof.
Theorem 4. No EPIC-like metric is sound.

Proof. Consider an arbitrary transition function τ and an arbitrary initial state distribution µ0 , and let
d be an EPIC-like metric with canonicalisation function c, normalisation function n, and admissible
metric m.
Let X be a linear subspace of Impcq, such that there, for any reward function R P Impcq, is exactly
one reward function R1 P X such that R and R1 differ by S 1 -redistribution under τ .
Let R1 be an arbitrary reward function in X such that npR1 q “ 1, and let R2 “ ´R1 . Note that R1
and the reward function that is 0 everywhere do not differ by potential shaping and S 1 -redistribution –
this is ensured by the fact that they are distinct, and both included in X . As per Proposition 1, this
implies that R1 does not have the same policy order as the reward function that is 0 everywhere.
This, in turn, means that maxπ J1 pπq ´ minπ J1 pπq ą 0. Moreover, since R2 “ ´R1 , this implies
that, if π1 is a policy that is optimal under R1 , and π2 is a policy that is optimal under R2 , then π2


                                                    31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


is maximally bad under R1 , and π1 is maximally bad under R2 . In other words, there are policies
π1 , π2 such that J2 pπ2 q ě J2 pπ1 q, and
                                          J1 pπ1 q ´ J1 pπ2 q
                                                                 “ 1.
                                       maxπ J1 pπq ´ minπ J1 pπq
This is the greatest value for this expression, and so the regret for R1 and R2 is maximally high.
Next, let R11 “ ϵ ¨ R1 , and R21 “ ϵ ¨ R2 , for some small positive value ϵ. Since positive linear scaling
does not affect the regret, we have that the regret for R11 and R21 also is 1.
Let x be a vector in Impcq that is orthogonal to X . Note that movement along x corresponds to
S 1 -redistribution under τ . Next, let R12 “ R11 ` α ¨ x and R22 “ R21 ` β ¨ x, where α and β are two
positive constants such that npR12 q “ 1 and npR22 q “ 1. Since movement along x corresponds to
S 1 -redistribution under τ , and since S 1 -redistribution under τ does not affect regret, we have that the
regret for R12 and R22 is 1.


Now, since R12 and R22 are in Impcq, and since npR12 q “ 1 and npR22 q “ 1, we have that dpR12 , R22 q “
mpR12 , R22 q. By making ϵ sufficiently small, we can ensure that this value is arbitrarily close to 0.
Therefore, for any simple STARC metric d and any environment, there are reward functions such that
R12 and R22 have maximally high regret, but dpR12 , R22 q is arbitrarily close to 0.
Theorem 5. There exist reward functions R1 , R2 such that dpR1 , R2 q ą 0 for any EPIC-like metric
d, but where R1 and R2 induce the same ordering of policies for any choice of transition function
and any choice of initial state distribution.

Proof. Recall that S must contain at least two states s1 , s2 , and A must contain at least two actions
a1 , a2 . Let R1 ps1 , a1 , s1 q “ 1, R1 ps1 , a1 , s2 q “ ϵ, R2 ps1 , a1 , s1 q “ ϵ, and R2 ps1 , a1 , s2 q “ 1, and
let R1 and R2 be 0 for all other transitions. R1 and R2 do not differ by potential shaping or positive
linear scaling; this means that dpR1 , R2 q ą 0 for any EPIC-like metric d. However, R1 and R2 have
the same policy ordering for all τ and µ0 .

F.4    OTHER P ROOFS

In this section, we provide a the remaining proofs of the results mentioned in the main text.
Proposition 1. Any STARC metric is a pseudometric on R.

Proof. To show that d is a pseudometric, we must show that

      1. dpR, Rq “ 0
      2. dpR1 , R2 q “ dpR2 , R1 q


                                                         32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      3. dpR1 , R3 q ď dpR1 , R2 q ` dpR2 , R3 q

1 follows from the fact that m is a metric, and 2 follows directly from the fact that the definition
of STARC metrics is symmetric in R1 and R2 . For 3, the fact that m is a metric again implies that
dpR1 , R3 q “ mpspR1 q, spR3 qq ď mpspR1 q, spR2 qq ` mpspR2 q, spR3 qq “ dpR1 , R2 q ` dpR2 , R3 q.
This completes the proof.
Proposition 2. All STARC metrics have the property that dpR1 , R2 q “ 0 if and only if R1 and R2
induce the same ordering of policies.

Proof. This is immediate from Proposition 1, together with the fact that if R1 and R2 differ by
potential shaping, S 1 -redistribution, and positive linear scaling, applied in any order, then R2 “ α ¨ R3
for some scalar α and some R3 that differs from R1 via potential shaping and S 1 -redistribution.
Proposition 3. If two pseudometrics d1 , d2 on R are both sound and complete, then d1 and d2 are
bilipschitz equivalent.

Proof. Since d1 is complete, we have that
        L1 ¨ d1 pR1 , R2 q ¨ pmax J1 pπq ´ min J1 pπqq ď                   max                J1 pπ1 q ´ J1 pπ2 q.
                                     π              π             π1 ,π2 :J2 pπ2 qěJ2 pπ1 q

Similarly, since d2 is sound, we also have that
                 max                J1 pπ1 q ´ J1 pπ2 q ď U2 ¨ d2 pR1 , R2 q ¨ pmax J1 pπq ´ min J1 pπqq.
        π1 ,π2 :J2 pπ2 qěJ2 pπ1 q                                                 π                  π

This implies that
    L1 ¨ d1 pR1 , R2 q ¨ pmax J1 pπq ´ min J1 pπqq ď U2 ¨ d2 pR1 , R2 q ¨ pmax J1 pπq ´ min J1 pπqq.
                              π                π                                        π                 π

First suppose that pmaxπ J1 pπq ´ minπ J1 pπqq ą 0. We can then divide both sides, and obtain that
                                                ˆ ˙
                                                 U2
                                d1 pR1 , R2 q ď      d2 pR1 , R2 q.
                                                 L1
Similarly, we also have that
                                     ˙    ˆ
                                 L2
                                       d2 pR1 , R2 q ď d1 pR1 , R2 q.
                                 U1
                                 ´ ¯         ´ ¯
                                    U2          L2
This means that we have constants L  1
                                         and    U1 not depending on R1 or R2 , such that
                    ˆ ˙                                    ˆ ˙
                      L2                                     U2
                           d2 pR1 , R2 q ď d1 pR1 , R2 q ď          d2 pR1 , R2 q
                      U1                                     L1
for all R1 and R2 such that pmaxπ J1 pπq ´ minπ J1 pπqq ą 0.
Next, assume pmaxπ J1 pπq ´ minπ J1 pπqq “ 0 but pmaxπ J2 pπq ´ minπ J2 pπqq ą 0. Since d1
and d2 are ´pseudometrics,
                ¯          we have that d1 pR1´, R2 q¯ “ d1 pR2 , R1 q and d2 pR1 , R2 q “ d2 pR2 , R1 q.
               L2                                          U2
Therefore,     U1    d2 pR1 , R2 q ď d1 pR1 , R2 q ď       L1   d2 pR1 , R2 q in this case as well.

Finally, assume that pmaxπ J1 pπq ´ minπ J1 pπqq “ 0 and pmaxπ J2 pπq ´ minπ J2 pπqq “ 0. In
this case, R1 and R2 induce the same policy order (namely, the order
                                                                 ´ ¯where π1 ” π2 for all π1 , π2 ).
This in turn means that d1 pR1 , R2 q “ d2 pR1 , R2 q “ 0, and so LU1 d2 pR1 , R2 q ď d1 pR1 , R2 q ď
                                                                    2

´ ¯
  U2
  L1 d2 pR1 , R2 q in this case as well. This completes the proof.


G     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP OF S MALL MDP S
In this appendix, we give the precise details required to reproduce our experimental results, as well as
more of the raw data than what is provided in the main text.


                                                           33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G.1    E NVIRONMENTS AND R EWARDS

As mentioned in the main text, we used Markov Decision Processes with 32 states and 4 actions. The
discount factor was set to 0.95 and the initial state distribution was uniform.
The transition distribution τ ps, a, s1 q was generated as follows:

      1. Sample i.i.d. Gaussians (µ “ 0, σ “ 1) to generate a matrix of shape r32, 4, 32s.
      2. For each item in the matrix: if the item is below 1, set its value to -20. This is done to ensure
         the transition distribution is sparse and therefore more similar to real-world environments.
         Without this step, when an agent is in state S and takes action A, the distribution τ pS, A, s1 q
         would be close to uniform, meaning that the choice of the action would not make much of a
         difference.
      3. Softmax along the last dimension (which corresponds to s1 ) to get a valid probability
         distribution.

We then generated pairs of rewards. This worked in two stages: random generation and interpolation.
In the random generation stage, we choose two random rewards R1 , R2 using the following procedure:

      1. Sample i.i.d. Gaussians (µ “ 0, σ “ 1) to generate a matrix of shape r32, 4, 32s correspond-
         ing to Rps, a, s1 q.
      2. With a 20% probability, make the function sparse in the following way – for each item in
         the matrix: if the item is below 3, set its value to 0.
      3. With a 70% probability, scale the reward function in the following way – sample a uniform
         distribution between 0 and 10, multiply the matrix by this number.
      4. With a 30% probability, translate the reward function in the following way – sample a
         uniform distribution between 0 and 10, add this number to the matrix.
      5. With a 50% probability, apply random potential shaping in the following way – sample
         32 i.i.d. Gaussians (µ “ 0, σ “ 1) to get a potential vector Φ. Then sample a uniform
         distribution between 0 and 10 and multiply the vector by this number. Then sample a
         uniform distribution between 0 and 1 and add this number to the vector. Then apply potential
         shaping to the reward function: Rnew ps, a, s1 q “ Rps, a, s1 q ` γΦps1 q ´ Φpsq.

When we say "With an X% probability", we are sampling a random number from a uniform dis-
tribution between 0 and 1 and if the number is above (100-X)%, we perform the action described,
otherwise we skip the step.
Then in the interpolation stage, we take the pair of reward functions generated above and do a linear
interpolation between them, finding 16 functions which lie between R1 and R2 . More precisely, we
set Rpiq “ R1 ` id where d “ pR2 ´ R1 q{16 and with i ranging from 1 to 16.
The interpolation step exists to give us pairs of rewards which are relatively close to each other –
for instance, R1 and Rp1q are very similar. This is important because nearly all reward functions
generated with the random generation process described above will be orthogonal to each other, and
thus their distances to each other would always be quite large. By including this interpolation step,
we ensure a greater variety in the range of distance values and regret values we expect to see.
For each environment, we generated 16 pairs of reward functions, and then for each pair we performed
16 interpolation steps. This means that for each transition distribution, we compared 256 different
reward functions.
We then compute all distance metrics as well as rollout regret between R1 and Rpiq for all i.

G.2    ROLLOUT R EGRET

We calculate rollout regret in 3 stages: 1, find optimal and anti-optimal policies, 2, compute returns
under various policies and reward functions, 3, calculate regret.
In stage 1, we use value iteration to find policies π1 which maximises reward R1 , πpiq which
maximises reward Rpiq , πx which minimises reward R1 (in other words maximising reward ´R1 ,


                                                   34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


meaning πx is the worst possible policy under R1 ), and πy which minimises reward R2 . Note that all
of these policies are deterministic, i.e. π : S Ñ A.
In stage 2, we simulate a number of episodes to determine the average return of the policy. Specifically,
we simulate 32 episodes such that no two episodes start in the same initial state (this helps reduce
noise in the return estimates). The episode terminates when the discount factor being applied (i.e. γ t )
is below 10´5 .
In stage 3, we calculate regret as follows. The regret is the average of two regrets: the regret of
using πpiq instead of π1 when evaluating using R1 , and the regret of using π1 instead of πpiq when
evaluating using Rpiq (with both of these being normalised by the range of possible returns):
                                                Reg1 ` Regpiq
                                        Reg “
                                                      2
                                              J1 pπ1 q ´ J1 pπpiq q
                                      Reg1 “
                                              J1 pπ1 q ´ J1 pπx q
                                              Jpiq pπpiq q ´ Jpiq pπ1 q
                                     Regpiq “
                                              Jpiq pπpiq q ´ Jpiq pπy q
In cases where the denominator is zero, we simply replace it with 1 (since the numerator in these
cases is also necessarily 0).

G.3    L IST OF M ETRICS

Our experiment covers hundreds of metrics, derived by creating different combinations of canon-
icalisation functions, normalisations, and distance metrics. Specifically, we used 6 “pseudo-
canonicalisations” (some of which, like C EPIC and C DARD , do not meet the conditions of Def-
inition 1), 7 normalisation functions, and 6 distance norms.
For canonicalisations, we used None (which simply skips the canonicalisation step), C EPIC ,
C DARD , MinimalPotential (which is the minimal “pseudo-canonicalisation” that removes
potential shaping but not S 1 -redistribution, and therefore is easier to compute), VALPotential
(which is given by Rps, a, s1 q ´ V π psq ` γV π ps1 q), and VAL (defined in Proposition 2 as
ES 1 „τ ps,aq rRps, a, S 1 q ´ V π psq ` γV π pS 1 qs). For both C EPIC and C DARD , both DS and DA
were chosen to be uniform over S and A. For both VALPotential and VAL, π was chosen to
be the uniformly random policy. 9 Note that VAL is the only canonicalisation which removes both
potential shaping and S 1 -redistribution, and thus the only one that meets the STARC definition
of a canonicalisation function (Definition 1). The other pseudo-canonicalisations were used for
comparison. It is worth noting that our experiment does not include the minimal canonicalisation
functions, given in Definition 4, because these functions are prohibitively expensive to compute. They
are therefore better suited for theoretical analysis, rather than practical evaluations.
The normalisation step and the distance step used L1 , L2 , L8 , weighted_L1 , weighted_L2 ,
and weighted_L8       ř. The weighted norms are weighted by the transition function τ , i.e.
Lτp pRqps, a, s1 q “ p s,a,s1 τ ps, a, s1 q|Rps, a, s1 q|p q1{p . We also considered metrics that skip the
normalisation step.
We used almost all combinations of these – the only exception was that we did not combine
MinimalPotential with normalisation norms L8 or weighted_L8 because the optimisation
algorithm for MinimalPotential does not converge for these norms.

G.4    N UMBER OF R EWARD PAIRS

We used 49,152 reward pairs. This number was chosen in advance as the stopping point – it
corresponds to using 96 CPU cores, generating 2 environments on each core, choosing 16 reward
pairs within each environment and then performing 16 interpolation steps between them.
   9
     Since VAL is a valid canonicalisation function for any choice of policy π, we simply picked a policy for
which V π would be easy to estimate. The reason for choosing a uniformly random policy, rather than some
deterministic policy, is that this policy has exploration build in.


                                                     35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H    F ULL R ESULTS O F S MALL MDP E XPERIMENTS
We used the Balrog GPU cluster at UC Berkeley, which consists of 8 A100 GPUs, each with 40 GB
memory, along with 96 CPU cores.
The notation in this table is in the format Canonicalisation-normalisation-distance.
For instance, VAL-2-weighted_1 means using the Val canonicalisation function, L2 normali-
sation function, and then taking the distance with the weighted L1 norm. 0 means normalisation is
skipped.

                               Table 2: Full experimental results

                           Distance function                Correlation to regret
                      VALPotential-1-weighted_1                    0.876
                          VAL-1-weighted_1                         0.873
                               VAL-1-1                             0.873
                     VAL-weighted_1-weighted_1                     0.873
                          VAL-weighted_1-1                         0.873
                               VAL-1-2                             0.870
                          VAL-weighted_1-2                         0.870
                          VAL-1-weighted_2                         0.870
                     VAL-weighted_1-weighted_2                     0.870
                  VALPotential-weighted_1-weighted_1               0.867
                        DARD-1-weighted_1                          0.861
                         VAL-weighted_2-inf                        0.858
                              VAL-2-inf                            0.858
                     VAL-weighted_2-weighted_2                     0.856
                               VAL-2-2                             0.856
                          VAL-weighted_2-2                         0.856
                          VAL-2-weighted_2                         0.856
                  VALPotential-weighted_2-weighted_2               0.845
                    DARD-weighted_1-weighted_1                     0.835
                    DARD-weighted_2-weighted_2                     0.831
                     EPIC-weighted_1-weighted_1                    0.830
                      VALPotential-2-weighted_2                    0.828
                        DARD-2-weighted_2                          0.826
                              DARD-1-1                             0.824
                     EPIC-weighted_2-weighted_2                    0.823
                         EPIC-1-weighted_1                         0.819
                        VAL-weighted_inf-inf                       0.816
                        MinimalPotential-1-1                       0.815
                    MinimalPotential-2-weighted_2                  0.814
                         EPIC-2-weighted_2                         0.814
                               EPIC-1-1                            0.814
                 VALPotential-weighted_2-weighted_inf              0.807
                    EPIC-weighted_2-weighted_inf                   0.806
                               VAL-2-1                             0.804
                          VAL-2-weighted_1                         0.804
                          VAL-weighted_2-1                         0.804
                     VAL-weighted_2-weighted_1                     0.804
                           VALPotential-1-1                        0.800
                  VALPotential-weighted_2-weighted_1               0.784
                    VAL-weighted_2-weighted_inf                    0.783
                         VAL-2-weighted_inf                        0.783
                           VALPotential-2-2                        0.782
                              DARD-2-2                             0.782
                        MinimalPotential-2-2                       0.778
                               EPIC-2-2                            0.778
                      VALPotential-1-weighted_2                    0.776


                                               36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    DARD-weighted_2-weighted_1           0.774
                         DARD-2-weighted_1               0.767
                       VALPotential-2-weighted_1         0.767
                     VAL-weighted_inf-weighted_2         0.766
                          VAL-weighted_inf-2             0.766
                         DARD-1-weighted_2               0.761
                              VAL-inf-inf                0.756
                    DARD-weighted_1-weighted_2           0.754
                            VALPotential-2-1             0.752
                              DARD-2-1                   0.751
                          EPIC-weighted_1-1              0.749
                               VAL-1-inf                 0.749
                          VAL-weighted_1-inf             0.749
                    MinimalPotential-2-weighted_1        0.746
                          EPIC-2-weighted_1              0.746
                          VAL-1-weighted_inf             0.741
                     VAL-weighted_1-weighted_inf         0.741
                     EPIC-weighted_2-weighted_1          0.738
                VALPotential-weighted_inf-weighted_inf   0.735
                               EPIC-2-1                  0.734
                    VAL-weighted_inf-weighted_inf        0.734
                         MinimalPotential-2-1            0.733
                     EPIC-weighted_1-weighted_2          0.730
                          VAL-inf-weighted_2             0.723
                               VAL-inf-2                 0.723
                 VALPotential-weighted_inf-weighted_1    0.722
                    MinimalPotential-1-weighted_1        0.718
                   DARD-weighted_inf-weighted_2          0.718
                   DARD-weighted_inf-weighted_1          0.713
                         DARD-weighted_2-1               0.711
                   DARD-weighted_2-weighted_inf          0.708
                          VAL-inf-weighted_1             0.708
                               VAL-inf-1                 0.708
                         VAL-inf-weighted_inf            0.707
                          VAL-weighted_inf-1             0.707
                     VAL-weighted_inf-weighted_1         0.707
                   DARD-weighted_inf-weighted_inf        0.698
                 VALPotential-weighted_1-weighted_inf    0.692
                    EPIC-weighted_inf-weighted_2         0.692
                    EPIC-weighted_inf-weighted_1         0.686
                      VALPotential-1-weighted_inf        0.685
                         DARD-weighted_inf-1             0.685
                          EPIC-weighted_2-1              0.680
                   DARD-weighted_1-weighted_inf          0.679
                      VALPotential-2-weighted_inf        0.677
                         DARD-2-weighted_inf             0.675
                   EPIC-weighted_inf-weighted_inf        0.661
                         DARD-inf-weighted_1             0.657
                         DARD-1-weighted_inf             0.654
                      VALPotential-inf-weighted_1        0.653
                         DARD-inf-weighted_2             0.652
                      VALPotential-inf-weighted_2        0.648
                               EPIC-1-2                  0.647
                         EPIC-weighted_inf-1             0.642
                              DARD-inf-1                 0.639
                              DARD-inf-2                 0.637
                   MinimalPotential-2-weighted_inf       0.637
                         EPIC-2-weighted_inf             0.637
                           VALPotential-inf-1            0.636


                                               37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          VALPotential-inf-2          0.634
                        MinimalPotential-2-inf        0.634
                             EPIC-2-inf               0.634
                          None-2-weighted_2           0.633
                       DARD-inf-weighted_inf          0.632
                             DARD-2-inf               0.630
                         EPIC-inf-weighted_2          0.630
                         EPIC-inf-weighted_1          0.629
                          VALPotential-2-inf          0.625
                     VALPotential-inf-weighted_inf    0.624
                          EPIC-1-weighted_2           0.622
                    None-weighted_2-weighted_inf      0.622
                         DARD-weighted_1-1            0.621
                             EPIC-inf-1               0.620
                              None-2-2                0.618
                             EPIC-inf-2               0.617
                     None-weighted_2-weighted_2       0.615
                    EPIC-weighted_1-weighted_inf      0.607
                     None-weighted_1-weighted_1       0.598
                              None-1-1                0.597
                          None-2-weighted_1           0.579
                         MinimalPotential-1-2         0.576
                     None-weighted_2-weighted_1       0.573
                              None-2-1                0.571
                        EPIC-inf-weighted_inf         0.571
                    MinimalPotential-1-weighted_2     0.568
                         VALPotential-inf-inf         0.557
                             None-inf-inf             0.555
                             EPIC-inf-inf             0.554
                            DARD-inf-inf              0.552
                             EPIC-1-inf               0.542
                         None-inf-weighted_2          0.539
                    None-weighted_inf-weighted_1      0.539
                              None-inf-2              0.538
                         None-inf-weighted_1          0.537
                              None-inf-1              0.537
                    None-weighted_inf-weighted_inf    0.530
                          EPIC-weighted_1-2           0.529
                         EPIC-1-weighted_inf          0.517
                          None-1-weighted_1           0.515
                         None-2-weighted_inf          0.513
                        MinimalPotential-1-inf        0.493
                    MinimalPotential-1-weighted_inf   0.489
                        None-inf-weighted_inf         0.487
                             DARD-1-2                 0.453
                              None-2-inf              0.444
                         EPIC-weighted_1-inf          0.436
                    None-weighted_1-weighted_inf      0.429
                          None-1-weighted_2           0.390
                             DARD-1-inf               0.376
                         None-1-weighted_inf          0.353
                              None-1-2                0.352
                              None-0-inf              0.333
                        DARD-weighted_inf-2           0.319
                         None-0-weighted_inf          0.312
                              None-0-2                0.304
                          None-0-weighted_2           0.303
                          None-0-weighted_1           0.296
                              None-0-1                0.296


                                               38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                             None-1-inf                 0.278
                       DARD-weighted_1-2                0.241
                          VALPotential-1-2              0.240
                        EPIC-weighted_2-2               0.224
                       DARD-weighted_1-inf              0.220
                       EPIC-weighted_inf-2              0.197
                             EPIC-0-inf                 0.184
                       DARD-weighted_2-2                0.178
                         VALPotential-1-inf             0.171
                        VAL-0-weighted_inf              0.171
                         VALPotential-0-inf             0.171
                            DARD-0-inf                  0.170
                         VAL-0-weighted_1               0.149
                              VAL-0-1                   0.149
                         VAL-0-weighted_2               0.146
                              VAL-0-2                   0.146
                    VALPotential-0-weighted_inf         0.141
                       DARD-0-weighted_inf              0.141
                             VAL-0-inf                  0.140
                       EPIC-0-weighted_inf              0.140
                       DARD-0-weighted_1                0.137
                     VALPotential-0-weighted_1          0.136
                       DARD-0-weighted_2                0.136
                     VALPotential-0-weighted_2          0.135
                        EPIC-0-weighted_2               0.131
                        EPIC-0-weighted_1               0.130
                       EPIC-weighted_2-inf              0.129
                             DARD-0-2                   0.125
                             DARD-0-1                   0.124
                          VALPotential-0-2              0.123
                       DARD-weighted_2-inf              0.122
                          VALPotential-0-1              0.122
                              EPIC-0-1                  0.122
                              EPIC-0-2                  0.122
                     VALPotential-weighted_2-1          0.112
                      DARD-weighted_inf-inf             0.095
                     VALPotential-weighted_2-2          0.093
                    VALPotential-weighted_inf-1         0.077
                VALPotential-weighted_inf-weighted_2    0.073
                    VALPotential-weighted_2-inf         0.065
                       EPIC-weighted_inf-inf            0.052
                    VALPotential-weighted_inf-2         0.051
                   VALPotential-weighted_inf-inf        0.024
                        None-weighted_2-1              -0.034
                     VALPotential-weighted_1-1         -0.035
                        None-weighted_inf-1            -0.035
                 VALPotential-weighted_1-weighted_2    -0.037
                   None-weighted_inf-weighted_2        -0.040
                     VALPotential-weighted_1-2         -0.040
                        None-weighted_inf-2            -0.043
                        None-weighted_2-2              -0.043
                    VALPotential-weighted_1-inf        -0.044
                        None-weighted_1-1              -0.045
                       None-weighted_inf-inf           -0.046
                        None-weighted_2-inf            -0.046
                    None-weighted_1-weighted_2         -0.047
                        None-weighted_1-2              -0.047
                        None-weighted_1-inf            -0.048



                                               39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


H.1   C OMPARISON OF E XPERIMENTAL P ERFORMANCE BASED ON C HOICE OF N ORMS

As discussed in the main text, the choice of normalisation and metric functions can make a noticeable
difference to the performance of a reward metric. To make it easier to see the impact that this choice
has, this appendix contains the same data as Appendix H, but organised together by canonicalisation
function, and then arranged by normalisation and metric.

                         1           2          inf     weighted_1    weighted_2    weighted_inf
           0           0.296       0.304       0.333      0.296          0.303         0.312
           1           0.597       0.352       0.278      0.515           0.39         0.353
           2           0.571       0.618       0.444      0.579          0.633         0.513
          inf          0.537       0.538       0.555      0.537          0.539         0.487
      weighted_1      -0.045      -0.047      -0.048      0.598         -0.047         0.429
      weighted_2      -0.034      -0.043      -0.046      0.573          0.615         0.622
      weighted_inf    -0.035      -0.043      -0.046      0.539          -0.04          0.53

Table 3: Correlation to regret for the None canonicalisation for each normalization and distance
metric. Each row corresponds to a normalisation function, and each column corresponds to a metric
function.



                             1        2        inf     weighted_1    weighted_2    weighted_inf
            0             0.122     0.122     0.184       0.13         0.131           0.14
            1             0.814     0.647     0.542      0.819         0.622          0.517
            2             0.734     0.778     0.634      0.746         0.814          0.637
           inf             0.62     0.617     0.554      0.629          0.63          0.571
       weighted_1         0.749     0.529     0.436       0.83          0.73          0.607
       weighted_2          0.68     0.224     0.129      0.738         0.823          0.806
       weighted_inf       0.642     0.197     0.052      0.686         0.692          0.661

Table 4: Correlation to regret for the EPIC canonicalisation for each normalization and distance
metric. Each row corresponds to a normalisation function, and each column corresponds to a metric
function.



                            1         2        inf     weighted_1    weighted_2    weighted_inf
            0             0.124     0.125     0.17       0.137         0.136          0.141
            1             0.824     0.453     0.376      0.861         0.761          0.654
            2             0.751     0.782     0.63       0.767         0.826          0.675
           inf            0.639     0.637     0.552      0.657         0.652          0.632
       weighted_1         0.621     0.241     0.22       0.835         0.754          0.679
       weighted_2         0.711     0.178     0.122      0.774         0.831          0.708
       weighted_inf       0.685     0.319     0.095      0.713         0.718          0.698

Table 5: Correlation to regret for the DARD canonicalisation for each normalization and distance
metric. Each row corresponds to a normalisation function, and each column corresponds to a metric
function.



                    1         2        inf      weighted_1    weighted_2    weighted_inf
             1    0.815     0.576     0.493       0.718         0.568          0.489
             2    0.733     0.778     0.634       0.746         0.814          0.637

Table 6: Correlation to regret for the MinimalPotential canonicalisation for each normalization
and distance metric. Each row corresponds to a normalisation function, and each column corresponds
to a metric function.


                                                       40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                          1         2       inf     weighted_1     weighted_2      weighted_inf
            0           0.122    0.123    0.171       0.136          0.135            0.141
            1            0.8      0.24    0.171       0.876          0.776            0.685
            2           0.752    0.782    0.625       0.767          0.828            0.677
           inf          0.636    0.634    0.557       0.653          0.648            0.624
       weighted_1      -0.035    -0.04    -0.044      0.867          -0.037           0.692
       weighted_2       0.112    0.093    0.065       0.784          0.845            0.807
       weighted_inf     0.077    0.051    0.024       0.722          0.073            0.735

Table 7: Correlation to regret for the VALPotential canonicalisation for each normalization and
distance metric. Each row corresponds to a normalisation function, and each column corresponds to
a metric function.



                          1        2       inf     weighted_1      weighted_2     weighted_inf
             0          0.149    0.146    0.14       0.149           0.146           0.171
             1          0.873    0.87     0.749      0.873            0.87           0.741
             2          0.804    0.856    0.858      0.804           0.856           0.783
            inf         0.708    0.723    0.756      0.708           0.723           0.707
        weighted_1      0.873    0.87     0.749      0.873            0.87           0.741
        weighted_2      0.804    0.856    0.858      0.804           0.856           0.783
        weighted_inf    0.707    0.766    0.816      0.707           0.766           0.734

Table 8: Correlation to regret for the VAL canonicalisation for each normalization and distance metric.
Each row corresponds to a normalisation function, and each column corresponds to a metric function.


I     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP O F R EACHER E NVIRONMENT

In this appendix, we elaborate on the details of our Reacher experiments. The discount rate for this
experiment was γ “ 0.99, following the original MuJoCo environment.

I.1   R EWARD FUNCTIONS

As mentioned in the main text, we used 7 different reward functions.
The GroundTruth is simply copied from the original Reacher environment. It computes the
Euclidean distance between the fingertip and target, denoted d. It also computes a penalty for taking
large actions, which is computed by squaring the values of the action and summing them, p “ a20 ` a21 .
It then returns ´pd ` pq.
The PotentialShaped reward applies randomly generated (but deterministic) potential shap-
ing on top of GroundTruth. When the experiment starts, 11 weights (one for each dimension
in observation space) and 1 bias are randomly sampled from a normal Gaussian. The potential
function is then simply Φpsq “ w ¨ x ` b, so the full reward is PotentialShapedps, a, s1 q “
GroundTruthps, a, s1 q ` γΦps1 q ´ Φpsq.
SPrime returns the same value as GroundTruth if s1 “ τ ps, aq, and the same value as Random
otherwise. At the start of the experiment, a new instance of Random is initialised (see below for
details). We consider s1 to follow from τ ps, aq if the two quantities are either less than 1% apart, or
less than 0.01 apart (even if they aren’t perfectly equal).
SecondPeak creates a second, smaller "peak" (corresponding to a second, less important target) in
the environment, alongside the original "peak" from GroundTruth. When initialised at the start
of the experiment, it picks a random position on the same 2D plane where the fingertip and target
are, such that the Euclidean distance between the second peak and the original peak is at least 0.5
(note that the size of the whole plane is 1 ˆ 1). The reward is then determined by first computing the
Euclidean distance between the fingertip and the second peak, denoted d, and then simply adding
´0.2d on top of GroundTruth, ie. SecondPeak “ GroundTruth ´ 0.2d.


                                                   41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


SemanticallyIdentical creates a reward peak around the target, similarly to GroundTruth,
but this peak has a different shape. It is a 2D Gaussian with a standard deviation of 0.1 along both
axes. The values of the Gaussian are then rounded to the nearest 0.01.
NegativeGroundReward simply returns ´1 ˚ GroundTruth.
Random returns random (but deterministic) values. When the experiment starts, 11 s-weights, 2
a-weights, 11 s1 -weights, and 1 bias are generated by sampling a normal Gaussian. The reward
function then simply returns s ¨ ws ` a ¨ wa ` s1 ¨ ws1 ` b.

I.2   C ANONICALISING AND NORMALISING IN CONTINUOUS SETTINGS

The state value function in VAL is based on a uniformly random policy π. We implemented V π using
SARSA (Rummery & Niranjan, 1994) updates with AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019) and a
reply buffer on a 4-layer MLP (which maps observations onto real values).
For the norm, we effectively need to compute the norm of a function,
                                                                  ş which means taking the norm of
an infinite-dimensional vector. This can be written precisely as p |f pxq|p dxq1{p , and approximated
using Monte Carlo sampling as p N1 |f pxq|p dxq1{p . When taking a sample of the reward function,
                                     ř
we sample s, a uniformly, and then set s1 “ τ ps, aq – this removes impossible transitions from
the sample space, while also reducing the dimensionality of the space we need to cover from 22
dimensions down to 12. As a special case, when taking the L8 norm, we simply look for the
maximum value of |f pxq|. This could be approximated using optimisation algorithms by assuming
|f pxq| is convex, but we chose not to make this assumption and instead simply choose the maximum
among the samples.


                                                 42
