Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


S PARSISTENCY FOR I NVERSE O PTIMAL T RANSPORT
 Francisco Andrade & Gabriel Peyré                               Clarice Poon
 ENS Paris                                                       University of Warwick
 {francisco.andrade,gabriel.peyre}@ens.fr                        clarice.poon@warwick.ac.uk



                                            A BSTRACT

         Optimal Transport is a useful metric to compare probability distributions and
         to compute a pairing given a ground cost. Its entropic regularization variant
         (eOT) is crucial to have fast algorithms and reflect fuzzy/noisy matchings. This
         work focuses on Inverse Optimal Transport (iOT), the problem of inferring the
         ground cost from samples drawn from a coupling that solves an eOT problem. It
         is a relevant problem that can be used to infer unobserved/missing links, and to
         obtain meaningful information about the structure of the ground cost yielding
         the pairing. On one side, iOT benefits from convexity, but on the other side,
         being ill-posed, it requires regularization to handle the sampling noise. This
         work presents an in-depth theoretical study of the ℓ1 regularization to model for
         instance Euclidean costs with sparse interactions between features. Specifically,
         we derive a sufficient condition for the robust recovery of the sparsity of the
         ground cost that can be seen as a far reaching generalization of the Lasso’s
         celebrated “Irrepresentability Condition”. To provide additional insight into
         this condition, we work out in detail the Gaussian case. We show that as the
         entropic penalty varies, the iOT problem interpolates between a graphical Lasso
         and a classical Lasso, thereby establishing a connection between iOT and graph
         estimation, an important problem in ML.


1     I NTRODUCTION

Optimal transport has emerged as a key theoretical and numerical ingredient in machine learning
for performing learning over probability distributions. It enables the comparison of probability
distributions in a “geometrically faithful” manner by lifting a ground cost (or “metric” in a loose
sense) between pairs of points to a distance between probability distributions, metrizing the
convergence in law. However, the success of this OT approach to ML is inherently tied to the
hypothesis that the ground cost is adapted to the problem under study. This necessitates the
exploration of ground metric learning. However, it is exceptionally challenging due to its a
priori highly non-convex nature when framed as an optimization problem, thereby inheriting
complications in its mathematical analysis. As we illustrate in this theoretical article, these
problems become tractable – numerically and theoretically – if one assumes access to samples
from the OT coupling (i.e., having access to some partial matching driven by the ground cost).
Admittedly, this is a restrictive setup, but it arises in practice (refer to subsequent sections for
illustrative applications) and can also be construed as a step in a more sophisticated learning
pipeline. The purpose of this paper is to propose some theoretical understanding of the possibility
of stably learning a ground cost from partial matching observations.

1.1   P REVIOUS W ORKS

Entropic Optimal Transport.          OT has been instrumental in defining and studying various
procedures at the core of many ML pipelines, such as bag-of-features matching Rubner et al.
(2000), distances in NLP Kusner et al. (2015), generative modeling Arjovsky et al. (2017), flow
evolution for sampling De Bortoli et al. (2021), and even single-cell trajectory inference Schiebinger
et al. (2019). We refer to the monographs Santambrogio (2015) for detailed accounts on the theory
of OT, and Peyré et al. (2019) for its computational aspects. Of primary importance to our work,
entropic regularization of OT is the workhorse of many ML applications. It enables a fast and
highly parallelizable estimation of the OT coupling using the Sinkhorn algorithm Sinkhorn (1964).


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


More importantly, it defines a smooth distance that incorporates the understanding that matching
procedures should be modeled as a noisy process (i.e., should not be assumed to be 1:1). These
advantages were first introduced in ML by the seminal paper of Cuturi Cuturi (2013), and this
approach finds its roots in Schrödinger’s work in statistical physics Léonard (2012). The role of
noise in matching (with applications in economics) and its relation to entropic OT were advanced
in a series of papers by Galichon and collaborators Galichon & Salanié (2010); Dupuy & Galichon
(2014); Galichon & Salanié (2022); see the book Galichon (2018). These works are key inspirations
for the present paper, which aims at providing more theoretical understanding in the case of
inverse OT (as detailed next).

Metric Learning. The estimation of some metrics from pairwise interactions (either positive or
negative) falls into the classical field of metric learning in ML, and we refer to the monograph Bellet
et al. (2013) for more details. In contrast to the inverse OT (iOT) problem considered in this paper,
classical metric learning is more straightforward, as no global matching between sets of points
is involved. This allows the metric to be directly optimized, while the iOT problem necessitates
some form of bilevel optimization. Similarly to our approach, since the state space is typically
continuous, it is necessary to restrict the class of distances to render the problem tractable. The
common option, which we also adopt in our paper to exemplify our findings, is to consider
the class of Mahalanobis distances. These distances generalize the Euclidean distance and are
equivalent to computing a vectorial embedding of the data points. See, for instance, Xing et al.
(2002); Weinberger et al. (2006); Davis & Dhillon (2008).

OT Ground Metric Learning. The problem of estimating the ground cost driving OT in a super-
vised manner was first addressed by Cuturi & Avis (2014). Unlike methods that have access to
pairs of samples, the ground metric learning problem requires pairs of probability distributions
and then evolves into a classical metric learning problem, but within the OT space. The class of
ground metrics can be constrained, for example, by utilizing Mahalanobis Wang & Guibas (2012);
Xu et al. (2018); Kerdoncuff et al. (2021) or geodesic distances Heitz et al. (2021), to devise more
efficient learning schemes. The study Zen et al. (2014) conducts ground metric learning and matrix
factorization simultaneously, finding applications in NLP Huang et al. (2016). It is noteworthy
that ground metric learning can also be linked to generative models through adversarial train-
ing Genevay et al. (2018) and to robust learning Paty & Cuturi (2020) by maximizing the cost to
render the OT distance as discriminative as possible.

Inverse Optimal Transport. The inverse optimal transport problem (iOT) can be viewed as
a specific instance of ground metric learning, where one aims to infer the ground cost from
partial observations of the (typically entropically regularized) optimal transport coupling. This
problem was first formulated and examined by Dupuy and Galichon Dupuy & Galichon (2014)
over a discrete space (also see Galichon & Salanié (2022) for a more detailed analysis), making the
fundamental remark that the maximum likelihood estimator amounts to solving a convex problem.
The mathematical properties of the iOT problem for discrete space (i.e., direct computation of the
cost between all pairs of points) are explored in depth in Chiu et al. (2022), studying uniqueness
(up to trivial ambiguities) and stability to pointwise noise. Note that our theoretical study differs
fundamentally as we focus on continuous state spaces. This “continuous” setup assumes access
only to a set of couples, corresponding to matches (or links) presumed to be drawn from an OT
coupling. In this scenario, the iOT is typically an ill-posed problem, and Dupuy et al. (2019);
Carlier et al. (2023) propose regularizing the maximum likelihood estimator with either a low-
rank (using a nuclear norm penalty) or a sparse prior (using an ℓ1 Lasso-type penalty). In our
work, we concretely focus on the sparse case, but our theoretical treatment of the iOT could be
extended to general structured convex regularization, along the lines of Vaiter et al. (2015). While
not the focus of our paper, it is noteworthy that these works also propose efficient large-scale,
non-smooth proximal solvers to optimize the penalized maximum likelihood functional, and we
refer to Ma et al. (2020) for an efficient solver without inner loop calls to Sinkhorn’s algorithm. This
approach was further refined in Stuart & Wolfram (2020), deriving it from a Bayesian interpretation,
enabling the use of MCMC methods to sample the posterior instead of optimizing a pointwise
estimate (as we consider here). They also propose parameterizing cost functions as geodesic
distances on graphs (while we consider only linear models to maintain convexity). An important
application of iOT to ML, explored by Li et al. (2019), is to perform link prediction by solving new
OT problems once the cost has been estimated from the observed couplings. Another category


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


of ML application of iOT is representation learning (learning embeddings of data into, e.g., an
Euclidean space) from pairwise interactions, as demonstrated by Shi et al. (2023), which recasts
contrastive learning as a specific instance of iOT.

Inverse problems and model selection. The iOT problem is formally a bilevel problem, as the ob-
servation model necessitates solving an OT problem as an inner-level program Colson et al. (2005)
– we refer to Eisenberger et al. (2022) for a recent numerical treatment of bilevel programming with
entropic OT. The iOT can thus be conceptualized as an “inverse optimization” problem Zhang
& Liu (1996); Ahuja & Orlin (2001), but with a particularly favorable structure, allowing it to be
recast as a convex optimization. This provides the foundation for a rigorous mathematical analysis
of performance, as we propose in this paper. The essence of our contributions is a theoretical
examination of the recoverability of the OT cost from noisy observations, and particularly, the
robustness to noise of the sparse support of the cost (for instance, viewed as a symmetric matrix
for Mahalanobis norms). There exists a rich tradition of similar studies in the fields of inverse
problem regularization and model selection in statistics. The most prominent examples are
the sparsistency theory of the Lasso Tibshirani (1996) (least square regularized by ℓ1 ), which
culminated in the theory of compressed sensing Candès et al. (2006). These theoretical results
are predicated on a so-called “irrepresentability condition” Zhao & Yu (2006), which ensures the
stability of the support. While our analysis is grounded in similar concepts (in particular, we
identify the corresponding irrepresentability condition for the iOT), the iOT inverse problem
is fundamentally distinct due to the differing observation model (it corresponds to a sampling
process rather than the observation of a vector) and the estimation process necessitates solving a
linear program of potentially infinite dimension (in the limit of a large number of samples). This
mandates a novel proof strategy, which forms the core of our mathematical analysis.

1.2   C ONTRIBUTIONS

This paper proposes the first mathematical analysis of the performance of regularized iOT esti-
mation, focusing on the special case of sparse ℓ1 regularization (the ℓ1 -iOT method). We begin
by deriving the customary “irrepresentability condition” of the iOT problem, rigorously proving
that it is well-defined. This condition interweaves the properties of the Hessian of the maximum
likelihood functional with the sparse support of the sought-after cost. The main contribution
of this paper is Theorem 5, which leverages this abstract irrepresentability condition to ensure
sparsistency of the ℓ1 -iOT method. This relates to the robust estimation of the cost and its sup-
port in some linear model, assuming the number n of samples is large enough. Specifically, we
demonstrate a sample complexity of n −1/2 . Our subsequent sets of contributions are centered on
the case of matching between samples of Gaussian distributions. Herein, we illustrate in Lemma 7
how to compute the irrepresentability condition in closed form. This facilitates the examination
of how the parameters of the problem, particularly regularization strength and the covariance
of the distributions, influence the success and stability of iOT. We further explore the limiting
cases of small and large entropic regularization, revealing in Proposition 8 and Proposition 9 that
iOT interpolates between the graphical lasso (to estimate the graph structure of the precision
matrix) and a classical lasso. This sheds light on the connection between iOT and graph estimation
procedures. Simple synthetic numerical explorations in Section 5.2 further provide intuition about
how ε and the geometry of the graph associated with a sparse cost impact sparsistency. As a minor
numerical contribution, we present in Appendix F a large-scale ℓ1 -iOT solver, implemented in JAX
and distributed as open-source software.


2     I NVERSE OPTIMAL TRANSPORT

The forward problem Given probability distributions α ∈ P (X ), β ∈ P (Y ) and cost function
c : X × Y → R, the entropic optimal transport problem seeks to compute a coupling density
                                      ε
                                                                   Z
          Sink(c, ε) ≜ arg max〈c, π〉 − KL(π|α ⊗ β) where 〈c, π〉 ≜ c(x, y)d π(x, y),       (1)
                       π∈U (α,β)      2

where KL(π|ξ) ≜ log(d π/d ξ)d π − d π and U (α, β) is the space of all probability measures
                  R                 R

π ∈ P (X × Y ) with marginals α, β.


                                                 3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The inverse problem The inverse optimal transport problem seeks to recover the cost function
c given an approximation π̂n of the probability coupling π̂ ≜ Sink(c, ε). A typical setting is an
                                                                                iid
empirical probability coupling π̂n = n1 ni=1 δ(xi ,y i ) where (x i , y i )ni=1 ∼ π̂. See Section 2.2.
                                       P


The loss function The iOT problem has been proposed and studied in a series of papers, see
Section 1.2. The approach is typically to consider some linear parameterization 1 of the cost
c A (x, y) by some parameter A ∈ Rs . The key observation of Dupuy et al. (2019) is that the negative
log-likelihood of π̂ at parameter value A is given by
                                                                                                ε
          L (A, π̂) ≜ −〈c A , π̂〉 + Wπ̂ (A) where Wπ̂ (A) ≜                      sup 〈c A , π〉 − KL(π|α̂ ⊗ β̂),
                                                                               π∈U (α̂,β̂)
                                                                                                2

and α̂, β̂ are the marginals of π̂. For ease of notation, unless stated otherwise, we write W = Wπ̂ .
So, computing the maximum likelihood estimator A for the cost corresponds to minimizing the
convex ‘loss function’ A 7→ L (A, π̂), which, by regarding Wπ̂ as a convex conjugate, can be seen as
an instance of a Fenchel-Young loss, a family of losses proposed in Blondel et al. (2020) . We write
the parameterization as
                                                        s
                                  Φ : A ∈ Rs 7→ c A =                     where C j ∈ C (X × Y ).
                                                        X
                                                               A j Cj ,
                                                        j =1

A relevant example are quadratic loss functions, so that for X ⊂ Rd1 , Y ⊂ Rd2 , given A ∈ Rd1 ×d2 ,
c A (x, y) = x ⊤ Ay. In this case, s = d 1 d 2 and for k = (i , j ) ∈ [d 1 ] × [d 2 ], Ck (x, y) = x i y j .

ℓ1 -iOT To handle the presence of noisy data (typically coming from the sampling process),
various regularization approaches have been proposed. In this work, we focus on the use of
ℓ1 -regularization Carlier et al. (2023) to recover sparse parametrizations:

                        arg min F (A),         where F (A) ≜ λ ∥A∥1 + L (A, π̂).                            (iOT−ℓ1 (π̂))
                              A


Kantorovich formulation Note that W (A) is defined via a concave optimization problem and
by Fenchel duality, one can show that (iOT−ℓ1 (π̂)) has the following equivalent Kantorovich
formulation Carlier et al. (2023):
                arg min K (A, f , g ),           where K (A, f , g ) ≜ J (A, f , g ) + λ ∥A∥1 ,       and         (K ∞ )
                    A, f ,g

                                                      ε         2( f (x) + g (y) + ΦA(x, y))
                    Z                                   Z     µ                              ¶
J (A, f , g ) ≜ −f (x) + g (y) + ΦA(x, y) d π̂(x, y)+                                          d α(x)d β(y).
                        ¡                ¢
                                                          exp
                                                      2                        ε
Based on this formulation, various algorithms have been proposed, including alternating mini-
mization with proximal updates Carlier et al. (2023). Section F details a new large scale solver that
we use for the numerical simulations.

2.1   I NVARIANCES AND ASSUMPTIONS

Assumption 1. We first assume that X and Y are compact.

Note that J has the translation invariance property that for any constant function u, J ( f + u, g −
u, A) = J ( f , g , A), so to remove this invariance, throughout, we restrict the optimization of (K ∞ )
to the set                      ½                                    Z               ¾
                           S ≜ (A, f , g ) ∈ Rs × L 2 (α) × L 2 (β) ; g (y)d β(y) = 0 .             (2)

Next, we make some assumptions on the cost to remove invariances in the iOT problem.
Assumption 2 (Assumption on the cost).         (i) E(x,y)∼α⊗β [C(x, y)C(x, y)⊤ ] ⪰ Id is invertible.

    (ii) °C(x, y)° É 1 for α almost every x and β-almost every y.
         °       °

   1 In this work, we restrict to linear parameterizations, although the same loss function can also be applied
to learn costs with nonlinear parameterization, e.g. via neural networks Ma et al. (2020).


                                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      (iii) for all k, Ck (x, y)dα(x) = 0 for β-a.e. y and Ck (x, y)dβ(y) = 0 for α-a.e. x.
                      R                                   R

Under these assumptions, it can be shown that iOT has a unique solution (see remark after Propo-
sition 2). Assumption 2 (i) is to ensure that c A = ΦA is uniquely determined by A. Assumption 2
(ii) is without loss of generality, since we assume that α, β are compactly supported, so this holds
up to a rescaling of the space. Assumption 2 (iii) is to handle the invariances pointed out in Carlier
et al. (2023) and Ma et al. (2020):
                       J (A, f , g ) = J (A ′ , f ′ , g ′ ) ⇐⇒ c A + ( f ⊕ g ) = c A ′ + ( f ′ ⊕ g ′ ).           (3)

As observed in Carlier et al. (2023), any cost can be adjusted to fit this assumption: one can define
                               C̃k (x, y) = Ck (x, y) − u k (x) − v k (y)

                         ¡¡β(y)P and v¢ k (y)                ¢¢ α(x) − Ck (x, y)d α(x)d β(y). Letting
                   R                               R                      R
wherePu k (x) = Ck (x, y)d                   ¡ =P Ck (x, y)d
Φ̃A = k A k C̃k , we have f − k A k u k ⊕ g − k A k v k + Φ̃A = ( f ⊕ g ) + ΦA. So optimization
with the parametrization Φ is equivalent to optimization with Φ̃.
NB: For the quadratic cost c k (x, y) = x i y j for k = (i , j ), condition (iii) corresponds to recentering
                                                                                                        ° ° the
data points, and taking x 7→ x − xd α(x) and y 7→ y − yd β(y). Condition (ii) holds if ∥x∥∨ ° y ° É 1
                                  R                             R

for α-a.e. x and β-a.e. y. Condition (i) corresponds to invertibility of Eα [xx ⊤ ] ⊗ Eβ [y y ⊤ ].

2.2    T HE FINITE SAMPLE PROBLEM
                                                                          iid
In practice, we do not observe π̂ but n data-points (x i , y i ) ∼ π̂ for i = 1, . . . , n, where π̂ = Sink(c Ab , ε).
             b we plug into iOT−ℓ1 the empirical measure π̂n = 1 n δx ,y and consider the
                                                                              P
To recover A,                                                               n i =1         i i
estimator
                                   A n ∈ arg min λ ∥A∥1 + L (A, π̂n ),                              (iOT−ℓ1 (π̂n ))
                                                     A
As in section 2.1, to account for the invariance (3), when solving (iOT−ℓ1 (P       π̂n )), we again centre the
cost parameterization such that for all i , ni=1 Ck (x i , y j ) = 0 and for all j , nj=1 Ck (x i , y j ) = 0. Note
                                            P

also that iOT−ℓ1 (π̂n ) can be formulated entirely in finite dimensions. See Appendix B for details.


3     T HE CERTIFICATE FOR SPARSISTENCY

In this section, we consider the problem (iOT−ℓ1 (π̂)) with full data π̂ and present a sufficient
condition for support recovery, that we term non-degeneracy of the certificate. For simplicity
of notation, throughout this section denote W ≜ Wπ̂ . Under non-degeneracy of the certificate
we obtain support recovery as stated in Theorem 3, a known result whose proof can be found
e.g. in Lee et al. (2015). This condition can be seen as a generalization of the celebrated Lasso’s
Irrepresentability condition (see e.g. Hastie et al. (2015)) – Lasso corresponds to having a quadratic
loss instead of L (A, π̂), thus ∇2A W (A) in the definition below reduces to a matrix. In what follows,
we denote u I ≜ (u i )i ∈I and U I ,J ≜ (Ui , j )i ∈I , j ∈J the restriction operators.
Definition 1. The certificate with respect to A and support I = {i : A i ̸= 0} is
                                    z ∗A ≜ ∇2 W (A)(:,I ) (∇2 W (A)(I ,I ) )−1 sign(A)I .                        (C)
We say that it is non-degenerate if ∥(z ∗A )I c ∥∞ < 1.

The next proposition, whose proof can be found in Appendix C.1, shows that the function W (A) is
twice differentiable, thus ensuring that C is well defined.
Proposition 2. A 7→ W (A) is twice differentiable, strictly convex, with gradient and Hessian
                                                                                ∂π A
                                ∇ A W (A) = Φ∗ π A ,        ∇2A W (A) = Φ∗           (x, y)
                                                                                ∂A
where π A is the unique solution to (1) with cost c A = ΦA.

We remark that strict convexity of W implies that any solution of (iOT−ℓ1 (π̂)) must be unique,
and by Γ-convergence, solutions A λ to (iOT−ℓ1 (π̂)) converge to Â as λ → 0. The next theorem, a
well-known result (see (Lee et al., 2015, Theorem 3.4) for a proof), shows that support recovery
can be characterized via z ∗b .
                                A


                                                              5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Theorem 3. Let π̂ = Sink(c Ab , ε). If z ∗b is non-degenerate, then for all λ sufficiently small, the solution
                                         A °
A λ to (iOT−ℓ1 (π̂)) is sparsistent with ° A λ − Ab° = O (λ) and Supp A λ = Supp( A).
                                                     °                   ¡ ¢
                                                                                         b


3.1   I NTUITION BEHIND THE CERTIFICATE (C)

Implication of the non-degeneracy condition The non-degeneracy condition        ¯      ¯is widely studied
                                                                                ¯ ∗ ¯
for the Lasso problem Hastie et al. (2015). Just as for the Lasso, the closer ¯(z b )i ¯ is to 1, the more
                                     ¯         ¯                                   A
unstable is this coefficient, and if ¯(z ∗b )i ¯ > 1 then one cannot expect to recover this coefficients
                                     ¯         ¯
                                         A
when there is noise. Note also that in the Lasso, the pre-certificate formula in (C) roughly the
correlation between coefficient inside and outside the support I . In our case, the loss is more
complex and this correlation is measured according to the hessian of W , which integrates the
curvature of the loss. This curvature formula is however involved, so to gain intuition, we perform
a detailed analysis in the ε → 0 and ε− > ∞ for the Gaussian setting where it becomes much
simpler (see Section 5.1).

Link to optimality conditions The certificate z ∗b can be seen as the limit optimality condition
                                                          A
for the optimization problem (iOT−ℓ1 (π̂)) as λ → 0: by the first order optimality condition to
(iOT−ℓ1 (π̂)), A λ is a solution if and only if z λ ≜ − λ1 ∇L(A λ ) ∈ ∂ ∥A λ ∥1 , where the subdifferential for
the ℓ1 norm has the explicit form ∂ ∥A∥1 = z ; ∥z∥∞ É 1, ∀i ∈ Supp(A), z i = sign(A i ) . It follows
                                                   ©                                              ª

z λ can be seen as a certificate for the support of A λ since Supp(A λ ) ⊆ i ; ¯z iλ ¯ = 1 . To study the
                                                                                   © ¯ ¯      ª

support behavior of A λ for small λ, it is therefore interesting to consider the limit of z λ as λ → 0.
Its limit is precisely the subdifferential element with the minimal norm and coincides with (C)
under the nondegeneracy condition:
Proposition 4. Let z λ ≜ − λ1 ∇L(A λ ) where A λ solves (iOT−ℓ1 (π̂)). Then,
                                               n ¡                                 o
                    lim z λ = z min                   2      b −1 z〉F ; z ∈ ∂∥ A∥
                                                               ¢
                                A
                                    ≜  arg min  〈z,  ∇  W  ( A                 b 1                    (MNC)
                       λ→0                   z
                                b

Moreover, if z ∗b is non-degenerate, then z min = z ∗b .
               A                            bA       A


4     S AMPLE COMPLEXITY BOUNDS

Our main contribution shows that (C) is a certificate for sparsistency under sampling noise:
Theorem 5. Let π̂ = Sink(c Ab , ε). Suppose that the certificate z ∗b is non-degenerate. Let δ > 0. Then,
                                                                   A
for all sufficiently small regularization parameters λ and sufficiently many number of samples n,
                                     ³               q                   q       ´ p
                  λ ≲ 1 and max exp(C ° Ab°1 /ε) log(1/δ)λ−1 , log(2s) ≲ n,
                                            ° °


                                                     qδ, the minimizer
for some constant C > 0, with probability at least 1 −                 A n to (P n ) is sparsistent with
                           b and A n − Ab ≲ λ + exp(C Ab /ε) log(1/δ)n −1 .
                                 °        °                  ° °
Ab with Supp(A n ) = Supp( A)    °        °
                                                 2
                                                             °  °
                                                                       1


Main idea behind Theorem 5 We know from Theorem 3 that there is some λ0 > 0 such that
for all λ É λ0 , the solution to (K ∞ ) has the same support as A.          b To show that the finite sample
problem also recovers the support of Ab when n is sufficiently large, we fix λ ∈ (0, λ0 ] and consider
the setting where the observations are iid samples from the coupling measure π̂. We will derive
convergence bounds for the primal and dual solutions as the number of samples n increases. Let
(A ∞ , f ∞ , g ∞ ) minimise (K ∞ ). Denote F ∞ = ( f ∞ (x i ))i ∈[n] , G ∞ = (g ∞ (y j )) j ∈[n] and
                                                                       µ                                   ¶
                 1                                                       2¡
                                                                           ΦA ∞ (x, y) + f ∞ (x) + g ∞ (y) .
                                                                                                          ¢
       P ∞ = 2 (p ∞ (x i , y j ))i , j ∈[n] , where p ∞ (x, y) = exp
                n                                                        ε
Let A n minimize iOT−ℓ1 (π̂n ). Then,¡ 2 there exists a probability      matrix P n ∈ Rn×n +   and vectors
            n                 1
F n ,G n ∈ R such that P n = n 2 exp ε (Φn A n + F n ⊕G n ) . In fact, (A n , F n ,G n ) minimize the finite
                                                           ¢

dimensional dual problem (K n ) given in the appendix. Now consider the certificates
                            1                                     1
                      z ∞ = Φ∗ p ∞ α ⊗ β − π̂ and z n = Φ∗n P n − P̂ n .
                                   ¡            ¢                      ¡            ¢
                            λ                                     λ

                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Note that z ∞ and z n both depend on λ; the superscript was dropped since λ is fixed. Moreover,
z ∞ is precisely z λ from Propostion 4. By exploiting strong convexity properties of Jn , one can
show the following sample complexity bound on the convergence of z n to z ∞ (the proof can be
found in the appendix):
Proposition 6. Let n ≳ max log(1/δ)λ−2 , log(2s) for some δ > 0. For some constant C > 0, with
                                ¡                     ¢
                                                                            1
probability at least 1 − δ, ∥z ∞ − z n ∥∞ ≲ exp(C ° Ab° /ε) log(1/δ)λ−1 n − 2 and
                                                  ° °
                                                                  1
                          1                        1
         ∥A n − A ∞ ∥22 +         (F n − F ∞ )2i +         (G n −G ∞ )2j ≲ ε2 exp(C ° Ab°1 /ε) log(1/δ)n −1 .
                              X                        X                            ° °
                         n i                      n    j


From Proposition 4, for all λ É λ0 for some λ0 sufficiently small, the magnitude of z ∞ outside the
support of Â is less than one. Moreover, the convergence result in Proposition 6 above implies
that, for n sufficiently large, the magnitude of z n outside the support of Â is also less than one.
Hence, since the set {i ; (z n )i = ±1} determines the support of A n , we have sparsistency.


5     G AUSSIAN DISTRIBUTIONS

To get further insight about the sparsistency property ot iOT, we consider the special case where
the source and target distributions are Gaussians, and the cost parametrization c A (x, y) = x ⊤ Ay.
To this end, we first derive closed form expressions for the Hessian ∂2A L (A) = ∇2A W (A). Given
α = N (m α , Σα ) and β = N (m β , Σβ ), it is known (see Bojilov & Galichon (2016)) that the coupling
                                                  ¡ α ¢ Σα Σ
                                                 µ       µ       ¶¶
density is also a Gaussian of the form π = N m         ,            for some Σ ∈ Rd1 ×d2 . In this case, W
                                                   mβ     Σ⊤ Σβ
can be written as an optimization problem over the cross-covariance Σ Bojilov & Galichon (2016).
                                                      ε
                          W (A) = sup 〈A, Σ〉 + log det Σβ − Σ⊤ Σ−1        α Σ ,
                                                               ¡             ¢
                                                                                                         (4)
                                   Σ∈Rd1 ×d2          2
with the optimal solution being precisely the cross-covariance of the optimal coupling π. In
Bojilov & Galichon (2016), the authors provide an explicit formula for the minimizer Σ to (4), and,
consequently, for ∇W (A):
                                                                                               ¶ 12
                                                                                ε2
                                                                           µ
                                ¢− 1
            Σ = Σα A∆ ∆A ⊤ Σα A∆ 2 ∆ − 12 εA †,⊤                  where ∆ ≜ Σβ + A † Σ−1   †,⊤
                     ¡
                                                                                      α  A          .           (5)
                                                                                4
By differentiating the first order condition for W , that is A † = ε−1 (Σβ − Σ⊤ Σ−1    †
                                                                                  α Σ)Σ Σα , Galichon
derives the expression for the Hessian in terms of Σ in (5):
                                                               ¢−1 ¡ −1,⊤
                    ∇2 W (A) = ∂ A Σ = ε Σα Σ−1,⊤ ⊗ Σβ Σ−1 + T             ⊗ A −1 ,
                                        ¡                                        ¢
                                                                    A                              (6)
where T is such that Tvec(A) = vec(A ⊤ ). This formula does not hold in when A is rectangular or
rank deficient, since A † is not differentiable. In the following, we derive, via the implicit function
theorem, a general formula for ∂ A Σ that agrees with that of Galichon in the square invertible case.
Lemma 7. Denoting Σ as in (5), one has
                         ³                                              ´−1
            ∇2 W (A) = ε ε2 (Σβ − Σ⊤ Σα Σ)−1 ⊗ (Σα − ΣΣ−1 ⊤ −1   ⊤
                                                       β Σ ) + (A ⊗ A)T                                         (7)

This formula given in Lemma 7 provides an explicit expression for the certificate (C).

5.1   L IMIT CASES FOR LARGE AND SMALL ε

This section explores the behaviour of the certificate in the large/small ε limits: Proposition 8
reveals that the large ε limit coincides with the classical Lasso while Proposition 9 reveals that the
small epsilon limit (for symmetric A ≻ 0 and Σα = Σβ = Id) coincides with the Graphical Lasso. In
the following results, we denote the functional in (iOT−ℓ1 (π̂)) with parameters λ and ε by Fε,λ (A).
Proposition 8 (ε → ∞). Let Ab be invertible and let π̂ = Sink(c Ab , ε) be the observed coupling between
α = N (m α , Σα ) and β = N (m β , Σβ ). Then,
                                                                         ¢−1
                            lim z ε = (Σβ ⊗ Σα )(:,I ) (Σβ ⊗ Σα )(I ,I )
                                                      ¡
                                                                             sign( A)
                                                                                   b I.               (8)
                              ε→∞


                                                              7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Moreover, for λ0 > 0, given any sequence (ε j ) j and A j ∈ arg min A Fε,λ0 /ε j (A) with lim j →∞ ε j = ∞,
any cluster point of (A j ) j is in
                                                1
                               arg min λ0 ∥A∥1 + ∥(Σ1/2  1/2     b 2
                                                    β ⊗ Σα )(A − A)∥F                                   (9)
                                A∈Rd ×d         2


Interpretation As ε → ∞, the KL term forces π̂ to be close to the independent coupling α ⊗ β and
in the limit, iOT is simply a Lasso problem and the limit in (8) is precisely the Lasso certificate
Hastie et al. (2015). Here, the cross covariance of π̂ satisfies εΣ = A + O (ε) ((53) in the appendix),
so for large ε, sparsity in A indicates the independence in the coupling between α and β.
Proposition 9 (ε → 0). Let Ab be symmetric positive-definite and let π̂ = Sink(c Ab , ε) be the observed
coupling between α = N (m α , Id) and β = N (m β , Id). Then,
                                                                                ¢−1
                         lim z ε = ( Ab−1 ⊗ Ab−1 )(:,I ) ( Ab−1 ⊗ Ab−1 )(I ,I )
                                                        ¡
                                                                                    sign( A)
                                                                                          b I.         (10)
                         ε→0

Let λ0 > 0. Then, optimizing over symmetric positive semi-definite matrices, given any sequence
(ε j ) j and A j ∈ arg min A⪰0 Fε,λ0 ε j (A) with lim j →∞ ε j = 0, any cluster point of (A j ) j is in

                                                       1             1
                               arg min λ0 ∥A∥1 −         log det(A) + 〈A, Ab−1 〉.                      (11)
                                 A⪰0                   2             2


Interpretation In contrast, ε → 0, the KL term disappears and the coupling π̂ becomes de-
pendent. Naturally, the limit problem is the graphical lasso, typically used to infer conditional
independence in graphs (but where covariates can be highly dependent). Note also that the
limit (10) is precisely the graphical Lasso certificate Hastie et al. (2015). Here, (Remark 25 in the
appendix) one show that for (x, y) ∼ π, the conditional covariance of x conditional on y (and also
vice versa) is εA −1 + O (ε2 ). Sparsity in A can therefore be viewed as information on conditional
independence.

5.2   N UMERICAL ILLUSTRATIONS

In order to gain some insight into the impact of ε and the covariance structure on the efficiency
of iOT, we present numerical computations of certificates here. We fix the covariances of the
input measures as Σα = Σβ = Idn , similar results are obtained with different covariance as long
as they are not rank-deficient. We consider that the support of the sought-after cost matrix
A = δIdn + diag(G1n ) −G ∈ Rn×n is defined as a shifted Laplacian matrix of some graph adjacency
matrix G, for a graph of size n = 80 (similar conclusions hold for larger graphs). We set the shift δ to
be 10% of the largest eigenvalue of the Laplacian, ensuring that C is symmetric and definite. This
setup corresponds to graphs defining positive interactions at vertices and negative interactions
along edges. For small ε, adopting the graphical lasso interpretation (as exposed in Section 5.1)
and interpreting C as a precision matrix, this setup corresponds (for instance, for a planar graph)
to imposing a spatially smoothly varying covariance C −1 . Figure 1 illustrates how the value of
the certificates z i , j evolves depending on the indexes (i , j ) for three types of graphs (circular,
planar, and Erdős–Rényi with a probability of edges equal to 0.1), for several values of ε. By
construction, z i ,i = 1 and z i , j = −1 for (i , j ) connected by the graph. For z to be non-degenerate,
it is required that |z i , j | < 1, as i moves away from j on the graph. For the circular and planar
graphs, the horizontal axis represents the geodesic distance d geod (i , j ), demonstrating how the
certificates become well-behaved as the distance increases. The planar graph displays envelope
curves showing the range of values of z for a fixed value of d geod (i , j ), while this is a single-valued
curve for the circular graph due to periodicity. For the Erdős–Rényi graph, to better account for the
randomness of the certificates along the graph edges, we display the histogram of the distribution
of |z i , j | for d geod (i , j ) = 2 (which represents the most critical set of edges, as they are the most
likely to be large). All these examples show the same behavior, namely, that increasing ε improves
the behavior of the certificates (which is in line with the stability analysis of Section 5.1, since (8)
implies that for large ε, the certificate is trivially non-degenerate whenever Σα , Σβ are diagonal),
and that pairs of vertices (i , j ) connected by a small distance d geod (i , j ) are the most likely to be
degenerate. This suggests that they will be inaccurately estimated by iOT for small ε.


                                                          8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                         Circular                   Planar                          Erdős–Rényi

Figure 1: Display of the certificate values z i , j for three types of graphs, for varying ε. Left, middle:
plotted as a function of the geodesic distance d geod (i , j ) on the x-axis. Right: histogram of z i , j for
(i , j ) at distance d geod (i , j ) = 2.
Figure 2 displays the recovery performances of ℓ1 –iOT for the circular graph shown on the left of
Figure 1 (similar results are obtained for the other types of graph topologies). These numerical
simulations are obtained using the large-scale iOT solver, which we detail in Appendix F. The
performance is represented using the number of inaccurately estimated coordinates in the esti-
mated cost matrix C , so a score of 0 means a perfect estimation of the support (sparsistency is
achieved). For ε = 0.1, sparsistency cannot be achieved, aligning with the fact that the certificate z
is degenerate as depicted in the previous figure. In sharp contrast, for larger ε, sparsistency can
be attained as soon as the number of samples N is sufficiently large, which also aligns with our
theory of sparsistency of ℓ1 –iOT since the certificate is guaranteed to be non-degenerate in the
large ε setting.


                          ε = 0.1                     ε=1                               ε = 10
 ♯ wrongly estim. pos.


Figure 2: Recovery performance (number of wrongly estimated position) of ℓ1 –iOT as a function
of λ for three different values of ε.


Figure 3 in the appendix displays the certificate values in the case of a non-symmetric planar
graph. The graph is obtained by deleting all edges on a planar graph with i < j . We plot the
certificate values as a function of geodesic distances d geod (i , j ) of the symmetrized graph. The
middle plot shows the certificate values on i Ê j (where the actual edges are constrained to be
and nondegeneracy requires values smaller than 1 in absolute value for d geod (i , j ) Ê 2). The right
plot shows the certificate values on i É j where there are no edges and for nondegeneracy, one
expects values smaller than 1 in absolute value for d geod (i , j ) Ê 1. Observe that here, the certificate
is degenerate for small values of d geod (i , j ) when ε = 0, meaning that the problem is unstable at
the “ghost” symmetric edges. As ε → ∞, the certificate becomes non-degenerate.


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we have proposed the first theoretical analysis of the recovery performance of ℓ1 -iOT.
Much of this analysis can be extended to more general convex regularizers, such as the nuclear
norm to promote low-rank Euclidean costs, for instance. Our analysis and numerical exploration
support the conclusion that iOT becomes ill-posed and fails to maintain sparsity for overly small ε.
When approached from the perspective of graph estimations, unstable indices occur at smaller
geodesic distances, highlighting the geometric regularity of iOT along the graph geometry.


A CKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The work of G. Peyré was supported by the European Research Council (ERC project NORIA) and
the French government under management of Agence Nationale de la Recherche as part of the
“Investissements d’avenir” program, reference ANR19-P3IA-0001 (PRAIRIE 3IA Institute).


R EFERENCES
Ravindra K Ahuja and James B Orlin. Inverse optimization. Operations research, 49(5):771–783,
  2001.

Jason Altschuler, Jonathan Niles-Weed, and Philippe Rigollet. Near-linear time approximation algo-
   rithms for optimal transport via sinkhorn iteration. Advances in neural information processing
   systems, 30, 2017.

Martin Arjovsky, Soumith Chintala, and Léon Bottou. Wasserstein generative adversarial networks.
 In International conference on machine learning, pp. 214–223. PMLR, 2017.

Aurélien Bellet, Amaury Habrard, and Marc Sebban. A survey on metric learning for feature vectors
  and structured data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1306.6709, 2013.

Mathieu Blondel, André FT Martins, and Vlad Niculae. Learning with fenchel-young losses. The
 Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(1):1314–1382, 2020.

Raicho Bojilov and Alfred Galichon. Matching in closed-form: equilibrium, identification, and
  comparative statics. Economic Theory, 61:587–609, 2016.

Jonathan Borwein and Adrian Lewis. Convex Analysis. Springer, 2006.

Emmanuel J Candès, Justin Romberg, and Terence Tao. Robust uncertainty principles: Exact
  signal reconstruction from highly incomplete frequency information. IEEE Transactions on
  information theory, 52(2):489–509, 2006.

Guillaume Carlier, Arnaud Dupuy, Alfred Galichon, and Yifei Sun. Sista: learning optimal transport
  costs under sparsity constraints. Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics, 76(9):
  1659–1677, 2023.

Wei-Ting Chiu, Pei Wang, and Patrick Shafto. Discrete probabilistic inverse optimal transport. In
 International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3925–3946. PMLR, 2022.

Benoît Colson, Patrice Marcotte, and Gilles Savard. Bilevel programming: A survey. 4or, 3:87–107,
  2005.

Marco Cuturi. Sinkhorn distances: Lightspeed computation of optimal transport. In Adv. in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, pp. 2292–2300, 2013.

Marco Cuturi and David Avis. Ground metric learning. The Journal of Machine Learning Research,
 15(1):533–564, 2014.

Marco Cuturi and Gabriel Peyré. A smoothed dual approach for variational wasserstein problems.
 SIAM Journal on Imaging Sciences, 9(1):320–343, 2016.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Jason V Davis and Inderjit S Dhillon. Structured metric learning for high dimensional problems.
   In Proceedings of the 14th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and
   data mining, pp. 195–203, 2008.

Valentin De Bortoli, James Thornton, Jeremy Heng, and Arnaud Doucet. Diffusion schrödinger
  bridge with applications to score-based generative modeling. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:17695–17709, 2021.

Klaus Deimling. Nonlinear functional analysis. Courier Corporation, 2010.

Arnaud Dupuy and Alfred Galichon. Personality traits and the marriage market. Journal of Political
  Economy, 122(6):1271–1319, 2014.

Arnaud Dupuy, Alfred Galichon, and Yifei Sun. Estimating matching affinity matrices under
  low-rank constraints. Information and Inference: A Journal of the IMA, 8(4):677–689, 2019.

Marvin Eisenberger, Aysim Toker, Laura Leal-Taixé, Florian Bernard, and Daniel Cremers. A unified
 framework for implicit sinkhorn differentiation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
 Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 509–518, 2022.

Alfred Galichon. Optimal transport methods in economics. Princeton University Press, 2018.

Alfred Galichon and Bernard Salanié. Matching with trade-offs: Revealed preferences over com-
   peting characteristics. Preprint hal-00473173, 2010.

Alfred Galichon and Bernard Salanié. Cupid’s invisible hand: Social surplus and identification in
   matching models. The Review of Economic Studies, 89(5):2600–2629, 2022.

Aude Genevay, Gabriel Peyré, and Marco Cuturi. Learning generative models with sinkhorn
  divergences. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1608–1617.
  PMLR, 2018.

Aude Genevay, Lénaic Chizat, Francis Bach, Marco Cuturi, and Gabriel Peyré. Sample complexity
  of Sinkhorn divergences. In The 22nd international conference on artificial intelligence and
  statistics, pp. 1574–1583. PMLR, 2019.

Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, and Martin Wainwright. Statistical learning with sparsity: the
  lasso and generalizations. CRC press, 2015.

Matthieu Heitz, Nicolas Bonneel, David Coeurjolly, Marco Cuturi, and Gabriel Peyré. Ground
 metric learning on graphs. Journal of Mathematical Imaging and Vision, 63:89–107, 2021.

Jean-Baptiste Hiriart-Urruty and Claude Lemaréchal. Conjugacy in convex analysis. Convex
  Analysis and Minimization Algorithms II: Advanced Theory and Bundle Methods, pp. 35–90,
  1993.

Gao Huang, Chuan Guo, Matt J Kusner, Yu Sun, Fei Sha, and Kilian Q Weinberger. Supervised word
  mover’s distance. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.

Tanguy Kerdoncuff, Rémi Emonet, and Marc Sebban. Metric Learning in Optimal Transport for
  Domain Adaptation. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Kyoto, Japan,
  January 2021. URL https://hal-ujm.archives-ouvertes.fr/ujm-02611800.

Matt Kusner, Yu Sun, Nicholas Kolkin, and Kilian Q Weinberger. From word embeddings to
 document distances. In Proc. of the 32nd Intern. Conf. on Machine Learning, pp. 957–966, 2015.

Jason D Lee, Yuekai Sun, and Jonathan E Taylor. On model selection consistency of regularized
   m-estimators. Electronic Journal of Statistics, 9:608–642, 2015.

Christian Léonard. From the Schrödinger problem to the Monge–Kantorovich problem. Journal of
  Functional Analysis, 262(4):1879–1920, 2012.

Ruilin Li, Xiaojing Ye, Haomin Zhou, and Hongyuan Zha. Learning to match via inverse optimal
  transport. Journal of machine learning research, 20, 2019.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Shaojun Ma, Haodong Sun, Xiaojing Ye, Hongyuan Zha, and Haomin Zhou. Learning cost functions
  for optimal transport. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.09650, 2020.

Gonzalo Mena and Jonathan Niles-Weed. Statistical bounds for entropic optimal transport: sample
  complexity and the central limit theorem. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  32, 2019.

Marcel Nutz. Introduction to entropic optimal transport. Lecture notes, Columbia University, 2021.

François-Pierre Paty and Marco Cuturi. Regularized optimal transport is ground cost adversarial.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7532–7542. PMLR, 2020.

Gabriel Peyré, Marco Cuturi, et al. Computational optimal transport: With applications to data
  science. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning, 11(5-6):355–607, 2019.

Clarice Poon and Gabriel Peyré. Smooth bilevel programming for sparse regularization. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:1543–1555, 2021.

Philippe Rigollet and Austin J Stromme. On the sample complexity of entropic optimal transport.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.13472, 2022.

Yossi Rubner, Carlo Tomasi, and Leonidas J. Guibas. The earth mover’s distance as a metric for
  image retrieval. International Journal of Computer Vision, 40(2):99–121, November 2000.

Filippo Santambrogio. Optimal transport for applied mathematicians. Birkäuser, NY, 55(58-63):94,
   2015.

Geoffrey Schiebinger, Jian Shu, Marcin Tabaka, Brian Cleary, Vidya Subramanian, Aryeh Solomon,
  Joshua Gould, Siyan Liu, Stacie Lin, Peter Berube, et al. Optimal-transport analysis of single-cell
  gene expression identifies developmental trajectories in reprogramming. Cell, 176(4):928–943,
  2019.

Liangliang Shi, Gu Zhang, Haoyu Zhen, Jintao Fan, and Junchi Yan. Understanding and generaliz-
  ing contrastive learning from the inverse optimal transport perspective. 2023.

Richard Sinkhorn. A relationship between arbitrary positive matrices and doubly stochastic
  matrices. Ann. Math. Statist., 35:876–879, 1964.

Andrew M Stuart and Marie-Therese Wolfram. Inverse optimal transport. SIAM Journal on Applied
  Mathematics, 80(1):599–619, 2020.

Robert Tibshirani. Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. Journal of the Royal Statistical
  Society Series B: Statistical Methodology, 58(1):267–288, 1996.

Joel A Tropp et al. An introduction to matrix concentration inequalities. Foundations and Trends®
  in Machine Learning, 8(1-2):1–230, 2015.

Samuel Vaiter, Mohammad Golbabaee, Jalal Fadili, and Gabriel Peyré. Model selection with low
  complexity priors. Information and Inference: A Journal of the IMA, 4(3):230–287, 2015.

Fan Wang and Leonidas J Guibas. Supervised earth mover’s distance learning and its computer
  vision applications. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 442–455. Springer, 2012.

Kilian Q Weinberger, John Blitzer, and Lawrence K Saul. Distance metric learning for large margin
   nearest neighbor classification. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pp.
  1473–1480, 2006.

Eric Xing, Michael Jordan, Stuart J Russell, and Andrew Ng. Distance metric learning with applica-
  tion to clustering with side-information. Advances in neural information processing systems, 15,
  2002.

Jie Xu, Lei Luo, Cheng Deng, and Heng Huang. Multi-level metric learning via smoothed wasser-
   stein distance. In IJCAI, pp. 2919–2925, 2018.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Gloria Zen, Elisa Ricci, and Nicu Sebe. Simultaneous ground metric learning and matrix factoriza-
  tion with earth mover’s distance. In 2014 22nd International Conference on Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 3690–3695. IEEE, 2014.

Jianzhong Zhang and Zhenhong Liu. Calculating some inverse linear programming problems.
   Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics, 72(2):261–273, 1996.

Peng Zhao and Bin Yu. On model selection consistency of lasso. The Journal of Machine Learning
  Research, 7:2541–2563, 2006.


Figure 3: Display of certificate values for a non-symmetric planar graph, for varying ε with edges
only for i > j . Middle/Right: plots of the certificate values as a function of the geodesic distance
d geod (i , j ) of the symmetrized graph. The middle plot show the values when restricted to i Ê j . The
right plot shows the values restricted to i É j (where there are no edges).


A     I NTERPRETATIONS OF THE LOSS FUNCTION

As mentioned in Section 2, the loss L (A, π̂) can be recovered via maximum likelihood (ML)
estimation (Dupuy et al., 2019, Proposition 1) and be regarded as an instance of a family of losses
called Fenchel-Young losses. For the sake of completeness, this section explains this in more
detail.

A.1   M AXIMUM L IKELIHOOD INTERPRETATION

The map A → Sink(c A , ε), where Sink(·, ·) is defined in Section 2, can be seen as parameterizing a
set of measures which are absolutely continuous with respect to α ⊗ β. By the standard duality
result (see Nutz (2021)):

      1) The density of Sink(c A , ε) is given by d Sink(c
                                                       R A , ε)/dR(α ⊗ β) =R exp(c A + f A + g A ), where f A
         and g A solve the dual problem, i.e., sup f ,g f d α + g d β − exp(c A + f + g ) d (α ⊗ β) + 1;
      2) The values of the primal and dual problems agree and are equal to − f A d α − g A d β.
                                                                                      R             R


Combining these two facts we obtain that
        ³ d Sink(c , ε) ´                                            ε
                   A
  − log                   = −c A − f A − g A = −c A + sup 〈c A , π〉 − KL(π|α ⊗ β) = −c A + Wπ̂ (A),
            d (α ⊗ β)                                π∈U (α,β)       2
where Wπ̂ is defined in as in Section 2. Finally, taking expectation with respect to π̂ yields
          h      ³ d Sink(c , ε) ´i
                            A
 E(x,y)∼π̂ − log                    = E(x,y)∼π̂ − c A + E(x,y)∼π̂ Wπ̂ (A) = −〈c A , π̂〉 + Wπ̂ (A) = L (A, π̂),
                                               £     ¤           £       ¤
                     d (α ⊗ β)
thus establishing the connection with ML estimation.

Bilevel interpretation Note also that
                                                              ε
              arg min L (A, π̂) = arg min −〈c A , π̂ − π A 〉 − KL(π A |α̂ ⊗ β̂)
                 A                   A                        2
                                                              ε                  ε
                                = arg min −〈c A , π̂ − π A 〉 − KL(π A |α̂ ⊗ β̂) + KL(π̂|α̂ ⊗ β̂)
                                     A                        2                  2


                                                      13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


where π A = arg minπ∈U (α̂,β̂) 〈c A , π〉 − KL(π|α̂ ⊗ β̂). Since π̂, π A have the same marginals,
                                                                  ε
               〈c A , π̂ − π A 〉 = 〈c A + f A + g A , π̂ − π A 〉 = 〈log(π A /(α̂ ⊗ β̂)), π̂ − π̂ A 〉.
                                                                  2
We therefore have
          arg min L (A, π̂) = arg min KL(π̂|π A ),       where π A = arg min 〈c A , π〉 − KL(π|α̂ ⊗ β̂).
              A                      A                                     π∈U (α̂,β̂)


A.2    F ENCHEL -Y OUNG L OSS INTERPRETATION

It is argued in Blondel et al. (2020) that, associated to a prediction rule of the form
                                          ŷ(θ) = arg max 〈θ, µ〉 − Ω(µ),
                                                 µ∈dom(Ω)

there is a natural loss function that the authors term Fenchel-Young loss and that is given by
                                         L Ω (θ; y) ≜ Ω∗ (θ) + Ω(y) − 〈θ, y〉.
With this in mind, let Ω(π) = KL(π|α ⊗ β) + ιU (α,β) (π) where ιU (α,β) (·) is the indicator function of
U (α, β), and note that
                                           L (A, π̂) = L Ω (c A ; π̂) − Ω(π̂).
Since, for the purposes of minimization with respect to A, the term Ω(π̂) is irrelevant, we see
that finding a minimizer of (iOT−ℓ1 (π̂)) amounts to finding a minimizer of the l 1 regularized
Fenchel-Young loss associated with KL(·|α ⊗ β) + ιU (α,β) (·).


B     T HE FINITE SAMPLE PROBLEM

As mention in Section 2.2, we do not observe the full coupling π̂ = Sink(c Ab , ε), but only the the
                                                          iid
empirical measure π̂n = n1 ni=1 δxi ,y i with (x i , y i ) ∼ π̂. We show here that the problem iOT−ℓ1 (π̂n )
                          P
can be formulated entirely in finite dimensions as follows. Let
                                             X
                               H (P |Q) ≜ P i , j (log(P i , j /Q i , j ) − 1).
                                                   i,j

Note that π̂n has marginals â n = n1 ni=1 δxi and b̂ n = n1 ni=1 δ y i . We can interpret π̂n as the matrix
                                     P                      P

P̂ n = n1 Idn×n and the “noisy” primal problem can be equivalently written as
                                             ε                  1             1
        mins sup λ ∥A∥1 + 〈Φn A, P − P̂ n 〉 − H (P ) s.t . P 1 = 1 and P ⊤ 1 = 1,                         (P n )
        A∈R P ∈Rn×n
                +
                                             2                  n             n

where we write H (P ) ≜ H (P | n12 1 ⊗ 1) and Φn A = k A k C k , where C k = (Ck (x i , y j ))i , j ∈[n] ∈
                                                           P

Rn×n . Note that the finite-dimensional problemP has the same invariances        P as (iOT−ℓ1 (π̂)), so, we
will take C k to be centred so that for all i , i (C k )i , j = 0 and for all j , j (C k )i , j = 0. The finite
sample Kantorovich formulation is
                    inf       K n (A, F,G) where K n (A, F,G) ≜ Jn (A, F,G) + λ ∥A∥1               and    (K n )
                  A,F,G∈S n

                                                                ε X
                                                                           µ                       ¶
                                                                             2
       Jn (A, F,G) ≜ −
                        X¡                        ¢¡ ¢
                            F i ⊕G j + (Φn A)i , j P̂ n i , j + 2       exp (F i +G j + (Φn A)i , j ,
                        i,j                                    2n i , j      ε

and we restrict the optimization of (K n ) over S n ≜ (A, F,G) ∈ Rs × Rn × Rn ; j G j = 0 .
                                                            ©                         P          ª


C     P ROOFS FOR S ECTION 3

C.1    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 2 ( DIFFERENTIABILITY OF W )

For the strict convexity of W (A) see Lemma 3 in Dupuy & Galichon (2014). The gradient formula
can also be found in Dupuy & Galichon (2014) and trivially follows from the envelope theorem


                                                           14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


because the optimization problem W (A) has a unique solution. We will only give a proof of the
Hessian formula.
The formula for the Hessian follows from the formula for the gradient provided we show that
the density π A is continuously differentiable with respect to A. The fact that we can swap the
order of the operator Φ∗ and partial differentiation follows from the conditions for differentiability
under the integral sign which holds since the measures are compactly supported. Without loss of
generality, let ε = 1. Then, the optimizer in W (A) is of the form Santambrogio (2015):
                                               ³                              ´
                               π A (x, y) = exp u A (x) + v A (y) + c A (x, y) ,

where u A (·) and v A (·) satisfy
                                            Z          ³                    ´
                          u A (x) = − log           exp v A (y) + c A (x, y) d β(y),   α-a.s.
                                            ZY         ³                    ´
                          v A (y) = − log           exp u A (x) + c A (x, y) d α(x),   β-a.s.
                                                X

It is known (see e.g. Nutz (2021)) that the functions u A (·) and v A (·) inherit the modulus of con-
tinuity of the cost (in this case the map (x, y) → c A (x, y))) and, hence, since we are assuming
the measures to be compactly supported, it follows that u A ∈ L 2 (α) and v A ∈ L 2 (β). Moreover,
if (u A , v A ) solve these two equations then, for any constant c, the pair (u A + c, v A − c) is also a
solution and, hence, to eliminate this ambiguity we consider solutions in H = L 2 (α)×L 20 (β), where
L 20 (β) = g ∈ L 2 (β) ; g d β(y) = 0 .
            ©            R           ª

To show that W is twice differentiable, since ∇W (A) = Φ∗ π A , it is sufficient to show that A 7→ u A
and A 7→ v A are differentiable. To this end, we will apply the Implicit Function Theorem (in Banach
spaces) to the map
                         F : H × Rs → L 2 (α) × L 2 (β)
                                                     ³              ´       
                                u       u + log Y exp v(y) + c A (x, y) d β(y)
                                                 R
                               v  →                  ³              ´       ,
                                        v + log X exp u(x) + c A (x, y) d α(x)
                                                 R
                                A
since we have F (u A , v A , A) = 0. The partial derivative of F at (u A , v A , A) , denoted by
∂u,v F (u A , v A , A), is the linear map defined by
           ³                        ´           ³    Z                             Z                        ´
              ∂u,v F (u A , v A , A) ( f , g ) = f +   p A (·, y)g (y) d β(y), g +   q A (x, ·) f (x) d α(x) , (12)
                                                      Y                            X

where
                         ³                    ´                              ³                    ´
                     exp v A (y) + c A (x, y)                            exp u A (x) + c A (x, y)
    p A (x, y) = R     ³                    ´       and q A (x, y) = R     ³                    ´       .
                  Y exp v A (y) + c A (x, y) d β(y)                   X exp u A (y) + c A (x, y) d β(x)

Note that, since F (u A , v A , A) = 0, p A (x, y) = q A (x, y) = π A (x, y). Moreover, since π A has marginals
α and β, it follows that
              D            ³                     ´          E
                ( f , g ), ∂u,v F (u A , v A , A) ( f , g )
              Z                        Z                                                 Z
            =       f (x)2 d α(x) +             2 f (x)g (y)π A (x, y) d (α ⊗ β)(x, y) +     g (y)2 d β(y). (13)
                X                        X ×Y                                              Y
              Z          ³               ´2
            =              f (x) + g (y) π A (x, y) d (α ⊗ β)(x, y)
                X ×Y

This shows that ∂u,v F (u A , v A , A) is invertible – the last line of 13 is zero if and only if f ⊕ g ≡ 0 and
since g ∈ L 20 (β) it follows that g = 0 and f = 0.
                                                                               ¢−1
To conclude the proof we need to show that ∂u,v F (u A , v A , A)
                                                         ¡
                                                                                     is a bounded operator (see e.g.
Deimling (2010) for the statement of IFT in Banach spaces) and to show this it is enough to show
that, for some constant C ,
                                   °³                      ´         °
                                   ° ∂u,v F (u A , v A , A) ( f , g )° Ê C ∥( f , g )∥.
                                   °                                 °


                                                             15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


This follows from 13 and the fact that there exists a constant C such that π A (x, y) Ê C Rfor all x
and y (see e.g. Nutz (2021) for the existence of C ). In fact, from g ∈ L 20 (β), we obtain ( f (x) +
g (y)))2 d (α ⊗ β)(x, y) = ∥( f , g )∥2 and, hence, 13 implies that
                               D            ³                      ´         E
                                  ( f , g ), ∂u,v F (u A , v A , A) ( f , g ) Ê C ∥( f , g )∥2

and from Cauchy-Schwarz applied to the left-hand-side we obtain
                          °³                      ´         °
                          ° ∂u,v F (u A , v A , A) ( f , g )° Ê C ∥( f , g )∥,
                          °                                 °

thus concluding the proof.

C.2   C ONNECTION OF THE CERTIFICATE (C) WITH OPTIMIZATION PROBLEM (iOT−ℓ1 (π̂))
                                           λ                                                   λ
As
© mentioned
       λ
             ª in Section 3.1, the vector z provides insight into support recovery since Supp(A ) ⊆
 i ; z i = ±1 . In this section, we provide the proof to Proposition 4, which shows that as λ con-
verges to 0, z λ converges to the solution of a quadratic optimization problem (MNC) that we term
the minimal norm certificate.
Note that the connection with (C) can now be established by noting that if the minimal norm
certificate is non-degenerate then the inequality constraints (which correspond to the complement
of the support of A)
                   b in (MNC) can be dropped since they are inactive; in this case (MNC) reduces
to a quadratic optimization problem with only equality constraints and whose solution can be
seen to be (C) which will thus be non-degenerate as well. The converse is clear. So, under non-
degeneracy, (C) can be seen as the limit optimality vector and determines the support of A λ when
λ is small.
To prove Proposition 4, we first show that the vector z λ coincides with the solution to a dual
problem of (iOT−ℓ1 (π̂)).
Proposition 10. Let W ∗ be the convex conjugate of W . Problem (iOT−ℓ1 (π̂)) admits a dual given
by
                        arg min W ∗ (Σ̂x y − λz) subject to ∥z∥∞ É 1,                        (14)
                                 z

where Σ̂x y = Φ π̂ . Moreover, a pair of primal-dual solutions (A λ , z λ ) is related by
                ∗


                                z λ = − λ1 ∇ A L (A λ , π̂) and z λ ∈ ∂∥A λ ∥1 .                 (15)

Proof. Observe that we can write L (A, π̂) as
                             Z
         L (A, π̂) = W (A) −     (ΦA)(x, y) d π̂ = W (A) − 〈Φ∗ π̂, A〉F = W (A) − 〈A, Σ̂x y 〉.
                                 X ×Y

The Fenchel Duality Theorem (see e.g. Borwein & Lewis (2006)) yields a dual of (iOT−ℓ1 (π̂)) given
by
                                     arg min W ∗ (Σ̂x y − w) + (λ∥ · ∥1 )∗ (w).
                                        w

To conclude the proof just note that the Fenchel conjugate of λ∥ · ∥1 is the indicator of the set
{v : ∥v∥∞ É λ} and make a change of variable z ≜ 1/λw to obtain 14. The relationship between
any primal-dual pair in Fenchel Duality can also be found in Borwein & Lewis (2006).



Proof of Proposition 4. We begin by noting that W ∗ is of class C 2 in a neighborhood of Σx y and
that
                                                   ³          ´−1
                                  ∇2 W ∗ (Σ̂x y ) = ∇2 W ( A)
                                                           b      .                           (16)

To see this, note that Proposition 2 together with the assumption on π̂ implies that
                                                 Σ̂x y = ∇W ( A).
                                                              b


                                                        16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Moreover, since W (A) is twice continuously differentiable and strictly convex (see Proposition
2), it follows (see e.g. Corollary 4.2.9 in Hiriart-Urruty & Lemaréchal (1993)) that W ∗ (·) is C 2 and
strictly convex in a neighborhood of Σ̂x y and that (16) holds.

Now observe that, since ∇W ∗ (Σ̂x y ) = ∇W ∗ ∇W ( A)          b we can rewrite ∂ ° Ab° as
                                               ¡         ¢                       ° °
                                                      b = A,
                                                                                      1

                       ∂ ° Ab°1 = arg min − z, ∇W ∗ (Σ̂x y ) subject to ∥z∥∞ É 1
                         ° °             ­                  ®
                                                                                                    (17)
                                       z

                         ambd a
Observe that since z       are uniformly bounded vectors due to the constraint set in 14, there is
a convergent subsequence converging to some z ∗ . We later deduce that all limit points are the
same and hence, the full sequence    z λ converges to z ∗ . Let λn be such that limλn →0 z λn = z ∗ , and
     0
let z be any element in ∂ ° Ab°1 . We have that
                          ° °

                                                                   1 ³ ∗¡                            ´
                − z 0 , ∇W ∗ (Σ̂x y ) É − z λn , ∇W ∗ (Σ̂x y ) É      W Σ̂x y − λn z λn − W (Σ̂x y )
            ­                        ® ­                      ®                        ¢
                                                                  λn
                                         1 ³ ∗¡                           ´
                                            W Σ̂x y − λn z 0 − W (Σ̂x y ) ,
                                                                ¢
                                      É
                                        λn

where the first inequality is the optimality of z 0 , the second inequality is the gradient inequality
of convex functions and the last inequality follows from the optimality of z λ . Taking the limit as
λn → 0 we obtain that

                                  − z 0 , ∇W ∗ (Σ̂x y ) = − z ∗ , ∇W ∗ (Σ̂x y ) ,
                                ­                       ® ­                      ®


showing that z ∗ ∈ ∂ ° Ab°1 . We now finish the proof by showing that
                     ° °

                              D                         E D                        E
                                z ∗ , ∇2 W ∗ (Σ̂x y )z ∗ É z 0 , ∇2 W ∗ (Σ̂x y )z 0 .            (18)

Since W ∗ (·) is C 2 in a neighborhood of Σ̂x y , Taylor’s theorem ensures that there exists a remainder
function R(x) with limx→Σ̂x y R(x) = 0 such that

                                           λn ­ λn 2 ∗
                 〈−z λn , ∇W ∗ (Σ̂x y )〉 +        z , ∇ W (Σ̂x y )z λn + R(Σ̂x y + λn z λn )λ2n
                                                                            ®
                                             2
                   1 ³ ∗¡                                  ¢´       1 ³ ∗¡                           ¢´
                      W Σ̂x y − λn z λn − W ∗ Σ̂x y É                   W Σ̂x y − λn z 0 − W ∗ Σ̂x y
                                            ¢          ¡                                  ¢      ¡
                =
                  λn                                              λn
                                          λ n
                =〈−z 0 , ∇W ∗ (Σ̂x y )〉 +       z 0 , ∇2 W ∗ (Σ̂x y )z 0 + R(Σ̂x y + λn z 0 )λ2n
                                              ­                         ®
                                           2
                     λn                    λn ­ 0 2 ∗
                              ∗
                É〈−z , ∇W (Σ̂x y )〉 +             z , ∇ W (Σ̂x y )z 0 + R(Σ̂x y + λn z 0 )λ2n ,
                                                                          ®
                                             2
where we used the optimality of z 0 and of z λn . We conclude that
      1 ­ λn 2 ∗                                        1­
         z , ∇ W (Σ̂x y )z λn + R(Σ̂x y + λn z λn )λn É z 0 , ∇2 W ∗ (Σ̂x y )z 0 ) + R(Σ̂x y + λn z 0 )λn .
                             ®                                                    ®
      2                                                 2
                                           0
Taking the limit establishes 18. Since z was an arbitrary element in ∂ ° Ab°1 , we obtain that the
                                                                                  ° °

limit of z λn is
                                   D ³             ´−1 E
                     z ∗ = arg min z, ∇2 W ( A)            subject to z ∈ ∂ ° Ab°1
                                                                                 ° °
                                                b     z
                                   z

where we used 16. Finally, observe that z ∗ was an arbitrary limit point of z λ and we showed that
all limit points are the same; this is enough to conclude the result.


D    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 6

The proof of this statement relies on strong convexity of Jn . Similar results have been proven in
the context of entropic optimal transport (e.g. Genevay et al. (2019); Mena & Niles-Weed (2019)).
Our proof is similar to the approach taken in Rigollet & Stromme (2022).


                                                          17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Let (A ∞ , f ∞ , g ∞ ) minimize (K ∞ ). Note that p ∞ α ⊗ β with
                                              µ                                      ¶
                                                2¡
                                                   ΦA ∞ (x, y) + f ∞ (x) + g ∞ (y)
                                                                                   ¢
                             p ∞ (x, y) = exp
                                                ε
minimizes (iOT−ℓ1 (π̂)). Let
                               1
                    P∞ =          (p ∞ (x i , y j ))i , j ,   F ∞ = ( f ∞ (x i ))i   and G ∞ = (g ∞ (y j )) j .
                               n2
                                           ° °
Note that by optimality of A ∞ , ∥A ∞ ∥1 É ° Ab°1 – this can be seen by comparing the objective
(iOT−ℓ1 (π̂)) at A ∞ and A.
                         b Moreover, due to the uniform bounds on f ∞ , g ∞ from Lemma 12, p ∞ is
uniformly bounded away from 0 by exp(−C /λ) for some constant C that depends on π̂.
Let P n minimise (P n ), we know it is of the form
                                               µ                ¶
                                        1        2
                                P n = 2 exp (Φn A n + F n ⊕G n ) .
                                       n         ε
for vectors A n , F n ,G n .
The ‘certificates’ are Φ∗ ϕ∞ and z n ≜ Φ∗n ϕn where
                                            1¡                    1¡
                                  ϕ∞ =         p ∞ α ⊗ β − π̂          and ϕn =
                                                              ¢               ¢
                                                                    P n − P̂ n .
                                            λ                     λ
Note that z n = Φ∗ ϕ∞ = − λ1 ∇ A L (A ∞ , π̂). The goal is to bound °Φ∗ ϕ∞ − Φ∗n ϕn °∞ so that nonde-
                                                                    °               °

generacy of z ∞ would imply nondegeneracy of Φn ϕn . Note that Φn P n = Φ π̂n . So, by the triangle
                                                     ∗                 ∗         ∗

inequality,

  °Φ ϕ∞ − Φ∗ ϕn ° É 1 °Φ∗ p ∞ α ⊗ β − Φ∗ P n ° + 1 °Φ∗ (π̂n − π̂)°
  ° ∗           °     ° ¡            ¢        °     °            °
           n                              n
                 ∞
                    λ                          ∞
                                                  λ               ∞
                    1°                      1                            1°
                   É °Φ∗n P ∞ − Φ∗n P n °∞ + °Φ∗ p ∞ α ⊗ β − Φ∗n P ∞ °∞ + °Φ∗ (π̂n − π̂)°∞
                                        °     °  ¡        ¢          °                  °
                    λ                       λ                            λ
The last two terms on the RHS can be controlled using Proposition 20, and are bounded by
O (t n −1/2 ) with probability at least 1 − O (exp(−t 2 )) for t > 0. For the first term on the RHS, letting
Z = P∞ − Pn ,
                     °                             °
        ° ∗ °        °X   n                        °
        °Φ Z ° = °   °
                               C(x i , y j )Zi , j °
                                                   °
            n    ∞   °i , j =1                     °
                                                    ∞
                               v
                               u            µ       µ                ¶     µ                     ¶¶2
                               u 1 X                  2                      2
                   É ∥C∥∞ t 2                exp (Φn A n + F n ⊕G n ) − exp (Φn A ∞ + F ∞ ⊕G ∞ )
                                 n i,j                ε                      ε                     i,j



Let L ≜ 2(∥Φn A n + F n ⊕G n )∥∞ ∨ ∥Φn A ∞ + F ∞ ⊕G ∞ )∥∞ ). According to the Lipschitz continuity of
the exponential
                   µ   µ                    ¶     µ                      ¶¶2
           1 X           2                          2
                    exp (Φn A n + F n ⊕G n ) − exp (Φn A ∞ + F ∞ ⊕G ∞ )                          (19)
          n2 i , j       ε                          ε                       i,j

               4 exp(L/ε) X
             É                ((Φn A n + F n ⊕G n ) − (Φn A ∞ + F ∞ ⊕G ∞ ))2i , j                                 (20)
                  ε2 n 2  i,j
                           Ã                                                                           !
               12 exp(L/ε) 1 X                           2       1X              2   1X             2
             É                         (Φn A n − Φn A ∞ )i , j +     (F n − F ∞ )i +     (G n −G ∞ ) j            (21)
                    ε2        n2 i , j                           n i                 n j

By strong convexity properties of Jn and hence K n , it can be shown (see Prop 14) that (21) is
upper bounded up to a constant by

                     ε−1 exp(L/ε) (K n (F ∞ ,G ∞ , A ∞ ) − K n (F n ,G n , A n ))
                              µ
                      exp(L/ε) °°n −2 (Φ∗ Φn )−1 ° °(∂ A Jn (A ∞ , F ∞ ,G ∞ ) + λξ∞ )°2
                                                 °°                                  °
                    É                   n
                         4

                                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                                                              ¶
                                                           °2                            °2
                               + n °∂F Jn (A ∞ , F ∞ ,G ∞ )° + n °∂G Jn (A ∞ , F ∞ ,G ∞ )°
                                   °                             °


where ξ∞ = λ1 (Φ∗ π̂ − Φ∗ (p ∞ α ⊗ β)) ∈ ∂ ∥A ∞ ∥1 . By Lemma 11 and Lemma 12, L = O (° Ab°1 ) with
                                                                                      ° °
                                                     1
probability at least 1 − O (exp(−t 2 )) if λ ≳ t n − 2 . Finally,
          °(∂ A Jn (A ∞ , F ∞ ,G ∞ ) + λξ∞ )°2 = °Φ∗ P̂ + Φ∗ P ∞ + λξ∞ °2
          °                                 °      °                              °
                                                      n        n
                                                   ³°               °2 °                      °2 ´
                                              É 2 °Φ∗n P̂ − Φ∗ π̂° + °Φ∗n P ∞ − Φ∗ (p ∞ α ⊗ β)°
                                                 Ã                             !2
                                     °2 1 X   n        1   n
         n °∂F Jn (A ∞ , F ∞ ,G ∞ )°2 =
            °                                             X
                                                  1−          p ∞ (x i , y j )
                                          n i =1       n j =1
                                                   Ã                             !2 ¶
                                     °2
                                        ¶
                                            1 X n        1X  n
         n ∂G Jn (A ∞ , F ∞ ,G ∞ ) 2 =
            °
            °                        °               1−         p ∞ (x i , y j )     .
                                            n j =1       n i =1
                                                                        2 −1
We show in Propositions 16, 19 and 20 that these are bounded by O (t °   n ) with probability     at
least 1 − O (exp(−t 2 )) and from Proposition 23, assuming n ≳ log(2s), °(n −2 Φ∗n Φn )−1 ° ≲ 1 with
                                                                                          °

probability at least 1 − O (exp(−n)).
So, for some constant C > 0, λ °Φ∗ ϕ∞ − Φ∗n ϕn °∞ ≲ exp(C ° Ab°1 /ε) ptn with probability at least
                                  °              °          ° °

           2
1
° − exp(−t   ). The
                 ° second statement follows by combining our bound for (21) with the fact that
°(n −2 Φ∗ Φn )−1 ° ≲ 1.
        n

In the following subsections, we complete the proof by establishing the required strong convexity
properties of Jn and bound ∇Jn at (A ∞ , F ∞ ,G ∞ ) using concentration inequalities. The proofs to
some of these results are verbatim to the results of Rigollet & Stromme (2022) for deriving sampling
complexity bounds in eOT, although they are included due to the difference in our setup.

D.1    S TRONG CONVEXITY PROPERTIES OF Jn

In this section, we present some of the key properties of Jn . Recall that since we assume that α, β
are compactly
           ¯     supported,
                     ¯      up to a rescaling of the space, we assume without loss of generality that
for all k, ¯Ck (x, y)¯ É 1.
Lemma 11. Let A n minimize (iOT−ℓ1 (π̂n )). Assume that for some constant C 1 > 0,
                                              1
                             t exp(C 1 /ε)n − 2 ≲ λ min 1, ° Ab°1 ,
                                                       ¡ ° ° ¢

then with probability at least 1 − O (exp(−t 2 )),
                                                            ° °
                                                ∥A n ∥1 É 2 ° Ab°

Proof. Let A be a minimizer to (iOT−ℓ1 (π̂n )). By optimality of A, λ ∥A∥ + L (A, π̂n ) É λ ° Ab°1 +
                                                                                            ° °

    b π̂n ). Writing P̂ n = 1 Id and Φn A = s A k Ck (x i , y j ) n ,
L ( A,
                                           ¡P                    ¢
                            n                 k=1                 i , j =1
                                                         ε
                     λ ∥A∥1 − 〈P̂ n , Φn A〉 + 〈P, Φn A〉 − H (P ) É λ ° Ab°1 + L ( A,
                                                                                  b π̂n )
                                                                     ° °
                                                                                                      (22)
                                                         2
for all P satisfying the marginal constraints P 1 = n1 1 and P ⊤ 1 = n1 1.

Note that since L ( A,
                    b π̂) + KL(π̂|α ⊗ β) = 0,
                      L ( A,
                          b π̂n ) = L ( A,
                                        b π̂n ) − L ( A,
                                                      b π̂) − KL(π̂|α ⊗ β)                            (23)
                                       b π̂ − π̂n 〉 + Wπ̂ ( A)
                                 = −〈Φ A,                             b − KL(π̂|α ⊗ β).
                                                            b − Wπ̂ ( A)                              (24)
                                                         n
                                                    1
The first two terms can be shown to be O (n − 2 ): Indeed,
                                1X  n
                 b π̂ − π̂n 〉 =                          b C(x i , y i )〉 − E[〈 A,
                                                      ¡                                           ¢
             〈Φ A,                     Zi , where Zi ≜ 〈 A,                     b C(x i , y i )]〉
                                n i =1
                                                                                                   b 2
                                                                                 b π̂ − π̂n 〉 É 8∥pA ∥ t
                                                          ° °
is the sum of n terms with mean zero. Moreover, |Zi | É 2 ° Ab°. By Lemma 18, 〈Φ A,                 n
with probability at least 1 − 2 exp(−t 2 ).


                                                         19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The bound                                                                                    1
                                         Wπ̂n ( A)        b = O (exp(−C /ε)t n − 2 )
                                                b − Wπ̂ ( A)
with probability 1−O (exp(t 2 )) is a due to the sample complexity of eOT Rigollet & Stromme (2022).
Plugging this back into (22), we obtain
                                     1    ε¡
          λ ∥A∥1 É λ ° Ab°1 + O (n − 2 ) + H (P ) − KL(π̂|α ⊗ β) + 〈P̂ n , Φn A〉 + 〈P, Φn A〉
                      ° °                                       ¢ ¡                          ¢
                                                                                                                     (25)
                                          2|         {z         } |            {z           }
                                                                       T1                                   T2

It remains to bound the terms T1 and T2 . Intuitively, if π̂ = p̂α ⊗ β has density p̂, then we can show
                      1
that T1 , T2 = O (n − 2 ) by choosing P = Q n ≜ n12 (p̂(x i , y j ))ni, j =1 . However, Q n will only approximately
satisfy the marginal constraints Q n 1 ≈ n1 1 and Q n⊤ 1 ≈ n1 1 (this approximation can be made precise
using Proposition 16). So, we insert into the above inequality P = Q̃ n with Q̃ n being the projection
of Q n onto the constraint set U ( n1 1n , n1 1n ).

By (Altschuler et al., 2017, Lemma 7), the projection Q̃ n satisfies
                                           °           °     °           °
                          °Q̃ n −Q n ° É 2 °Q n 1 − 1 1° + 2 °Q ⊤ 1 − 1 1° .
                          °          °     °           °     °           °
                                      1                      ° n                                                     (26)
                                           °        n °1              n °1
By Proposition 16, with probability at least 1 − O (exp(−t 2 )),
                             ¯                        ¯ v          ¯                          ¯2
       °
               1
                   °
                        1  n ¯1 Xn                    ¯ u   1X  n ¯1 X   n                    ¯    µ
                                                                                                     t
                                                                                                        ¶
                                                      ¯ u
                                                                            p̂(x i , y j ) − 1¯ = O p .
       °           °      X
       °Q n 1 − 1° =         ¯
                             ¯      p̂(x i , y j ) − 1¯ É t        ¯
                                                                   ¯
                                                                                              ¯
       °       n °1 n i =1 ¯ n j =1                   ¯     n i =1 ¯ n j =1                   ¯       n
                                    1
Similarly, °Q n 1 − n1 1°1 = O (n − 2 ) with high probability.
           °            °

Note that
                                                        ¯                                               ¯
                                                   ¯ ¯X   s X    n                                      ¯
                                ¯〈Q̃ n −Q n , Φn A〉¯ = ¯¯
                                ¯
                                                                      A k (C k )i , j (Q̃ n −Q n )i , j ¯            (27)
                                                                                                        ¯
                                                        ¯k=1 i , j =1                                   ¯
                                                      °               °
                                É max ∥C k ∥∞ ∥A∥1 °Q n − Q̃ n °1                                                    (28)
                                     k

Moreover,
                                         〈P̂ n −Q n , Φn A〉 É ∥A∥ °Φ∗n (P̂ n −Q n )°
                                                                  °                °
                                                                                                                     (29)

By Proposition 19 and 20, with probability at least 1 − O (exp(−t 2 )),
                                               1                                     1
                E °Φ∗ P̂ n − Φ∗ π̂° = O (t n − 2 ) and E °Φ∗ Q n − Φ∗ π̂° = O (t n − 2 ).
                  °               °                      °              °
                          n                                                     n

                         − 12
So, we have T2 É C n            ∥A∥1 .
We now consider the term T1 in (25). Since p̂ is uniformly bounded from above by exp(C /ε) and
from below with constant exp(−C /ε) for some C > 0, one can check from the projection procedure
of Altschuler et al. (2017) that Q̃ n is also uniformly bounded from above by n12 exp(C /ε) and away
from zero by n12 exp(−C /ε) for some C > 0. So,

                           |T1 | É ¯ H (Q̃ n ) − H (Q n )¯ + ¯ H (Q n ) − KL(π̂|α ⊗ β)¯
                                   ¯                     ¯ ¯                          ¯
                                                                                                 (30)
                                     C /ε °
                                            Q̃ n −Q n + H (Q n ) − KL(π̂|α ⊗ β)
                                          °           ° ¯                            ¯
                                 ≲e                   °     ¯
                                                                 1
                                                                                     ¯           (31)
                                                                       p
We can use the bound (26) to see that °Q̃ n −Q n °1 ≲ t / n with probability at least 1 − exp(−t 2 ).
                                                 °              °

To bound T3 ≜ H (Q n ) − KL(π̂|α ⊗ β), note that Moreover,
               Ã                                              ! Z
                 1 X n X  n
    E[T3 ] = E 2             log(p̂(x i , y j ))p̂(x i , y j ) − log(p̂(x, y))p̂(x, y)d α(x)d β(y)
                 n i =1 j =1
             µ
               n(n − 1)
                              ¶Z
                                                                             1 X   n
                                                                α(x)d β(y)            E log(p̂(x i , y i ))p̂(x i , y i )
                                                                                       ¡                                  ¢
           =              − 1    log(  p̂(x,   y)) p̂(x,    y)d            +
                  n2                                                         n 2 i =1


                                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


              −1                                          1
                 Z                                           Z
             É     log( p̂(x, y)) p̂(x, y)d α(x)d β(y)  +      log(p̂(x, y))p̂(x, y)2 d α(x)d β(y)
              n2                                          n2
               1 ¡° °
                              Z
                                 log(p̂(x, y))d π̂(x, y)
                            ¢
             É 2 °p̂ °∞ − 1
              n
Therefore, by the bounded differences lemma 15 with

                                     1 X n X  n                                        Z
          f (z 1 , . . . , z n ) =    2
                                                 log(p̂(x i , y j ))p̂(x i , y j ) −       log(p̂(x, y))p̂(x, y)d α(x)d β(y)
                                     n i =1 j =1

where z i = (x i , y i ). Then, letting z j = z ′j for all j ̸= i , the bounded differences property is satisfied
with

             f (z 1 , . . . , z n ) − f (z 1′ , . . . , z n′ )
                                                              
                                         1   n   n ¡
                                             +  log(p̂(x i , y j ))p̂(x i , y j ) − log(p̂(x ′ , y j ))p̂(x ′ , y j )
                                              X X                                                                       ¢
                                     =    2                                                   i              i
                                         n j =1 j =1
                                            
                                               j ̸=i

                                         4(°p̂ °∞ + 1)2 )
                                           ° °
                                     É                             ≜ c.
                                                  n
                                                             2t (∥p̂ ∥∞ +1)
So, with probability at least 1 − 2 exp −t 2 , |T3 | É n12 +
                                       ¡    ¢
                                                                  p
                                                                     n
                                                                            .

In summary, with probability 1 − O (exp(−t 2 )),
                   ³                         1
                                               ´                 C 2 (exp(C 1 /ε)t
                     λ −C 2 t exp(C 1 /ε)n − 2 ∥A∥1 É λ ° Ab°1 +
                                                        ° °
                                                                        p
                                                                          n
for some constants C 1 ,C 2 > 0. So, choosing
                                                                 1
                                            C 2 t exp(C 1 /ε)n − 2 É min λ/4, λ ° Ab°1 /2 ,
                                                                        ¡       ° °      ¢

we have                                                                       ° °
                                                                     ∥A∥1 É 2 ° Ab°
with probability at least 1 − exp(−t 2 ).



Lemma 12. Let (A, F,G) minimize (K n ). Let C A = Φn A. Then,

                  F i ∈ [−3 ∥C A ∥∞ , ∥C A ∥∞ ] and G i ∈ [−2 ∥C A ∥∞ , 2 ∥C A ∥∞ ].

Moreover, exp(4 ∥C A ∥∞ ε−1 ) Ê exp 2ε F i +G j + (Φn A)i , j Ê exp(−6 ∥C A ∥∞ ε−1 ).
                                       ¡ ¡                   ¢¢
                                                                                                                            Note that
∥C A ∥∞ É ∥A∥1 .
If (A, f , g ) minimize (K ∞ ). Let c A = ΦA. Then, for all x, y

                   f (x) ∈ [−3 ∥c A ∥∞ , ∥c A ∥∞ ] and g (y) ∈ [−2 ∥c A ∥∞ , 2 ∥c A ∥∞ ].

Moreover, exp(4 ∥c A ∥∞ ε−1 ) Ê exp 2ε f ⊕ +g + (ΦA)i , j Ê exp(−6 ∥c A ∥∞ ε−1 ).
                                     ¡ ¡                 ¢¢


Proof. This proof is nearly identical to (Rigollet & Stromme, 2022, Prop. 10): Let A, F,G minimize
(K n ).
By the marginal constraints for P n ≜ n12 exp 2ε (F ⊕G + Φn A) i , j given in (P n ),
                                          ¡    ¡              ¢¢

                                µ                             ¶
                       1X         2
                    1=       exp (ΦA(x i , y j ) + F i +G j )
                       n j        ε
                           µ                  ¶                         µ                   ¶                                    (32)
                             2                  X1         ¡      ¢       2
                     Ê exp (− ∥C A ∥∞ + F i )          exp 2G j /ε Ê exp (− ∥C A ∥∞ + F i )
                             ε                   j n                      ε


                                                                          21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                               P
where we use Jensen’s inequality and the assumption that j G j = 0 for the second. So, F i É ∥C A ∥∞
for all i ∈ [n]. Using the other marginal constraint for P n along with this bound on F i implies that
                                µ                           ¶      µ                     ¶
                        1X        2                                  2¡                 ¢
                    1=      exp (ΦA(x i , y j ) + F i +G j ) É exp     2 ∥C A ∥∞ +G j )
                        n i       ε                                  ε

So, G n, j Ê −2 ∥C A ∥∞ .
                                                               P
To prove the reverse bounds, we now show that                     i F i is lower bounded: Note that since H (P ) Ê −1,
by duality between (P n ) and (K n ),
                  ε               ε                             ε X
                                                                           µ                      ¶
                                              1X       1X                    2
     ∥C A ∥∞ +      Ê 〈Φn A, P 〉 − H (P ) = −     Fi −     Gj + 2       exp (F i +G j + (Φn A)i j
                  2               2           n i      n j     2n i , j      ε

                                                        2
                                                                                      = n 2 . So,
                     P                    P          ¡                            ¢
By assumption,           j G j = 0 and        i , j exp ε (F i +G j + (Φn A)i j

                                                      1X
                                                          F i Ê − ∥C A ∥∞ .
                                                      n i

By repeating the argument in (32), we see that
                                            Ã              !
                                                   2 X
                 1 Ê exp(2/ε(− ∥C A ∥∞ +G j )) exp      F i Ê exp(2/ε(−2 ∥C A ∥∞ +G j )).
                                                   nε i

So, G j É 2 ∥C A ∥∞ and F i Ê −3 ∥C A ∥∞ .
The proof for (K ∞ ) is nearly identical and hence omitted.

Similarly to (Rigollet & Stromme, 2022, Lemma 11), we derive the following strong convexity bound
for Jn :
Lemma 13. The functional Jn is strongly convex with

  Jn (A ′ , F ′ ,G ′ ) Ê Jn (A, F,G) + 〈∇Jn (A, F,G), (A ′ , F ′ ,G ′ ) − (A, F,G)〉
                                                                                                          (33)
                                                  µ                                                     ¶
                                       exp(−L/ε) 1 °                     ′ °2   1°     ′ °2 1°     ′ °2
                                                        Φn (A − A ) 2 +
                                                                           °             °           °
                                     +                 °                          °F −F 2 +   °G −G 2 ,
                                           ε        n2                          n           n
for some L = O (∥A∥1 ∨ ° A ′ °1 ).
                             ° °


Proof. To establish the strong convexity inequality, let

                              h(t ) ≜ J ((1 − t )A + t A ′ , (1 − t ) f + t f ′ , (1 − t )g + t g ′ ).

It suffices to find δ > 0 such that for all t ∈ [0, 1],
                                   µ                                              ¶
                                     1 °            °2 1 °        °2 1 °       °2
                      h ′′ (t ) Ê δ 2 °Φn (A − A ′ )°2 + °F − F ′ °2 + °G −G ′ °2 .                              (34)
                                     n                  n             n

Let Z t ≜ ((1 − t )F + t F ′ ) ⊕ ((1 − t )G + tG ′ ) + ((1 − t )ΦA + t ΦA ′ ). Note that
                                             µ             ¶
                               2 X             2                                                            2
                  h ′′ (t ) =            exp     (Z            ′          ′           ′
                                                    t i , j (F i − F i +G i −G i + (ΦA )i , j − (ΦA)i , j )
                                                     )                                                           (35)
                              εn 2 i , j       ε

Since ∥c A ∥∞ ∨ ∥c A ′ ∥∞ É L, by Lemma 12, ∥Z t ∥∞ ≲ ∥c A ∥∞ ∨ ∥c A ′ ∥∞ . So,
                                    2
                     h ′′ (t ) Ê        exp(−L/ε) (F i′ − F i +G i′ −G i + (ΦA ′ )i , j − (ΦA)i , j )2 .
                                                 X
                                   εn 2
                                                 i,j
                                                 P                           P
By expanding out the brackets and using i G i = 0 and since C k are centred ( i (C k )i , j = 0 and
                                          2
  j (C k )i , j = 0), (34) holds with δ = ε exp(−L/ε).
P


Based on this strong convexity result, we have the following bound.


                                                                22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proposition 14. Let (A n , F n ,G n ) minimise Fn , then for all (A, F,G) ∈ S such that n −2 exp(F ⊕G +
Φn A) satisfy the marginal constraints of (P n ),
                                                  µ                                                   ¶
                                         exp(−L/ε) 1                   2   1          2  1°      ′ °2
  K n (A, F,G) − K n (A n , F n ,G n ) Ê
                                                                                                   °
                                                       ∥Φ n (A − A n )∥2 +   ∥F − Fn 2 +
                                                                                    ∥       G −G n 2 .
                                                                                           °
                                             ε      n2                     n             n
and
                                                 ε exp(L/ε) °
                                                           µ
          K n (A, F,G) − K n (A n , F n ,G n ) É             °n −2 (Φ∗ Φn )−1 ° °(∂ A Jn (A, F,G) + λξ)°2
                                                                              °°                       °
                                                                      n
                                                      4
                                                                                                ¶
                                                                     °2                      °2
                                                 + n °∂F Jn (A, F,G)°2 + n °∂G Jn (A, F,G)°2 .
                                                     °                     °


where L = O (∥A∥1 ∨ ∥A n ∥1 ).

Proof. By strong convexity of Jn , we can show that for any (A, f , g ), (A ′ , f ′ , g ′ ) ∈ S and any
ξ ∈ ∂ ∥A∥1 ,
            K n (A ′ , F ′ ,G ′ ) Ê K n (A, F,G) + 〈∇Jn (A, F,G), (A ′ , F ′ ,G ′ ) − (A, F,G)〉 + λ〈ξ, A ′ − A〉
                                                   δ 1 °                                                          (36)
                                                     µ                                                          ¶
                                                         °Φn (A − A ′ )°2 + 1 °F − F ′ °2 + 1 °G −G ′ °2 ,
                                                                         °          °       °      °         °
                                                 +     2                  2                  2                2
                                                   2 n                          n                n
                2 exp(−L/ε)
where δ =                       with L = O (∥A∥1 ∨ ° A °1 ). The first statement follows by letting (A, F,G) =
                                                     ° ′°
                      ε
(A n , F n ,G n ) in the above inequality.
To prove the second statement, let
                             M ≜〈∇Jn (A, F,G), (A ′ , F ′ ,G ′ ) − (A, F,G)〉 + λ〈ξ, A ′ − A〉
                                  δ 1 °
                                   µ                                                            ¶
                                                       ′ °2      1°       ′ °2   1°        ′ °2
                                          Φn (A − A ) 2 +
                                                          °                 °                °
                                +       °                           °F −F 2 +      °G −G 2 .
                                  2 n2                           n              n
By minimising over (A ′ , F ′ ,G ′ ), note that
                  1 ³ 2°                         °2                            °2                    °2 ´
                     n °(∂ A Jn (A, F,G) + λξ)°(Φ∗ Φn )−1 + n °∂F Jn (A, F,G)°2 + n °∂G Jn (A, F,G)°2 ,
                                                               °                     °
       M Ê−
                 2δ                                 n

So,
             1 ³° °n −2 (Φ∗ Φn )−1 ° °(∂ A Jn (A, F,G) + λξ)°2 + n °∂F Jn (A, F,G)°2 + n °∂G Jn (A, F,G)°2
                                   °°                       °      °              °      °                ° ´
 −M É                     n                                                        2                       2
            2δ
Finally, note that K n (A, F,G) − K n (A , F ,G ) Ê K n (A, F,G) − K n (A n , F n ,G n ) by optimality of
                                                ′ ′    ′

A n , F n ,G n .

D.2     C ONCENTRATION BOUNDS

Lemma 15 (McDiarmid’s inequality). Let f : X n → R satisfy the bounded differences property:
           sup ¯ f (x 1 , . . . , x i −1 , x i , x i +1 , . . . , x n ) − f (x 1 , . . . , x i −1 , x ′ , x i +1 , . . . , x n )¯ É c.
               ¯                                                                                                                ¯
                                                                                             i
                   x i′ ∈X

Then, given X 1 , . . . , X n random variables with X i ∈ X , for any t > 0,
                         P(¯ f (X 1 , . . . , X n ) − E[ f (X 1 , . . . , X n )]¯ Ê t ) É 2 exp(−2t 2 /(nc 2 )).
                            ¯                                                   ¯


Given random vectors X and Y , denote Cov(X , Y ) = E〈Y − E[Y ], X − E[X ]〉 and Var(X ) = Cov(X , X ).
                                                                         dπ
Proposition 16. Let π have marginals α and β and let p = d (α⊗β)              . Let (x i , y i ) ∼ π̂ where π̂ has
marginals α, β. Assume that °p °∞ É b. Then,
                            ° °

                             "        Ã                         !2 #
                               1 X n       1X  n                       (b + 1)2
                           E            1−        p(x i , y j )      É
                               n j =1      n i =1                         n
and                                            Ã                        !2
                                        1 X n       1X  n                  (t + b + 1)2
                                                 1−        p(x i , y j ) É              .
                                        n j =1      n i =1                      n
with probability at least 1 − exp(−t 2 /(4b 2 )).


                                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Remark 17. The bounds also translate to an ℓ1 norm on the marginal errors, since by Cauchy-
Schwarz,
                        ¯                        ¯ v          Ã                        !2
                  1  n  ¯    1   n               ¯ u     n 1       1X  n
                    X          X                 ¯ u   X
                        ¯1 −        p(x i , y j )¯ É            1−        p(x i , y j ) .
                        ¯                            t
                 n j =1 ¯    n i =1              ¯     j =1 n      n i =1
                                                                                            r
                                                                                                                                ¢2
Moreover, by Jensen’s inequality E n1 nj=1 ¯1 − n1 ni=1 p(x i , y j )¯ É                     E nj=1 n1 1 − n1 ni=1 p(x i , y j ) .
                                     P            P        ¯                            ¯     P       ¡      P



Proof.
                 "      Ã                         !2 #
                 1 X n       1X  n                       1 X   n
               E                                                   E (1 − p(x i , y j ))(1 − p(x k , y j )) .
                                                                    ¡                                      ¢
                          1−        p(x i , y j )      = 3
                 n j =1      n i =1                     n i j ,k=1

For each j ∈ [n], we have the following cases for u j ≜ E (1 − p(x i , y j ))(1 − p(x k , y j )) :
                                                         ¡                                      ¢



       1. i = k = j , then u j = E(x,y)∼π̂ (p ∞ (x, y) − 1)2 . There is 1 such term.

       2. i = j and k ̸= j , then u j = E(x,y)∼π̂,z∼α (1 − p(x, y))(1 − p(z, y)) = 0. There are n − 1 such
                                                        ¡                         ¢

          terms.

       3. i ̸= j and k = j , then u j = E(z,y)∼π̂,x∼α (1 − p(x, y))(1 − p(z, y)) = 0. There are n − 1 such
                                                        ¡                         ¢

          terms.

       4. i = k and i ̸= j , then u j = Ex∼α,y∼β (1 − p(x, y))2 and there are (n − 1) such terms.

       5. i , j , k all distinct. Then, u j = 0 and there are (n − 1)(n − 2) such terms.


Therefore,

  1 X    n                                              1                           n −1
             E (1 − p(x i , y j ))(1 − p(x k , y j )) = 2 E(x,y)∼π̂ (p(x, y) − 1)2 + 2 Ex∼α,y∼β (1 − p(x, y))2
              ¡                                      ¢
   3
  n i j ,k=1                                           n                             n
      ¯           ¯
Using ¯1 − p(x, y)¯ É b + 1 gives the first inequality.
                                                                                                         ¢2
Note also that letting V = n1 ni=1 (1 − p(x i , y j )) j , ∥V ∥2 = nj=1 n1 ni=1 (1 − p(x i , y j )) . We will
                                   P ¡                    ¢           P    ¡ P
                                                                  ³                     ´
apply Lemma 15 to f (z 1 , . . . , z n ) = ∥V ∥. Let V ′ = n1 ni=1 (1 − p(x i′ , y ′j )) where x i , y j = x ′j , y ′j for
                                                             P
                                                                                                      j
i , j Ê 2. Then, for all vectors u of norm 1,
                                 n           1X  n
               〈u, V ′ − V 〉 =                      (p(x i′ , y ′j ) − p(x i , y j ))
                                 X
                                        uj
                                 j =1        n i =1
                                     1X  n                                        n     1
                                            (p(x i′ , y 1′ ) − p(x i , y 1 )) +      u j (p(x 1′ , y ′j ) − p(x 1 , y j ))
                                                                                X
                             = u1
                                     n i =1                                     j =2    n
                                 2b Xn       2b
                             É          uj É p .
                                 n j =1       n

So, by the reverse triangle inequality, ¯∥V ∥ − °V ′ °¯ É p2bn . It follows that
                                        ¯       ° °¯

                                                                                 q
              n −1/2 ∥V ∥ É n −1/2 t + n −1/2 E ∥V ∥ É n −1/2 t +                 n −1 E ∥V ∥2 É n −1/2 (t + b + 1).

with probability at least 1 − exp(−t 2 /(4b 2 )) as required.


                                                                     24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


D.2.1      B OUNDS FOR THE COST PARAMETRIZATION

In the following two propositions (Prop 20 and 19), we assume that Φn is defined with C k =
(Ck (x i , y j ))i , j and discuss in the remark afterward how to account for the fact that our cost C k in
(P n ) are centered.
Note that the following classical result is a direct consequence of Lemma 15
Lemma 18. Suppose Z1 , . . . , Zm are independent mean zero random variables taking values in
Hilbert space H . Suppose there is some C > 0 such that for all k, ∥Zk ∥ É C . Then, for all t > 0, with
probability at least 1 − 2 exp(−t ),
                                        °         °2
                                        °1 X m    °         8C 2 t
                                               Zk ° É              .
                                        °         °
                                        °
                                        ° m k=1 °            m
Proposition 19. Let C = maxx,y °C(x, y)°. Let (x i , y i )ni=1 be iid drawn from π̂. Then,
                                   °      °

                                                            p
                                       °Φ P̂ − Φ∗ π̂° É 8C t
                                       ° ∗          °
                                          n
                                                              n
with probability at least 1 − 2 exp(−t 2 ).

Proof. Direct consequence of Lemma 18.

Proposition 20. Let t > 0. Let (x i , y i )ni=1 be i.i.d. drawn from π̂, which has marginals α, β. Let
                        where π has marginals α, β and p = d π . Then, E °Φ∗ P − Φ∗ (pα ⊗ β)° =
                                                                                                  °2
P = 12 (p(x i , y j ))n
                                                                               °
      n                i , j =1                                                                    d (α⊗β)                  n
O (n −1 ) and
                                     °Φ P − Φ∗ pα ⊗ β° ≲ 1p+ t
                                     ° ∗             °
                                        n
                                                            n
                                       2
                                            ° °2
with probability at least 1 − 2 exp(−2t /(64 p ∞ ))
                                            ° °


Proof. Let h(x, y) ≜ p(x, y)C(x, y), then
                                                                                           
                                                   1  n                     n
                                           Φ∗n P = 2
                                                     X                    X
                                                         h(x j , y j ) +      h(x i , y j )
                                                                                           
                                                  n j =1                  i =1
                                                                                          i ̸= j

and
                                                                                  1 ∗¡
                                         E[Φ∗n P − Φ∗ pα ⊗ β] =                     A p π̂ − pα ⊗ β
                                                                                                    ¢
                                                                                  n
It follows that
                                              °2  1 ° ¡              ¢°2
                          E °Φ∗n P − Φ∗ pα ⊗ β° = 2 °Φ∗ p π̂ − pα ⊗ β ° + Var(Φ∗n P )
                            °
                                                 n
and
                                                        1          n
                                     Var(Φ∗n P ) =
                                                                   X
                                                                         Cov(h(x i , y k ), h(x ℓ , y k ))
                                                        n 4 i , j ,k,ℓ=1

Note that Cov(h(x i , y k ), h(x ℓ , y k )) = 0 whenever i , j , k, ℓ are distinct and there are n(n − 1)(n −
2)(n − 3) = n 4 − 6n 3 + 12n 2 − 6n such terms, i.e. there are 6n 3 − 12n 2 + 6n nonzero terms in the
sum. It follows that Var(Φ∗n P ) = O (n −1 ) if ∥C∥ and p are uniformly bounded.
To conclude, we apply Lemma 15 with f (z 1 , . . . , z n ) = °Φ∗n P − Φ∗ pα ⊗ β° and z i = (x i , y i ). Let
                                                                                            °                        °

X (z 1 , . . . , z n ) = Φ∗n P − Φ∗ pα ⊗ β. Then, Note that for an arbitrary vector u,
                                                                                           Ã                                        !
                                                                                              s
                                                               ′                                                         ′ ′
                                                                                          X X
                       〈u, X (z 1 , z 2 , . . . , z n ) − X (z 1 , z 2 , . . . , z n )〉 =       u k (h(x i , y j ) − h(x i , y j ))
                                                                                    i,j      k=1
                          Ã                                              !          Ã                                                  !
                      n s                                                         n s
                                  u k (h(x i , y 1 ) − h(x i′ , y 1 ))                         u k (h(x 1 , y j ) − h(x 1′ , y ′j ))
                      X X                                                         X X
                  =                                                          +
                      i =2 k=1                                                   j =1 k=1


                                                                             25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                    É 8n −1 ∥u∥ sup °C(x, y)° °p °∞
                                    °       °° °
                                      x,y

So, f (z 1 , z 2 , . . . , z n ) − f (z 1′ , z 2 , . . . , z n ) É 8n −1 °p °∞ and
                                                                         ° °


                                     °Φ P − Φ∗ pα ⊗ β° ≲ 1p+ t
                                     ° ∗                °
                                         n
                                                            n
                                                   2
with probability at least 1 − 2 exp(−2t 2 /(64 °p °∞ ))
                                               °  °



Remark 21 (Adjusting   for the centred cost parametrization).            In the above two propositions, we
compare Φ∗n P = i , j Ck (x i , y j )P i , j with Φ∗ π = Ck (x, y)d π(x, y) for P being a discretized version
               P                                        R

of π. The delicate issue is that in (P n ), C k is a centralized version of Ĉ k ≜ (Ck (x i , y j ))i , j . In
particular,
                                  1X  n                 1X  n                 1 Xn X  n
                     C k = Ĉ k −        (Ĉ k )i , j −        (Ĉ k )i , j + 2          (Ĉ k )i , j .
                                  n i =1                n i =1               n j =1 i =1
Note that if P 1 = n1 1 and P ⊤ 1 = n1 1, then
                                      X                             X                              1 X n X n
                                            (C k )i , j P i , j =         (Ĉ k )i , j P i , j −    2
                                                                                                              (Ĉ k )k, j
                                      i,j                           i,j                            n j =1 k=1

This last term on the RHS is negligible because Φ∗ (α ⊗ β) = 0 by assumption of Ck being centred:
Note that
                                  1 Xn X n                       1
                                   2
                                            (Ĉ k )k, j = Φ̂∗n ( 2 1n×n ).
                                 n j =1 k=1                     n
Applying the above proposition,
                        °                                    °
                        ° 1 X n X n                          ° m + log(n)
                                     (Ĉ k )k, j − Φ∗ (α ⊗ β)° ≲  p
                        °                                    °
                        ° 2
                        ° n j =1 k=1                         °      n

with probability at least 1 − exp(−m). So, up to constants, the above two propositions can be
applied even for our centralized cost C .

D.2.2       I NVERTIBILITY BOUND

Recall our assumption that M ≜ E(x,y)∼α⊗β [C(x, y)C(x, y)⊤ ] is invertible. In Proposition 23, we
bound the deviation of Φ∗n Φn from M in the spectral norm, and hence establish that it is invertible
with high probability.
We will make use of the following matrix Bernstein inequality.
Theorem 22 (Matrix Bernstein). Tropp et al. (2015) Let Z1 , . . . , Zn ∈ Rd ×d be independent symmetric
mean-zero random matrices such that ∥Zi ∥ É L for all i ∈ [n]. Then, for all t Ê 0,
                              °     °
                              °X ° q                      1
                            E ° Zi ° É 2σ log(2d ) + L log(2d )
                              °     °
                              °i    °                     3

where σ2 = ° ni=1 E[Zi2 ]°.
           °P            °

Proposition 23. Assume that log(2s) + 1 É n. Let t > 0. Then,
                             °               ° s
                             ° Φ Φn − M ° ≲ log(2s) + pt
                             ° 1 ∗           °
                             ° n2 n          °        n −1    n
with probability at least 1 − O (exp(−t 2 )).

Proof. Recall that Φn A =
                                             P
                                                 k Ak Ck ,     where C k is the centred version of the matrix Ĉ k =
(Ck (x i , y j ))i , j . That is,
                                                         1X                1X                1 XX
                          (C k )i , j = (Ĉ k )i , j −       (Ĉ k )ℓ, j −     (Ĉ k )i ,m + 2    (Ĉ k )ℓ,m .              (37)
                                                         n ℓ               n m              n ℓ m


                                                                                  26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


                                                       P
For simplicity, we first do the proof for (Φn A)i , j = k A k Ck (x i , y j ), and explain at the end how to
modify the proof to account for Φn using the centered C k .
First,
                                Ã                                                                !
            1 ∗          1X  n      n
                                  1 X
                                                                     Z
                                                                  ⊤                      ⊤
              Φ Φn − M =                C(x i , y j )C(x i , y j ) − C(x i , y)C(x i , y) d β(y)                             (38)
            n2 n         n i =1 n j =1
                         1X  n Z                                    Z
                       +          C(x i , y)C(x i , y)⊤ d β(y) − C(x, y)C(x, y)⊤ d α(x)d β(y)                                (39)
                         n i =1


To bound the two terms in (39), let Zi ≜ C(x i , y)C(x i , y)⊤ d β(y) − C(x, y)C(x, y)⊤ d α(x)d β(y)
                                          R                            R

and observe that
              ° °these are i.i.d. matrices with zero mean. By matrix Bernstein with the bounds
∥Zi ∥ É 2 and ° Zi2 ° É 4,
                               °          ° p                         s
                               °1 X  n    °  8 log(2s)   2 log(2s)      log(2s)
                              E°       Z °É    p       +           É4
                               °          °
                               ° n i =1 i °      n           3n            n

assuming that log(2s) É n.
For the two terms in (38),
  °       Ã                                                                     !°
  °1 X  n   1 Xn                                Z                                  °
                                            ⊤                         ⊤
E°                C(x i , y j )C(x i , y j ) − C(x i , y)C(x i , y) d β(y) °                                           (40)
  °                                                                                °
  ° n i =1 n j =1                                                                  °
                                               °                                                                       °
     °                                    °    °                                                                         °
     ° 1 X  n                             °    ° n
                                                 1      1   n                               Z                            °
                                        ⊤                                                 ⊤                      ⊤
 É E° 2       C(x i , y i )C(x i , y i ) ° + E °                C(x i , y j )C(x i , y j ) − C(x i , y)C(x i , y) d β(y)°
     °                                    °    °   X     X                                                             °
                                               °                                                                       
     ° n i =1                             °      n
                                               ° i =1
                                                      n
                                                          j =1
                                                                                                                         °
                                                                                                                         °
                                                          j ̸=i
                                               °                                                                         °
                                                                                                                             (41)
            °                                                                         °
            °                                                                         °
         n
  2 n −1 X °
            °
                1     n   µ                             Z                            ¶°
           E°              C(x i , y j )C(x i , y j )⊤ − C(x i , y)C(x i , y)⊤ d β(y) °
                    X                                                                 °
 É + 2                                                                                                                       (42)
  n  n i =1 ° n − 1 j =1
            °                                                                         °
                                                                                      °
                    j ̸=i
            °                                                                         °

For each i = 1, . . . n, let Y j = C(x i , y j )C(x i , y j ) − C(x i , y)C(x i , y)⊤ d β(y) and observe that condi-
                                                               R
                 © ª
tional on x i , Y j j ̸=i are iid matrices with zero mean. The matrix Bernstein inequality applied to
  1 P
n−1   j ∈[n]\{i } Y j implies that
                           °                     ° p                        s
                           ° 1                   °   8 log(2s) 2 log(2s)      log(s)
                          E°
                                      X
                                              Yj ° É p        +          É4
                           °                     °
                           ° n − 1 j ∈[n]\{i } °       n −1     3n − 3          n

assuming that log(2s) É n − 1.
                                                       °                °
Finally, we apply Lemma 15 to f (z 1 , . . . , z n ) = ° n12 Φ∗n Φn − M °. Let Φ′n u = k u k C(x i′ , y i′ ) with
                                                       °                °             P

x i′ = x i and y i′ = y i for i Ê 2. For each vector u of unit norm,

  1                                       1 X   n X  n ¯                  ¯ ¯                      ¯2
     〈(Φ ∗
           Φ n − (Φ ′ ∗ ′
                      )  Φ     )u, u〉 =                 ¯C(x i , y j )⊤ u ¯2 − ¯¯C(x ′ , y ′ )⊤ u ¯¯                           (43)
         n          n        n                                                        i    j
  n2                                     n 2 i =1 j =1
         1 X n ¯                                                      n ¯
                ¯C(x i , y 1 )⊤ u ¯2 − ¯C(x ′ , y ′ )⊤ u ¯2 + 1
                                                                                           ¯ ¯                     ¯2
                                                                        ¯C(x 1 , y j )⊤ u ¯2 − ¯¯C(x ′ , y ′ )⊤ u ¯¯ É 4n −1 . (44)
                                  ¯ ¯                    ¯          X
     = 2                                    i 1                  2                                    1 j
        n i =1                                                n j =2

So,
                                        °          °    s
                                        ° Φ Φn − M ° É 8 log(2s) + pt
                                        ° 1 ∗      °
                                        ° n2 n     °      n −1       n
with probability at least 1 − exp(−2t 2 /16).


                                                               27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To conclude this proof,Pwe now discuss how to modify the above proof in the case of the centered
cost C k , that is Φn A = k A k C k where C k is as defined in (37). Note that in this case,
                                                                       Ã                       !Ã                          !
   1                  1 X   n                                     1         n                         n
          ∗
      (Φ Φn )k,ℓ = 2
                                                                           X                        X
                                 Ck (x i , y j )Cℓ (x i , y j ) + 4            Cℓ (x p , y q )             Ck (x i , y j )                (45)
  n2 n                n i , j =1                                 n p,q=1                          i , j =1
                               Ã                     !Ã                      !           Ã                      !Ã                          !
                      1 X n      n
                                 X                       X n                    1 X  n      Xn                        Xn
                   − 3               Cℓ (x p , y j )          Ck (x i , y j ) − 3               Cℓ (x i , y q )             Ck (x i , y j )
                     n j =1 p=1                          i =1                   n i =1 q=1                           j =1
                                                                                                                                        (46)
We already know from the previous arguments that
                          °                                               °
                          ° 1 X    n                                      °          q
                        E° 2           Ck (x i , y j )Cℓ (x i , y j ) − M ° = O ( log(s)/n).
                          °                                               °
                          ° n i , j =1                                    °

For the last term in (45), let Λ = (i , j , p, q) ; i ∈ [n], j ∈ [n] \ {i } , p ∈ [n] \ i , j , q ∈ [n] \ i , j , p .
                                           ©                                                        © ª                © ªª

Note that Λ has n(n −1)(n −2)(n −3) terms, and Λc = [n]×[n]×[n]×[n] has O (n 3 ) terms. Therefore,
we can write
           ° Ã                       !Ã                         !°
           ° 1     n                        n                    °
                                                              ⊤ °
          E° 4
                  X                       X
                        C(x p , y q )            C(x i , y j ) °
           °
           ° n p,q=1                    i , j =1
                                                                 °
                  °                                            °      °                                              °
               1 °                                           ⊤°
                                                               °      ° 1                                            °
                                                                                                                    ⊤°
            É 4 E°              C(x p , y q )C(x i , y j ) ° + E ° 4
                  ° X                                                             X
                                                                                          C(x p , y q )C(x i , y j ) °
                                                                      °
              n °(i , j ,p,q)∈Λ                                °      ° n (i , j ,p,q)∈Λc                            °
                  °                                            °
               1 °                                             °
            É 4 E°              C(x p , y q )C(x i , y j )⊤ ° + O (n −1 )
                  ° X                                          °
              n °(i , j ,p,q)∈Λ                                °
                                                                        3                c
where
°        ° second inequality is because there are O (n ) terms in Λ and we used the bound that
       the
°C(x, y)° = 1. Moreover,
       °                                          °                               °                                                 °
  1 °                                             ° n −3 X X X                    ° 1                                               °
                                                 ⊤°                                                                                ⊤°
     E                                                                          E
       ° X                                                                                  X
                      C(x   , y   )C(x   , y   )    É                                                   C(x   , y   )C(x   , y   )  °.
                                                                                  °
                          p     q      i     j                                                              p     q      i     j
  n 4 °(i , j ,p,q)∈Λ                                 n 4 i j ̸∈{i } p̸∈{i , j } ° n − 3 q̸∈{i , j ,p }
       °                                          °                               °
                                                  °                                                                                 °

Note that conditional on i , j , p,
                   1
                                                                     Z
              E[                      C(x p , y q )C(x i , y j )⊤ ] = C(x p , y)d β(y)C(x i , y j )⊤ = 0
                          X
                 n − 3 q̸∈{i , j ,p }

by assumption that C(x, y)d β(y) = 0. So, we can apply Matrix Bernstein as before to show that
                            °                                       °
                        1 °                                         °   q
                                                                   ⊤°
                     E[ 4 E °
                            ° X
                                         C(x p , y q )C(x i , y j ) °] ≲ log(s)n −1 .
                       n °(i , j ,p,q)∈Λ                            °

A similar argument can be applied to handle the two terms in (46), and so,
                                 °              ° q
                                 ° 1 ∗
                               E ° 2 Φ n Φn − M °
                                                °
                                                ° ≲ log(s)/n.
                                 °
                                   n
The high probability bound can now be derived using Lemma 15 as before.


E     P ROOFS FOR THE G AUSSIAN SETTING

Simplified problem To ease the computations, we will compute the Hessian of the following
function (corresponding to the special case where Σα = Id and Σβ = Id):
                                                ε
                            W̃ (A) ≜ sup〈A, Σ〉 + log det(Id − Σ⊤ Σ).                  (47)
                                      Σ         2
To retrieve the Hessian of the original function note that, since log det(Σβ −Σ⊤ Σ−1
                                                                                  α Σ) = log det(Σβ )+
                   −1                −1                                            −1     −1                                        1      1
log det(Id − Σβ 2 Σ⊤ Σ−1
                      α ΣΣβ ), a change of variable Σ̃ ≜ Σα ΣΣβ , shows that W (A) = W̃ (Σα AΣβ )
                           2                               2   2                          2   2


and, hence,
                                                         1       1             1     1      1       1
                                      ∇2 W (A) = (Σβ2 ⊗ Σα2 )∇2 W̃ (Σα2 AΣβ2 )(Σβ2 ⊗ Σα2 ).                                             (48)


                                                                     28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


By the envelope theorem, ∇W̃ (A) = Σ, where Σ is the maximizer of (47), thus reducing the compu-
tation of ∇2 W̃ (A) to differentiating the optimality condition of Σ, i.e.,

                                         A = ε−1 Σ(Id − Σ⊤ Σ)−1 .                                   (49)

Recall also that such a Σ has an explicit formula given in (5).
Lemma 24.
                                                                                  ¢−1
                      ∇2 W̃ (A) = ε ε2 (Id − Σ⊤ Σ)−1 ⊗ (Id − ΣΣ⊤ )−1 + (A ⊤ ⊗ A)T
                                   ¡
                                                                                                    (50)

and Σ is as in (49) and T is the linear map defined by Tvec(X ) = vec(X ⊤ ).


Proof of Lemma 24. Define G(Σ, A) ≜ Σ(Id − Σ⊤ Σ)−1 − ε−1 A. Note that a maximizer Σ of (47)
satisfies G(Σ, A) = 0. Moreover, ∂ΣG is invertible at such (Σ, A) because this is the Hessian of
log det(Id − Σ⊤ Σ), a strictly concave function. By the implicit function theorem, there exists a
function f : A 7→ Σ such that G( f (A), A) = 0 and

                                    ∇ f = (∂ΣG)−1 ∂ A G = ε−1 (∂ΣG)−1 .

It remains to compute ∂ΣG at ( f (A), A):
At an arbitrary point (Σ, A) we have

      ∂ΣG = (Id − Σ⊤ Σ)−1 ⊗ Id + (Id ⊗ Σ)∂Σ (Id − Σ⊤ Σ)−1
          = (Id − Σ⊤ Σ)−1 ⊗ Id + (Id ⊗ Σ) (Id − Σ⊤ Σ)−1 ⊗ (Id − Σ⊤ Σ)−1 (Σ⊤ ⊗ Id)T + (Id ⊗ Σ⊤ )
                                         ¡                             ¢¡                       ¢


and at ( f (A), A), i.e, with Σ(Id − Σ⊤ Σ)−1 = ε−1 A, we can further simplify to

                     ∂ΣG = (Id − Σ⊤ Σ)−1 ⊗ (Id + Σ(Id − Σ⊤ Σ)−1 Σ⊤ )) + ε−2 (A ⊤ ⊗ A)T

By the Woodbury matrix formula,

                          (Id + Σ(Id − Σ⊤ Σ)−1 Σ⊤ ) = (Id − ΣΣ⊤ )−1 = Id + AΣ⊤ .

So,
                          ∂ΣG = (Id − Σ⊤ Σ)−1 ⊗ (Id − ΣΣ⊤ )−1 + ε−2 (A ⊤ ⊗ A)T,
thus concluding the proof.


We remark that from the connection between W (A) and W̃ (A), i.e., 48, we obtain Lemma 7 as a
corollary.

E.1   L IMIT CASES

SVD representation of the covariance To derive the limiting expressions, we make an ob-
servation on the singular value decomposition of Σ: Let the singular value decomposition
of A be A = U DV ⊤ , where D is the diagonal matrix with positive entries d i . Note that ∆ =
        2           1             2       1
(Id + ε4 (A ⊤ A)† ) 2 = V (Id + ε4 D −2 ) 2 V ⊤ . Moreover, ∆ and A ⊤ A commute, so

                                                                      ¶ 12
                                                                            
                                                                 2
                                              ε                ε           ε
                                                          µ
                                      1
               Σ = A∆((∆2 A ⊤ A)† ) 2 ∆ − A T,† = U  Id + D †,2 − D †  V ⊤ = U D̃V ⊤ ,  (51)
                                              2                 4          2

where D̃ is the diagonal matrix with diagonal entries
                                          vÃ         !
                                                 ε2    ε 1
                                          u
                                          u
                                      ˜
                                     di = t  1+ 2 −         .                                       (52)
                                                4d i   2 di


                                                    29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


E.1.1   L INK WITH L ASSO : L IMIT AS ε → ∞

Note that                      s
                                                             3
                         ε            4d i2       ε     di di
                  d˜i =         1+           −        =   − 3 + O (ε−5 ) → 0,          ε → ∞.       (53)
                        2d i           ε   2     2d i   ε  ε
It follows that limε→∞ Σ = 0 and hence, ε∇2 W̃ (A) → Id. So, the certificate converges to
                                                                 ¢−1
                              (Σβ ⊗ Σα )(:,I ) (Σβ ⊗ Σα )(I ,I )
                                              ¡
                                                                     sign( A)
                                                                           b I.                     (54)

Proof of Proposition 8. The iOT problem approaches a Lasso problem as ε → ∞. Recall that in the
Gaussian setting, the iOT problem is of the form
                                                           ε
             arg min F (A) = λ ∥A∥1 + 〈A, Σε,A − Σε, Ab 〉 + log det Σβ − Σ⊤    −1
                                                                          ε,A Σα Σε,A
                                                                   ¡                  ¢
                                                                                           (55)
                 A                                         2

where Σε,A satisfies Σβ − Σ⊤
                           ε,A Σα Σε,A = εΣα Σε,A A . So, we can write
                                −1         −1      −1

                                                                     ε
                arg min F (A) ≜ λ ∥A∥1 + 〈A, Σε,A − Σε, Ab 〉 +         log det εΣ−1
                                                                                 α Σε,A A
                                                                                          −1
                                                                              ¡              ¢
                                                                                                    (56)
                   A                                                 2

Let
                                           1     1
                                                                    −1        −1
                                X ≜ Σα2 AΣβ2         and Σ̃ε,A = Σα 2 Σε,A Σβ 2 .

From (52), if X has SVD decomposition W = U diag(d i )V ⊤ , then

                                   Σ̃ε,A = U D̃V ⊤ ,     where D̃ = diag(d˜i )
and
                                                          3
                                                     di di
                                               d˜i =   − 3 + O (ε−5 ).
                                                     ε  ε
So,
                                            µ                      ¶
                                                − 21             1
         log det(εΣ−1
                   α  Σε,A A −1
                                ) = log det   εΣα    Σ̃ε,A X −1 2
                                                               Σα

                                                              2 2
                                  = log det U diag 1 − d i /ε + O (ε−4 ) U ⊤
                                            ¡          ¡                   ¢ ¢

                                                                             1
                                  = log det diag 1 − d i2 /ε2 + O (ε−4 ) = − 2 ∥X ∥2F + O (ε−4 ).
                                            ¡      ¡                    ¢¢
                                                                             ε
Also,
                    ε〈Σε,A − Σε, Ab , A〉 = ε〈Σ̃ε,A − Σ̃ε, Ab , X 〉 = 〈X − X 0 , X 〉 + O (ε−2 ).
So, assuming that λ = λ0 /ε,

               εF (A) = λ0 ∥A∥1 + 〈X − X 0 , X 〉 − ∥X ∥2F + O (ε−2 )                                (57)
                                  ° 1                   °2      ° 1           °2
                                                        ° − 1 °(Σ 2 ⊗ Σ 2 ) Ab° + O (ε−2 )
                                             1                          1
                      = λ0 ∥A∥1 + °       Σ
                                  ° 2        2
                                                        °       °             °
                                   (Σ
                                  ° β  ⊗     α )(A − A)
                                                     b
                                                                     β α                            (58)
                                                        °
                                                          F   2 °             °

The final statement on the convergence of minimizers follows by Gamma-convergence.

E.1.2   L INK WITH G RAPHICAL L ASSO

In the special case where the covariances are the identity (Σα = Id and Σβ = Id) and A is symmetric
positive definite we have that Σ is also positive definite and Galichon’s formula (5) holds (since A
is invertible) and hence the Hessian reduces to
                             µ            ¶−1
                               1 2
                                              = (A ⊗ A) Σ−1 ⊗ Σ−1 + T .
                                                       ¡              ¢
                                 ∇ W̃ (A)                                                        (59)
                               ε
Moreover, if A admits an eigenvalue decomposition A = U DU ⊤ , then Σ admits an eigenvalue
decomposition Σ = U
                  ¡ D̃U
                        ⊤
                          with entries of D̃ given by (52). Note that it follows that limε→0 Σ = Id
and, hence, limε→0 Σ ⊗ Σ−1 + T = Id + T, a singular matrix with the kernel being the set of
                     −1
                                ¢



                                                         30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


asymmetric matrices. So, the limit does not necessarily exist as ε → 0. However, in the special case
where A is symmetric positive definite, one can show that the certificates remain well defined as
ε → 0: Let S + be the set of matrices ψ such that ψ is symmetric and S − be the set of matrices ψ
such that ψ is anti-symmetric. Then, (∇2 W̃ (A))−1 (S + ) ⊂ S + and (∇2 W̃ (A))−1 (S − ) ⊂ S − . Moreover,
                            µ            ¶−1
                              1 2
                                             ↾S + = (A ⊗ A) Σ−1 ⊗ Σ−1 + Id ,
                                                           ¡              ¢
                                ∇ W̃ (A)
                              ε
                            µ            ¶−1
                              1 2
                                             ↾S − = (A ⊗ A) Σ−1 ⊗ Σ−1 − Id .
                                                           ¡              ¢
                                ∇ W̃ (A)
                              ε
Since the symmetry of A implies the symmetry of sign(A), we can replace the Hessian given in (59)
by (A ⊗ A)(Σ−1 ⊗ Σ−1 + Id) and, hence, since limε→0 Σ = Id, the limit as ε → 0 is
                                                                            ¢−1
                       lim z ε = (A −1 ⊗ A −1 )(:,I ) (A −1 ⊗ A −1 )(I ,I )
                                                     ¡
                                                                                sign(A)I .   (60)
                         ε→0


This coincides precisely with the certificate of the graphical lasso:

                                 arg min〈S, Θ〉 − log det(Θ) + λ ∥Θ∥1 .
                                    Θ⪰0


Proof of Proposition 9. The iOT problem with identity covariances restricted to the set of positive
semi-definite matrices has the form
                                                                ε
    arg min Fε,λ (A), where Fε,λ (A) ≜ λ ∥A∥1 + 〈A, Σε,A − Σ̂〉 + log det(Id − Σ⊤ ε,A Σε,A ),   (61)
       A⪰0                                                      2

where I − Σ⊤ ε,A Σε,A = εΣε,A A . From the singular value decomposition of Σε,A ,i.e., (51), we see
                               −1

that if A is symmetric positive definite, then so is Σε,A . Plugging the optimality condition, i.e.,
I − Σ⊤
     ε,A Σε,A = εΣε,A A , into (61), we obtain
                        −1


                                                     ε
                 arg min λ ∥A∥1 + 〈A, Σε,A − Σ̂〉 +     log det(εA −1 Σε,A )
                   A⪰0                               2
                                    ε                                     ε
               = arg min λ ∥A∥1 −     log det(A/ε) + ε〈A, (Σε,A − Σ̂)/ε〉 + log det(Σε,A )
                   A⪰0              2                                     2

Let λ = ελ0 for some λ0 > 0. Then, removing the constant 2ε log det(εId) term and factoring out ε,
the problem is equivalent to
                                     1                                    1
                 arg min λ0 ∥A∥1 −     log det(A) + 〈A, ε−1 (Σε,A − Σ̂)〉 + log det(Σε,A )
                   A⪰0               2                                    2

Assume that Σ̂ = Σε, Ab . From the expression for the singular values of Σε,A in (52), note that
                                                    ε
                                         Σε,A = Id − A −1 + O (ε2 ).
                                                    2
                                  1
So, limε→0 (Σε,A − Σε, Ab )/ε = − 2 A − Ab . The objective converges pointwise to
                                    ¡ −1    −1
                                               ¢

                                           1             1
                               λ0 ∥A∥1 −     log det(A) + 〈A, Ab−1 − A −1 〉,
                                           2             2
and the statement is then a direct consequence of Gamma-convergence.

Remark 25. Note that from (52), we have Σ = Id − 2ε A −1 + O (ε2 ). So, in this case, the covariance of
π̂ is
                                                Id − 2ε A −1 + O (ε2 )
                           µ                                           ¶
                                    Id
                                 ε −1      2                             .
                            Id − 2 A + O (ε )             Id
For (X , Y ) ∼ π, The Schur complement of this is the covariance of X conditional on Y , which
is εA −1 + O (ε2 ). So, up the ε, one can see A −1 as the “precision" matrix of the covariance of X
conditional on Y .


                                                     31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F   L ARGE SCALE ℓ1 - I OT SOLVER

Recall that the iOT optimization problem, recast over the dual potentials for empirical measures,
reads
                                               ε X
                                                          µ                       ¶
                   1X                                       2
              inf      F i +G i + (Φn A)i ,i + 2       exp (F i +G j + (Φn A)i , j + λ ∥A∥1 .
             A,F,G n i                        2n i , j      ε
To obtain a better-conditioned optimization problem, in line with Cuturi & Peyré (2016), we instead
consider the semi-dual problem, which is derived by leveraging the closed-form expression for
the optimal G, given F .
                                           εX
                                                          µ                  ¶
                    1X                             1X       2
                inf     F i + (Φn A)i ,i +     log     exp (F i + (Φn A)i , j + λ ∥A∥1 .
                A,F n i                    n i     n j      ε

Following Poon & Peyré (2021), which proposes a state-of-the-art Lasso solver, the last step is to
use the following Hadamard product over-parameterization of the ℓ1 norm

                                                    ∥U ∥22       ∥V ∥22
                                     ∥A∥1 = min              +            .
                                             U ⊙V     2            2
where the Hadamard product is U ⊙ V ≜ (Ui Vi )i , to obtain the final optimization problem
                                       εX                                         λ        λ
                                                      µ                         ¶
         1X                                    1X       2
   inf       F i + (Φn (U ⊙ V ))i ,i +     log     exp (F i + (Φn (U ⊙ V ))i , j + ∥U ∥22 + ∥V ∥22 .
  A,U ,V n i                           n i     n j      ε                         2        2

This is a smooth optimization problem, for which we employ a quasi-Newton solver (L-BFGS).
Although it is non-convex, as demonstrated in Poon & Peyré (2021), the non-convexity is benign,
ensuring the solver always converges to a global minimizer, (F ⋆ ,U ⋆ ,V ⋆ ), of the functional. From
this, one can reconstruct the cost parameter, A ⋆ ≜ U ⋆ ⊙ V ⋆ .


                                                    32
