Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


F IT L IKE YOU S AMPLE : S AMPLE -E FFICIENT S CORE
M ATCHING F ROM FAST M IXING D IFFUSIONS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Score matching is an approach to learning probability distributions parametrized
         up to a constant of proportionality (e.g. Energy-Based Models). The idea is to
         fit the score of the distribution (i.e. ∇x log p(x)), rather than the likelihood, thus
         avoiding the need to evaluate the constant of proportionality. While there’s a clear
         algorithmic benefit, the statistical cost can be steep: recent work by Koehler et al.
         (2022) showed that for distributions that have poor isoperimetric properties (a large
         Poincaré or log-Sobolev constant), score matching is substantially statistically less
         efficient than maximum likelihood. However, many natural realistic distributions,
         e.g. multimodal distributions as simple as a mixture of two Gaussians in one
         dimension—have a poor Poincaré constant.
         In this paper, we show a close connection between the mixing time of a broad
         class of Markov processes with generator L and stationary distribution p, and an
         appropriately chosen generalized score matching loss that tries to fit Op    p . In the
         special case of O = ∇x , and L being the generator of Langevin diffusion, this gen-
         eralizes and recovers the results from Koehler et al. (2022). This allows us to adapt
         techniques to speed up Markov chains to construct better score-matching losses.
         In particular, “preconditioning” the diffusion can be translated to an appropriate
        “preconditioning” of the score loss. Lifting the chain by adding a temperature like
         in simulated tempering can be shown to result in a Gaussian-convolution annealed
         score matching loss, similar to Song & Ermon (2019). Moreover, we show that
         if the distribution being learned is a finite mixture of Gaussians in d dimensions
         with a shared covariance, the sample complexity of annealed score matching is
         polynomial in the ambient dimension, the diameter of the means, and the smallest
         and largest eigenvalues of the covariance—obviating the Poincaré constant-based
         lower bounds of the basic score matching loss shown in Koehler et al. (2022).


1    I NTRODUCTION

Energy-based models (EBMs) are parametric families of probability distributions parametrized up
to a constant of proportionality, namely pθ (x) ∝ exp(Eθ (x)) for some energy function Eθ (x).
Fitting θ from data by using the standard approach of maximizing the likelihood of the training data
with a gradient-based method requires evaluating ∇θ log Zθ = Epθ [∇θ Eθ (x)] — which cannot be
done in closed form, and instead Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods are used. Score matching
(Hyvärinen, 2005) obviates the need to estimate a partition function, by instead fitting the score of
the distribution ∇x log p(x). While there is algorithmic gain, the statistical cost can be substantial. In
recent work, Koehler et al. (2022) show that score matching is statistically much less efficient (i.e. the
estimation error, given the same number of samples is much bigger) than maximum likelihood when
the distribution being estimated has poor isoperimetric properties (i.e. a large Poincaré constant).
However, even very simple multimodal distributions like a mixture of two Gaussians with far away
means—have a very large Poincaré constant. As many distributions of interest (e.g. images) are
multimodal in nature, the score matching estimator is likely to be statistically untenable.
The seminal paper by Song & Ermon (2019) proposes a way to deal with multimodality and man-
ifold structure in the data by annealing: namely, estimating the scores of convolutions of the data
distribution with different levels of Gaussian noise. The intuitive explanation they propose is that
the distribution smoothed with more Gaussian noise is easier to estimate (as there are no parts of


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


the distribution that have low coverage by the training data), which should help estimate the score
at lower levels of Gaussian noise. However, making this either quantitative or formal seems very
challenging. Moreover, Song & Ermon (2019) propose annealing as a fix to another issue: using
the score to sample from the distribution using Langevin dynamics is also problematic, as Langevin
mixes slowly in the presence of multimodality and low-dimensional manifold structure.
In this paper, we show that there is a deep connection between the mixing time of a broad class of
continuous, time-homogeneous Markov processes with stationary distribution p and generator L,
and the statistical efficiency of an appropriately chosen generalized score matching loss (Lyu, 2012)
that tries to match Opp . In the case that L is the generator of Langevin diffusion, and O = ∇x , we
recover the results of Koehler et al. (2022). This “dictionary” allows us to design score losses with
better statistical behavior, by adapting techniques for speeding up Markov chain convergence — e.g.
preconditioning a diffusion and lifting the chain by introducing additional variables. In summary, our
contributions are as follows:
1. A general framework for designing generalized score matching losses with good sample com-
   plexity from fast-mixing diffusions. Precisely, for a broad class of diffusions with generator L
   and Poincaré constant CP , we can choose a linear operator O, such that the generalized score
                                     2
   matching loss 12 Ep Op p − pθ
                                Opθ
                                       has statistical complexity that is a factor CP2 worse than that
                                    2
   of maximum likelihood. (Recall, CP characterizes the mixing time of the Markov process with
   generator L in chi-squared distance.) In particular, for diffusions that look like “preconditioned”
   Langevin, this results in “appropriately preconditioned” score loss.
2. We analyze a lifted diffusion, which introduces a new variable for temperature and provably show
   statistical benefits of annealing for score matching. Precisely, we exhibit continuously-tempered
   Langevin, a Markov process which mixes in time poly(D, d, 1/λmin , λmax ) for finite mixtures
   of Gaussians in ambient dimension d with identical covariances whose smallest and largest
   eigenvalues are lower and upper bounded by λmin and λmax respectively, and means lying in a
   ball of radius D. (Note, the bound has no dependence on the number of components.) Moreover,
   the corresponding generalized score matching loss is a form of annealed score matching loss
   (Song & Ermon, 2019; Song et al., 2020), with a particular choice of weighing for the different
   amounts of Gaussian convolution. This is the first result formally showing the statistical benefits
   of annealing for score matching.

1.1   D ISCUSSION AND RELATED WORK

Our work draws on and brings together, theoretical developments in understanding score matching,
as well as designing and analyzing faster-mixing Markov chains based on strategies in annealing.
We discuss the most related lines of work here, and discuss a broader range of related papers in
Appendix I.
Score matching: Score matching was originally proposed by Hyvärinen (2005), who also provided
some conditions under which the estimator is consistent and asymptotically normal. Asymptotic
normality is also proven for various kernelized variants of score matching in Barp et al. (2019).
Recent work by Koehler et al. (2022) proves that when the family of distributions being fit is rich
enough, the statistical sample complexity of score matching is comparable to the sample complexity
of maximum likelihood only when the distribution satisfies a Poincaré inequality. In particular, even
simple bimodal distributions in 1 dimension (like a mixture of 2 Gaussians) can significantly worsen
the sample complexity of score matching (exponential with respect to mode separation). For restricted
parametric families (e.g. exponential families with sufficient statistics consisting of bounded-degree
polynomials), recent work (Pabbaraju et al., 2023) showed that score matching can be comparably
efficient to maximum likelihood, by leveraging the fact that a restricted version of the Poincaré
inequality suffices for good sample complexity.
Theoretical understanding of annealed versions of score matching is still very impoverished. A recent
line of work (Lee et al., 2022; 2023; Chen et al., 2022) explores how accurately one can sample using
a learned (annealed) score, if the (population) score loss is successfully minimized. This line of work
can be viewed as a kind of “error propagation” analysis: namely, how much larger the sampling
error with a score learned up to some tolerance. It does not provide insight on when the score can be
efficiently learned, either in terms of sample complexity or computational complexity.

                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Sampling by annealing: There are a plethora of methods proposed in the literature that use
temperature heuristics (Marinari & Parisi, 1992; Neal, 1996; Earl & Deem, 2005) to alleviate the
slow mixing of various Markov Chains in the presence of multimodal structure or data lying close to
a low-dimensional manifold. A precise understanding of when such strategies have provable benefits,
however, is fairly nascent. Most related to our work, in Ge et al. (2018); Lee et al. (2018), the authors
show that when a distribution is (close to) a mixture of K Gaussians with identical covariances,
the classical simulated tempering chain (Marinari & Parisi, 1992) with temperature annealing (i.e.
scaling the log-pdf of the distribution), along with Metropolis-Hastings to swap the temperature in
the chain mixes in time poly(K).

2     P RELIMINARIES
2.1   G ENERALIZED S CORE M ATCHING

The conventional score-matching objective (Hyvärinen, 2005) is defined as
                                                                                          2
                                1                         2  1   ∇x p ∇x q
                DSM (p, q) =      Ep ∥∇x log p − ∇x log q∥2 = Ep     −                                  (1)
                                2                            2    p    q                  2
Note, in this notation, the expression is asymmetric: p is the data distribution, q is the distribution that
is being fit. Written like this, it is not clear how to minimize this loss, when we only have access to
data samples from p. The main observation of Hyvärinen (2005) is that the objective can be rewritten
(using integration by parts) in a form that is easy to fit given samples:

                                                              1
                      DSM (p, q) = EX∼p Tr ∇2x log q + ∥∇x log q∥2 + Kp                                  (2)
                                                              2
where Kp is some constant
                          independent of q. To turn this into an algorithm given samples, one simply
solves minq∈Q EX∼p̂ Tr ∇2x log q + 21 ∥∇x log q∥2 for some parametrized family of distributions
Q, where p̂ denotes the uniform distribution over the samples from p. This objective can be calculated
efficiently given samples from p, so long as the gradient and Hessian of the log-pdf of q can be
efficiently calculated.1
Generalized Score Matching, first introduced in Lyu (2012), generalizes ∇x to an arbitrary linear
operator O:
Definition 1. Let F 1 and F m be the space of all scalar-valued and m-variate functions of x ∈ Rd ,
respectively. The Generalized Score Matching (GSM) loss with a general linear operator O : F 1 →
F m is defined as
                                                                        2
                                                    1    Op Oq
                                  DGSM (p, q) =       Ep   −                                            (3)
                                                    2    p   q          2


In this paper, we will be considering operators O, such that (Og)(x) = B(x)∇g(x). In other words,
the generalized score matching loss will have the form:
                                          1                                    2
                        DGSM (p, q) = Ep ∥B(x) (∇x log p − ∇x log q)∥2                              (4)
                                          2
This can intuitively be thought of as a “preconditioned” version of the score matching loss, notably
with a preconditioner function B(x) that is allowed to change at every point x. The generalized score
matching loss can also be turned into an expression that doesn’t require evaluating the pdf of the data
distribution (or gradients thereof), using a similar “integration-by-parts” identity:
Lemma 1 (Integration by parts, Lyu (2012)). The GSM loss satisfies
                                               "                       #
                                                       2
                                         1        Oq           +   Oq
                        DGSM (p, q) = Ep                 − 2O             + Kp                      (5)
                                         2         q 2              q
where O+ is the adjoint of O defined by ⟨Of, g⟩L2 = ⟨f, O+ g⟩L2 .
   1
     In many score-based modeling approaches, e.g. (Song & Ermon, 2019; Song et al., 2020) one directly
parametrizes the score ∇ log q instead of the distribution q.


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Again, for the special case of the family of operators O in (4), the integration by parts form of the
objective can be easily written down explicitly (the proof is provided in Appendix B):
Lemma 2 (Integration by parts for the GSM in (4)). The generalized score matching objective in (4)
satisfies the equality
                         1
                             Ep ∥B(x)∇x log q(x)∥2 + 2Ep div B(x)2 ∇x log q(x) + Kp

          DGSM (p, q) =
                         2

2.2   C ONTINOUS - TIME M ARKOV P ROCESSES

In this section, we introduce the key definitions related to continuous-time Markov chains and
diffusion processes:
Definition 2 (Markov semigroup). We say that a family of functions {Pt (x, y)}R t≥0 on a state space
Ω is a Markov semigroup if Pt (x, ·) is a distribution on Ω and Pt+s (x, dy) = Ω Pt (x, dz)Ps (z, dy).
for all x, y ∈ Ω and s, t ≥ 0.
Definition 3 (Time-homogeneous Markov processes). A time-homogeneous Markov process (Xt )t≥0
on state space Ω is defined by a Markov semigroup {PtR(x, y)}t≥0 as follows: for any measurable
A ⊆ Ω, we have Pr(Xs+t ∈ A|Xs = x) = Pt (x, A) = A PRt (x, dy). Moreover, Pt can be thought
of as acting on a function g as (Pt g)(x) = EPt (x,·) [g(y)] = Ω g(y)Pt (x, dy). Finally, we say that
p(x) is a stationary distribution if X0 ∼ p implies that Xt ∼ p for all t.
A particularly important class of time-homogeneous Markov processes is given by Itô diffusions,
namely stochastic differential equations of the form
                                     dXt = b(Xt )dt + σ(Xt )dBt                                       (6)
for a drift function b, and a diffusion coefficient function. In fact, a classical result due to Dynkin
(Rogers & Williams (2000), Theorem 13.3) states that any “sufficiently regular” time-homogeneous
Markov process (specifically, a process whose semigroup is Feller-Dynkin) can be written in the above
form. We will be interested in Itô diffusions, whose stationary distribution is a given distribution
p(x) ∝ exp(−f (x)). Perhaps the most well-known example of such a diffusion is Langevin diffusion:
Definition 4 (Langevin diffusion). Langevin diffusion is the stochastic process dXt = −∇f (Xt )dt +
√
  2dBt , where f : Rd → R, dBt is Brownian motion in Rd with covariance matrix I. Under
mild regularity conditions on f , the stationary distribution of this process is p(x) : RN → R, s.t.
p(x) ∝ e−f (x) .
In fact, a completeness result due to Ma et al. (2015) states that we can characterize all Itô diffusions
whose stationary distribution is p(x) ∝ exp(−f (x)). Precisely, they show:
Theorem 1 (Itô diffusions with a given stationary distribution, Ma et al. (2015)). Any Itô diffusion
with stationary distribution p(x) ∝ exp(−f (x)) can be written in the form:
                                                                         p
                dXt = (−(D(Xt ) + Q(Xt ))∇f (Xt ) + Γ(Xt )) dt + 2D(Xt )dBt                            (7)
where ∀x ∈ Rd , D(x) ∈ Rd×d is a positive-definite
                                              P      matrix, ∀x ∈ Rd , Q(x) is a skew-symmetric
matrix, D, Q are differentiable, and Γi (x) := j ∂j (Dij (x) + Qij (x)).

Intuitively, D(x) can be viewed as “reshaping” the diffusion, whereas Q and Γ are “correction terms”
to the drift so that the stationary distribution is preserved.

2.3   D IRICHLET FORMS AND P OINCARÉ INEQUALITIES

Definition 5. The generator L corresponding to Markov semigroup is Lg = limt→0 Pt g−g   t   . Moreover,
if p is the unique stationary distribution, the Dirichlet form and the variance are respectively
                        E(g, h) = −Ep ⟨g, Lh⟩ and Varp (g) = Ep (g − Ep g)2
We will use the shorthand E(g) := E(g, g).
By Itô’s Lemma, the generator of diffusions of the form (7) have the form:
             (Lg)(x) = ⟨−[D(x) + Q(x)]∇f (x) + Γ(x), ∇g(x)⟩ + Tr(D(x)∇2 g(x))                         (8)
The Dirichlet form for diffusions of the form (7) also has a very convenient form:


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma 3 (Dirichlet form p of continuous Markov Process). An Itô diffusion of the form (7) has a
Dirichlet form E(g) = Ep ∥ D(x)∇g(x)∥22 . Notably, for Langevin diffusion, the Dirichlet form is
just E(g) = Ep ∥∇g∥22 .
For a general diffusion of the form (7), we can think of D(x) as a (point-specific) preconditioner,
specifying the norm with respect to which to measure ∇g. The proof of this lemma is given in
Appendix B. Versions of the SDEs we consider have appeared in the literature under various names,
e.g., Riemannian Langevin (Girolami & Calderhead, 2011) and preconditioned Langevin (Hairer
et al., 2007; Beskos et al., 2008), Fisher-adaptive Langevin (Titsias, 2023).
Finally, we define the Poincaré constant, which captures the mixing time of the process in the
χ2 -sense:
Definition 6 (Poincaré inequality). A continuous-time Markov process satisfies a Poincaré inequality
with constant C if for all functions g such that E(g) is defined (finite), we have E(g) ≥ C1 Varp (g).
We will abuse notation, and for a Markov process with stationary distribution p, denote by CP the
Poincaré constant of p, the smallest C such that above Poincaré inequality is satisfied.
The Poincaré inequality implies exponential ergodicity for the χ2 -divergence, namely: χ2 (pt , p) ≤
e−2t/CP χ2 (p0 , p) where p is the stationary distribution of the chain and pt is the distribution after
running the Markov process for time t, starting at p0 . We will analyze the Poincaré constant using a
decomposition technique similar to the ones employed in Ge et al. (2018); Moitra & Risteski (2020).
Intuitively, these results “decompose” the Markov chain by partitioning the state space into sets,
such that: (1) the mixing time of the Markov chain inside the sets is good; (2) the “projected” chain,
which transitions between sets with probability equal to the probability flow between sets, also mixes
fast. An example of such a result is Theorem 6.1 from Ge et al. (2018), reiterated as Theorem 6 in
Appendix A.

3       A F RAMEWORK FOR A NALYZING G ENERALIZED S CORE M ATCHING
The goal of this section is to provide a general framework that provides a bound on the sample
complexity of a generalized score matching objective with operator O, under the assumption that
some Markov process with generator L mixes fast. For this section, n will denote the number of
samples, and Ê will denote an empirical average, that is the expectation over the n training samples.
We will show:
Theorem 2 (Main, sample complexity bound). Consider an Itô diffusion of the form (7) with
stationary distribution p(x) ∝ exp(−f (x)) and Poincaré constant CP with respect to the generator
of the Itô diffusion. Consider the generalized score matching loss with operator (Og)(x) :=
p                                               p                                 2
   D(x)∇g(x), namely DGSM (p, q) = 12 Ep           D(x) (∇x log p − ∇x log q) . Suppose we are
                                                                                             2
optimizing this loss over a parametric family {pθ : θ ∈ Θ} satisfying:
1. (Asymptotic normality) Let Θ∗ be the set of global minima of the generalized score matching loss
   DGSM , that is Θ∗ = {θ∗ : DGSM (p, pθ∗ ) = minθ∈Θ DGSM (p, pθ )}. Suppose the generalized
   score matching loss is asymptotically normal: namely, for every θ∗ ∈ Θ∗ , and every sufficiently
   small neighborhood S of θ∗ , there exists a sufficiently large n, such that there is a unique minimizer
   θ̂n of Êlθ (x) in S, where
                            2
               1 Opθ (x)           +   Opθ (x)         1h p                                                i
   lθ (x) :=                  − 2O                  =     ∥ D(x)∇x log pθ (x)∥2 + 2div (D(x)∇x log pθ (x))
               2 pθ (x) 2               pθ (x)         2
                                          √                 d
    Furthermore, assume θ̂n satisfies         n(θ̂n − θ∗ ) −
                                                           → N (0, ΓSM ).
2. (Realizibility) At any θ∗ ∈ Θ∗ , we have pθ∗ = p.
Then, we have2 :
  ∥ΓSM ∥OP ≤ 2CP2 ∥ΓMLE ∥2OP [∥cov(∇θ ∇x log pθ (x)D(x)∇x log pθ (x))∥OP
                  + ∥cov(∇θ ∇x log pθ (x)⊤ div(D(x)))∥OP + ∥cov(∇θ Tr[D(x)∇2x log pθ (x))∥OP ]
    2
        The notation divD(x) denotes the vector field Rd → Rd , s.t. divD(x)i =
                                                                                  P
                                                                                      j ∂j Dji (x)



                                                        5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Remark 1. The two terms on the right hand sides qualitatively capture two intuitive properties
necessary for a good sample complexity: the factor involving the covariances can be thought of as
a smoothness term capturing how regular the score is as we change the parameters in the family
we are fitting; the CP term captures how the error compounds as we “extrapolate” the score into a
probability density function.
Remark 2. This theorem generalizes Theorem 2 in Koehler et al. (2022), who show the above only
in the case of L being the generator of Langevin (Definition 4), and O = ∇x , i.e. when DGSM is the
standard score matching loss. Furthermore, they only consider the case of pθ being an exponential
family, i.e. pθ (x) ∝ exp(⟨θ, T (x)⟩) for some sufficient statistics T (x).
                                      √               d
Remark 3. Note that if we know n(θ̂n − θ∗ ) −         → N (0, ΓSM ), we can extract bounds on the
expected ℓ22 distance between θ̂n and θ∗ . Namely, from Markov’s inequality (see e.g., Remark 4 in
Koehler et al. (2022)), we have for sufficiently large n, with probability at least 0.99 it holds that
∥θ̂n − θ∗ ∥22 ≤ Tr(ΓnSM ) .

Some conditions for asymptotic normality can be readily obtained by applying standard results
from asymptotic statistics (e.g. Van der Vaart (2000), Theorem 5.23, reiterated as Lemma 5 for
completeness).From that lemma, when an estimator θ̂ = arg min Êlθ (x) is asymptotically normal,
        √            d
we have n(θ̂ −θ∗ ) − → N 0, (∇2θ L(θ∗ ))−1 Cov(∇θ ℓ(x; θ∗ ))(∇2θ L(θ∗ ))−1 , where L(θ) = Eθ l(x).

Therefore, to bound the spectral norm of ΓSM , we need to bound the Hessian and covariance terms in
the expression above. The latter is a fairly straightforward calculation, and is included in Appendix C.
The bound on the Hessian is where the connection to the Poincaré constant manifests:
Lemma 4 (Bounding Hessian). The loss DGSM defined in Theorem 2 satisfies
                             2                −1
                            ∇θ DGSM (p, pθ∗ )    ⪯ CP ΓMLE .

Proof. To reduce notational clutter, we will drop |θ=θ∗ since all the functions of θ are evaluated at θ∗ .
Consider an arbitrary direction w. We have:

                                            1     p
                      w, ∇2θ DGSM (p, pθ )w = Ep ∥ D(x)∇x ∇θ log pθ (x)w∥22
                     2 1                            3 1 T −1
                     ≥    Varp (⟨w, ∇θ log pθ (x)⟩) =    w ΓM LE w
                       CP                             CP
 1 follows from a straightforward calculation (in Lemma 13), 2 follows from the definition
of Poincaré inequality of a diffusion process with Dirichlet form derived in Lemma 3, applied
                                                                                           −1
to the function ⟨w, ∇θ log pθ ⟩, and 3 follows since ΓM LE = Ep ∇θ log pθ ∇θ log p⊤

                                                                                        θ      (i.e.
the inverse Fisher matrix (Van der Vaart, 2000)). Since this holds for every vector w, we have
∇2θ DGSM ⪰ C1P Γ−1M LE . By monotonicity of the matrix inverse operator (Toda, 2011), the claim of
the lemma follows.

4    B ENEFITS OF A NNEALING : C ONTINUOUSLY T EMPERED L ANGEVIN
     DYNAMICS
In this section, we show another technique used to speed up Markov chains: lifting the Markov
chain by introducing additional variables (e.g., momentum in underdamped Langevin, temperature in
tempering techniques) can be used to design better score losses to deal with multimodality in the data
distribution. Precisely, we introduce a diffusion we term Continuously Tempered Langevin Dynamics,
which is a close relative of simulated tempering (Marinari & Parisi, 1992), where the number of
“temperatures” is infinite, and we temper by convolving with Gaussian noise. We show that the
generalized score matching loss corresponding to this Markov process mixes in time poly(D, d) for a
mixture of K Gaussians (with identical covariance) in d dimensions, and means in a ball of radius D.
More precisely, in this section, we will consider the following family of distributions:
Assumption 1. Let p0 be a d-dimensional Gaussian distribution with mean 0 and covariance Σ.
                                                                          PK
We will assume the data distribution p is a K-Gaussian mixture, namely p = i=1 wi pi , where


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


pi (x) = p0 (x − µi ), i.e. a shift of the distribution p0 so its mean is µi . We will assume the means µi
lie within a ball with diameter D. We will denote the min and max eigenvalues of covariance with
λmin (Σ) = λmin and λmax (Σ) = λmax . We will denote the min and max mixture proportion with
mini wi = wmin and maxi wi = wmax . Let Σβ = Σ + βλmin Id be the shorthand notation of the
covariance of individual Gaussian at temperature β.

Mixtures of Gaussians are one of the most classical distributions in statistics—and they have very
rich modeling properties. They are universal approximators in the sense that any distribution can be
approximated (to any desired accuracy), if we consider a mixture with sufficiently many components
(Alspach & Sorenson, 1972). A mixture of K Gaussians is also the prototypical example of a
distribution with K modes — the shape of which is determined by the covariance of the components.
Note at we are just saying that the data distribution p can be described as a mixture of Gaussians,
we are not saying anything about the parametric family we are fitting when optimizing the score
matching loss—we need not necessarily fit the natural unknown parameters (the means, covariances
and weights).
The primary reason this family of distributions is convenient for technical analysis is a closure
property under convolutions: a convolution of a Gaussian mixture with a Gaussian produces another
Gaussian mixture. Namely, the following holds from the distributivity property of the convolution
operator, which is due to the linearity of an integral:
Proposition 1 (Convolution P with Gaussian). Under Assumption  1, the distribution p ∗ N (x; 0, σ 2 I)
satisfies p ∗ N (x; 0, σ I) = i wi p0 (x − µi ) ∗ N (x; 0, σ 2 I) and (p0 (x − µi ) ∗ N (x; 0, σ 2 I)) is
                        2

a multivariate Gaussian with mean µi and covariance Σ + σ 2 I.

The Markov process we will be analyzing (and the corresponding score matching loss) is a continuous-
time analog of the Simulated Tempering Langevin Monte Carlo chain introduced in Ge et al. (2018):
Definition 7 (Continuously Tempered Langevin Dynamics (CTLD)). We will consider an SDE over a
temperature-augmented state space, that is a random variable (Xt , βt ), Xt ∈ Rd , βt ∈ R+ , defined
as              (                             √
                  dXt = ∇x log pβ (Xt )dt + 2dBt
                                                                            √
                    dβt = ∇β log r(βt )dt + ∇β log pβ (Xt )dt + νt L(dt) + 2dBt
                                                                                 2

where r : [0, βmax ] → R denotes the distribution over β, r(β) ∝ exp − λmin7D  (1+β) and βmax =
14D 2          β
λmin − 1. Let p := p ∗ N (0, βλmin Id ) denotes the distribution p convolved with a Gaussian of
covariance βλmin Id . Furthermore, L(dt) is a measure supported on the boundary of the interval
[0, βmax ] and νt is the unit normal at the endpoints of the interval, such that the stationary distribution
of this SDE is p(x, β) = r(β)pβ (x) (Saisho, 1987).
Remark 4. The above process can be readily seen as a “continuous-time” analogue of the usual
simulated tempering chain (Lee et al., 2018; Ge et al., 2018), which either evolves x according to a
Markov chain with probability pβ , or changes β (which has a discrete number of possible values),
and applies an appropriate Metropolis-Hastings filter. The stationary distribution is p(x, β) =
r(β)pβ (x), since the updates amount to performing (reflected) Langevin dynamics corresponding to
this stationary distribution.
Remark 5. The existence of the boundary measure is a standard result of reflecting diffusion
processes via solutions to the Skorokhod problem (Saisho, 1987). If we ignore the boundary reflection
term, the updates for CTLD are simply Langevin dynamics applied to the distribution p(x, β). r(β)
specifies the distribution over the different levels of noise and is set up roughly so the Gaussians in
the mixture have variance βΣ with probability exp(−Θ(β)).

Since CTLD amounts to performing (reflected) Langevin dynamics on the appropriate joint distribu-
tion p(x, β), the corresponding generator L for CTLD is also readily written down:
Proposition 2 (Dirichlet form for CTLD). The Dirichlet form corresponding to CTLD has the form
                        E(f (x, β)) = Ep(x,β) ∥∇f (x, β)∥2 = Er(β) Eβ (f (·, β))                         (9)
where Eβ is the Dirichlet form corresponding to the Langevin diffusion (Lemma 3) with stationary
distribution p(x|β).


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Next, we derive the explicit score loss due to CTLD:
Proposition 3. The generalized score matching loss with O = ∇x,β satisfies
                                  2                −1
                                 ∇θ DGSM (p, pθ∗ )    ⪯ CP ΓMLE
Moreover,
DGSM (p, pθ ) = Eβ∼r(β) Ex∼pβ (∥∇x log p(x, β) − ∇x log pθ (x, β)∥2 + ∥∇β log p(x, β) − ∇β log pθ (x, β)∥2 )
= Eβ∼r(β) Ex∼pβ ∥∇x log p(x|β) − ∇x log pθ (x|β)∥2
                                                                                                              2
                          Tr ∇2x log p(x|β) − Tr ∇2x log pθ (x|β) + ∥∇x log p(x|β)∥22 − ∥∇x log pθ (x|β)∥22

+ λmin Eβ∼r(β) Ex∼pβ

Proof. The first claim follows by Lemma 4 as a special case of Langevin on the lifted distribution.
The second claim follows by writing ∇β log p(x|β) and ∇β log pθ (x|β) through the Fokker-Planck
equation for p(x|β) (see Lemma 15).
This loss was derived from first principles from the Markov Chain-based framework in Section 3,
however, it is readily seen that this loss is a “second-order” version of the annealed losses in Song &
Ermon (2019); Song et al. (2020) — the weights being given by the distribution r(β). Additionally,
this loss has terms matching “second order” behavior of the distributions, namely Tr ∇2x log p(x|β)
and ∥∇x log p(x|β)∥22 with a weighting of λmin . Note this loss would be straightforward to train
by the change of variables formula (Proposition 6, Appendix D)—and we also note that somewhat
related “higher-order” analogues of score matching have appeared in the literature (without analysis
or guarantees), for example, Meng et al. (2021).
The main result on the mixing time of CTLD is the following:
Theorem 3 (Poincaré constant of CTLD). Under Assumption 1, the Poincaré constant of CTLD CP
enjoys the upper bound CP ≲ D22 d2 λ9max λ−2
                                          min .

Note that the above result has no dependence on the number of components, or on the smallest
component weight wmin —only on the diameter D, the ambient dimension d, and λmin and λmax .
This result thus applies to very general distributions, intuitively having an arbitrary number of modes
which lie in a ball of radius D, and a bound on their “peakiness” and “spread”. Our bounds are very
likely not tight: our main thrust is to prove a polynomial dependence on the relevant parameters,
which standard Langevin dynamics cannot achieve.
To get a bound on the asymptotic sample complexity of generalized score matching, according to
the framework from Theorem 2, we also need to bound the smoothness terms (Lemma 14 in the
general framework). These terms of course depend on the choice of parametrization for the family
of distributions we are fitting. To get a quantitative sense for how these terms might scale, we will
consider the natural parametrization for a mixture:
Assumption 2. Consider the case of learning unknown means, such that the parameters to be learned
are a vector θ = (µ1 , µ2 , . . . , µK ) ∈ RdK .

Note that in this parametrization, we assume that the weights {wi }K i=1 and shared covariance matrix
Σ are known, though the results can be straightforwardly generalized to the natural parametrization in
which we are additionally fitting a vector {wi }K
                                                i=1 and matrix Σ, at the expense of some calculational
complexity. With this parametrization, the smoothness term can be bounded as follows:
Theorem 4 (Smoothness under the natural parameterization). Under Assumptions 1 and 2, the
following upper bound obtains:
                                                                                              −1
     ∥cov ∇θ ∇x,β log p⊤

                         θ ∇x,β log pθ ∥OP + ∥cov (∇θ ∆x,β log pθ ) ∥OP ≲ poly D, d, λmin
Note the above result also has no dependence on the number of components, or on the smallest
component weight wmin . Finally, we show that the generalized score matching loss is asymptotically
normal. The proof of this is in Appendix F, and proceeds by verifying standard technical conditions
for asymptotic behavior of M-estimators (Lemma 5), along with the Poincaré inequality bound in
Theorem 3 and the framework in Theorem 2. As in Theorem 2, n will denote the number of samples,
and Ê will denote an empirical average, that is the expectation over the n training samples. We show:
Theorem 5 (Main, Polynomial Sample Complexity Bound of CTLD). Let the data distribution
p satisfy Assumption 1. Then, the generalized score matching loss defined in Proposition 6 with
parametrization as in Assumption 2 satisfies:


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


1. The set of optima Θ∗ := {θ∗ = (µ1 , µ2 , . . . , µK )|DGSM (p, pθ∗ ) = minθ DGSM (p, pθ )} satis-
   fies:
   θ∗ = (µ1 , µ2 , . . . , µK ) ∈ Θ∗ if and only if ∃π : [K] → [K] satisfying ∀i ∈ [K], µπ(i) = µ∗i , wπ(i) = wi }

2. Let θ∗ ∈ Θ∗ and let C be any compact set containing θ∗ . Denote C0 = {θ ∈ C : pθ (x) =
   p(x) almost everywhere
                    h     }. Finally, let D be any closed
                                                      i subset of C not intersecting C0 . Then, we
                                                    ∗
   have limn→∞ Pr inf θ∈D DGSM (θ) < DGSM (θ ) → 0.
                             \              \

3. For every θ∗ ∈ Θ∗ and every sufficiently small neighborhood S of θ∗ , there exists a suf-
   ficiently large n, such that there is a unique minimizer θ̂n of Êlθ (x) in S. Furthermore,
                  √               d
   θ̂n satisfies:   n(θ̂n − θ∗ ) −→ N (0, ΓSM ) for a matrix ΓSM satisfying ∥ΓSM ∥OP ≤
                                    2
   poly D, d, λmax , λ−1

                       min ∥ΓMLE ∥OP .

We provide some brief comments on each parts of this theorem. The first condition is the standard
identifiability condition (Yakowitz & Spragins, 1968) for mixtures of Gaussians: the means are
identifiable up to “renaming” the components. This is of course, inevitable if some of the weights are
equal; if all the weights are distinct, Θ∗ would in fact only consist of one point, s.t. ∀i ∈ [K], µi = µ∗i .
The second condition says that asymptotically, the empirical minimizers of DGSM are the points in
Θ∗ . It can be viewed as (and follows from) a uniform law of large numbers. Finally, the third point
characterizes the sample complexity of minimizers in the neirhborhood of each of the points in Θ∗ ,
and is a consequence of the CTLD Poincaré inequality estimate (Theorem 3) and the smoothness
estimate (Theorem 4). Note that in fact the RHS of point 3 has no dependence on the number of
components. This makes the result extremely general: the loss compared to MLE is very mild even
for distributions with a large number of modes. 3

Bounding the Poincaré constant: We will first sketch the proof of Theorem 3. By slight abuse
of notation, we will define the distribution of the “individual components” of the mixture at a
particular temperature, namely for i ∈ [K], define p(x, β, i) = r(β)wi N (x; µi , Σ + βλmin Id ).
Correspondingly, we will denote the conditional distribution for the i-th component by p(x, β|i) ∝
r(β)N (x; µi , Σ + βλmin Id ).The proof proceeds by applying the decomposition Theorem 6 to
CTLD. Towards that, we denote by Ei the Dirichlet form corresponding to Langevin with stationary
distribution
      P      p(x, β|i). By Proposition 2, it’s easy to see that the generator for CTLD satisfies
E = i wi Ei . This verifies condition (1) in Theorem 6. To verify condition (2), we will show
Langevin for each of the distributions p(x, β|i) mixes fast (i.e. the Poincaré constant is bounded).
The details of this are provided in Section E.1. To verify condition (3), we will show the projected
chain “between” the components (as defined in Theorem 6) mixes fast. The details of this are provided
in Section E.2.
Smoothness under the natural parametrization: To obtain the polynomial upper bound in Theo-
rem 4, we note the two terms ∥cov ∇θ ∇x,β log p⊤   θ ∇x,β log pθ ∥OP and ∥cov (∇θ ∆x,β log pθ ) ∥OP
can be completely characterized by bounds on the higher-order derivatives with respect to x and µi of
the log-pdf since derivatives with respect to β can be related to derivatives with respect to x via the
Fokker-Planck equation (Lemma 15). The polynomial bound requires three ingredients: In Lemma 10,
we relate the derivatives of the mixture to derivatives of components by recognizing the higher-order
score functions (Janzamin et al., 2014) of the form Dp  p is closely related to the convex perspective
map. In Lemma 7, we derive a new result in mixed derivatives of Gaussian components based on
Hermite polynomials. In Corollary 1, we handle log derivatives with higher-order versions of the
Faá di Bruno formula (Constantine & Savits, 1996), which is a combinatorial formula characterizing
higher-order analogues of the chain rule. See Appendix G for details.

R EFERENCES
Daniel Alspach and Harold Sorenson. Nonlinear bayesian estimation using gaussian sum approxima-
  tions. IEEE transactions on automatic control, 17(4):439–448, 1972.
   3
     Of course, in the parametrization in Assumption 2, ∥ΓM LE ∥OP itself will generally have dependence on
K, which has to be the case since we are fitting Ω(K) parameters.


                                                     9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Dominique Bakry and Michel Émery. Diffusions hypercontractives. In Séminaire de Probabilités
 XIX 1983/84: Proceedings, pp. 177–206. Springer, 2006.
Ainesh Bakshi, Ilias Diakonikolas, He Jia, Daniel M Kane, Pravesh K Kothari, and Santosh S
  Vempala. Robustly learning mixtures of k arbitrary gaussians. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual
  ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, pp. 1234–1247, 2022.
Sivaraman Balakrishnan, Martin J Wainwright, and Bin Yu. Statistical guarantees for the em algorithm:
  From population to sample-based analysis. 2017.
Alessandro Barp, Francois-Xavier Briol, Andrew Duncan, Mark Girolami, and Lester Mackey.
  Minimum stein discrepancy estimators. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32,
  2019.
Mario Bebendorf. A note on the poincaré inequality for convex domains. Zeitschrift für Analysis und
 ihre Anwendungen, 22(4):751–756, 2003.
Mikhail Belkin and Kaushik Sinha. Polynomial learning of distribution families. In 2010 IEEE 51st
 Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pp. 103–112. IEEE, 2010.
Alexandros Beskos, Gareth Roberts, Andrew Stuart, and Jochen Voss. Mcmc methods for diffusion
  bridges. Stochastics and Dynamics, 8(03):319–350, 2008.
Stephen P Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex optimization. Cambridge university press, 2004.
Yu Cao, Jianfeng Lu, and Lihan Wang. On explicit l 2-convergence rate estimate for underdamped
  langevin dynamics. Archive for Rational Mechanics and Analysis, 247(5):90, 2023.
Hong-Bin Chen, Sinho Chewi, and Jonathan Niles-Weed. Dimension-free log-sobolev inequalities
  for mixture distributions. Journal of Functional Analysis, 281(11):109236, 2021.
Hongrui Chen, Holden Lee, and Jianfeng Lu. Improved analysis of score-based generative modeling:
  User-friendly bounds under minimal smoothness assumptions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01916,
  2022.
Zongchen Chen and Santosh S Vempala. Optimal convergence rate of hamiltonian monte carlo
  for strongly logconcave distributions. In Approximation, Randomization, and Combinatorial
  Optimization. Algorithms and Techniques (APPROX/RANDOM 2019). Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-
  Zentrum fuer Informatik, 2019.
G Constantine and T Savits. A multivariate faa di bruno formula with applications. Transactions of
  the American Mathematical Society, 348(2):503–520, 1996.
Sanjoy Dasgupta. Learning mixtures of gaussians. In 40th Annual Symposium on Foundations of
  Computer Science (Cat. No. 99CB37039), pp. 634–644. IEEE, 1999.
Constantinos Daskalakis, Christos Tzamos, and Manolis Zampetakis. Ten steps of em suffice for
  mixtures of two gaussians. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 704–710. PMLR, 2017.
Persi Diaconis and Daniel Stroock. Geometric bounds for eigenvalues of markov chains. The annals
  of applied probability, pp. 36–61, 1991.
Tim Dockhorn, Arash Vahdat, and Karsten Kreis. Score-based generative modeling with critically-
  damped langevin diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.07068, 2021.
David J Earl and Michael W Deem. Parallel tempering: Theory, applications, and new perspectives.
  Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics, 7(23):3910–3916, 2005.
Rong Ge, Holden Lee, and Andrej Risteski. Simulated tempering langevin monte carlo ii: An
  improved proof using soft markov chain decomposition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.00793, 2018.
Mark Girolami and Ben Calderhead. Riemann manifold langevin and hamiltonian monte carlo
 methods. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology, 73(2):123–214,
 2011.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Natalie Grunewald, Felix Otto, Cédric Villani, and Maria G Westdickenberg. A two-scale approach
  to logarithmic sobolev inequalities and the hydrodynamic limit. In Annales de l’IHP Probabilités
  et statistiques, volume 45, pp. 302–351, 2009.
M Hairer, AM Stuart, and J Voss. Analysis of spdes arising in path sampling part ii: The nonlinear
 case. The Annals of Applied Probability, 17(5/6):1657–1706, 2007.
Björn Holmquist. The d-variate vector hermite polynomial of order k. Linear algebra and its
  applications, 237:155–190, 1996.
Samuel B Hopkins and Jerry Li. Mixture models, robustness, and sum of squares proofs. In
  Proceedings of the 50th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, pp. 1021–
  1034, 2018.
Koji Hukushima and Koji Nemoto. Exchange monte carlo method and application to spin glass
  simulations. Journal of the Physical Society of Japan, 65(6):1604–1608, 1996.
Aapo Hyvärinen. Estimation of non-normalized statistical models by score matching. Journal of
 Machine Learning Research, 6(4), 2005.
Majid Janzamin, Hanie Sedghi, and Anima Anandkumar. Score function features for discriminative
 learning: Matrix and tensor framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.2863, 2014.
Frederic Koehler, Alexander Heckett, and Andrej Risteski. Statistical efficiency of score matching:
  The view from isoperimetry. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.00726, 2022.
Holden Lee, Andrej Risteski, and Rong Ge. Beyond log-concavity: Provable guarantees for sampling
  multi-modal distributions using simulated tempering langevin monte carlo. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Holden Lee, Jianfeng Lu, and Yixin Tan. Convergence for score-based generative modeling with
  polynomial complexity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.06227, 2022.
Holden Lee, Jianfeng Lu, and Yixin Tan. Convergence of score-based generative modeling for general
  data distributions. In International Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory, pp. 946–985.
  PMLR, 2023.
Tony Lelièvre. A general two-scale criteria for logarithmic sobolev inequalities. Journal of Functional
  Analysis, 256(7):2211–2221, 2009.
Chunyuan Li, Changyou Chen, David Carlson, and Lawrence Carin. Preconditioned stochastic
  gradient langevin dynamics for deep neural networks. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on
  artificial intelligence, volume 30, 2016.
Siwei Lyu. Interpretation and generalization of score matching. arXiv preprint arXiv:1205.2629,
  2012.
Yi-An Ma, Tianqi Chen, and Emily Fox. A complete recipe for stochastic gradient mcmc. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 28, 2015.
Neal Madras and Dana Randall. Markov chain decomposition for convergence rate analysis. Annals
  of Applied Probability, pp. 581–606, 2002.
Enzo Marinari and Giorgio Parisi. Simulated tempering: a new monte carlo scheme. Europhysics
  letters, 19(6):451, 1992.
Chenlin Meng, Yang Song, Wenzhe Li, and Stefano Ermon. Estimating high order gradients of
  the data distribution by denoising. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
  25359–25369, 2021.
Ankur Moitra and Andrej Risteski. Fast convergence for langevin diffusion with manifold structure.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.05576, 2020.
Ankur Moitra and Gregory Valiant. Settling the polynomial learnability of mixtures of gaussians. In
  2010 IEEE 51st Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pp. 93–102. IEEE, 2010.


                                                  11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Radford M Neal. Sampling from multimodal distributions using tempered transitions. Statistics and
  computing, 6:353–366, 1996.
Felix Otto and Maria G Reznikoff. A new criterion for the logarithmic sobolev inequality and two
  applications. Journal of Functional Analysis, 243(1):121–157, 2007.
Chirag Pabbaraju, Dhruv Rohatgi, Anish Sevekari, Holden Lee, Ankur Moitra, and Andrej Risteski.
  Provable benefits of score matching. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.01993, 2023.
L Chris G Rogers and David Williams. Diffusions, Markov processes and martingales: Volume 2, Itô
  calculus, volume 2. Cambridge university press, 2000.
Yasumasa Saisho. Stochastic differential equations for multi-dimensional domain with reflecting
  boundary. Probability Theory and Related Fields, 74(3):455–477, 1987.
Arora Sanjeev and Ravi Kannan. Learning mixtures of arbitrary gaussians. In Proceedings of the
  thirty-third annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pp. 247–257, 2001.
Umut Simsekli, Roland Badeau, Taylan Cemgil, and Gaël Richard. Stochastic quasi-newton langevin
 monte carlo. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 642–651. PMLR, 2016.
Yang Song and Stefano Ermon. Generative modeling by estimating gradients of the data distribution.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2011.13456, 2020.
Robert H Swendsen and Jian-Sheng Wang. Replica monte carlo simulation of spin-glasses. Physical
  review letters, 57(21):2607, 1986.
Henry Teicher. Identifiability of finite mixtures. The annals of Mathematical statistics, pp. 1265–1269,
 1963.
Michalis K Titsias. Optimal preconditioning and fisher adaptive langevin sampling. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2305.14442, 2023.
Alexis Akira Toda. Operator reverse monotonicity of the inverse. The American Mathematical
  Monthly, 118(1):82–83, 2011.
Aad W Van der Vaart. Asymptotic statistics, volume 3. Cambridge university press, 2000.
Dawn Woodard, Scott Schmidler, and Mark Huber. Sufficient conditions for torpid mixing of parallel
  and simulated tempering. 2009a.
Dawn B Woodard, Scott C Schmidler, and Mark Huber. Conditions for rapid mixing of parallel and
  simulated tempering on multimodal distributions. 2009b.
Sidney J Yakowitz and John D Spragins. On the identifiability of finite mixtures. The Annals of
  Mathematical Statistics, 39(1):209–214, 1968.
Yun Yang and David B Dunson.             Sequential markov chain monte carlo.          arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1308.3861, 2013.


                                                  12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Part I

Appendix
Table of Contents
     A Preliminaries                                                                             14
       A.1 Markov Chain Decomposition Theorems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         14
       A.2 Asymptotic efficiency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   15
       A.3 Hermite Polynomials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     15
       A.4 Logarithmic derivatives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   17
       A.5 Moments of mixtures and the perspective map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       18

     B Generators and score losses for diffusions                                                19

     C A Framework for Analyzing Generalized Score Matching                                      21

     D Overview of Continuously Tempered Langevin Dynamics                                       22

     E Polynomial mixing time bound: proof of Theorem 3                                          23
       E.1 Fast Mixing Within a Component . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      23
       E.2 Mixing between components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       25

     F Asymptotic normality of generalized score matching for CTLD                               28

     G Polynomial smoothness bound: proof of Theorem 4                                           32

     H Technical Lemmas                                                                          34
       H.1 Moments of a chi-squared random variable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      34

     I   Additional related work                                                                 34


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A     P RELIMINARIES

A.1    M ARKOV C HAIN D ECOMPOSITION T HEOREMS

Our mixing time bounds for the Continuously Tempered Langevin Dynamics will heavily use
decomposition theorems to bound the Poincaré constant. These results “decompose” the Markov
chain by partitioning the state space into sets, such that: (1) the mixing time of the Markov chain
inside the sets is good; (2) the “projected” chain, which transitions between sets with probability
equal to the probability flow between sets, also mixes fast.
In particular, we recall the following two results:
Theorem 6 (Decomposition of Markov Chains, Theorem 6.1 in Ge et al. (2018)). Let M = (Ω, L)
be a continuous-time Markov chain with stationary distribution p and Dirichlet form E(g, g) =
−⟨g, Lg⟩p . Suppose the following hold.
                                                    Pm
1. The Dirichlet form for L decomposes as ⟨f, Lg⟩p = j=1 wj ⟨f, Lj g⟩pj , where
                                                      m
                                                      X
                                                p=          wj pj
                                                      j=1

    and Lj is the generator for some Markov chain Mj on Ω with stationary distribution pj .
2. (Mixing for each Mj ) The Dirichlet form Ej (f, g) = −⟨f, Lg⟩pj satisfies the Poincaré inequality

                                           Varpj (g) ≤ CEj (g, g).

3. (Mixing for projected chain) Define the χ2 -projected chain M̄ as the Markov chain on [m]
   generated by L̄, where L̄ acts on g ∈ L2 ([m]) by
                 X                                                                wk
    L̄ḡ(j) =           [ḡ(k) − ḡ(j)]P̄ (j, k), where P̄ (j, k) =                                      .
                                                                    max{χ2 (pj , pk ), χ2 (pk , pj ), 1}
               1≤k≤m,k̸=j


    Let p̄ be the stationary distribution of M̄ . Suppose M̄ satisfies the Poincaré inequality Varp̄ (ḡ) ≤
    C̄ Ē(g, g).

Then M satisfies the Poincaré inequality

                                                     C̄
                                    Varp (g) ≤ C 1 +                E(g, g).
                                                     2


The Poincaré constant bounds we will prove will also use a “continuous” version of the decomposition
Theorem 6, which also appeared in Ge et al. (2018):
Theorem 7 (Continuous decomposition theorem, Theorem D.3 in Ge et al. (2018)). Consider a
probability measure π with C 1 density on Ω = Ω(1) × Ω(2) , where Ω(1) ⊆ Rd1 and Ω(2) ⊆ Rd2 are
closed sets. For X = (X1 , X2 ) ∼ P with probability density function p (i.e., P (dx) = p(x) dx and
P (dx2 |x1 ) = p(x2 |x1 ) dx2 ), suppose that

        • The marginal distribution of X1 satisfies a Poincaré inequality with constant C1 .
        • For any x1 ∈ Ω(1) , the conditional distribution X2 |X1 = x1 satisfies a Poincaré inequality
          with constant C2 .

Then π satisfies a Poincaré inequality with constant
                       (                                                        !       )
                                               ∥∇x1 p(x2 |x1 )∥2
                                        Z
            C̃ = max C2 1 + 2C1                                  dx2              , 2C1
                                          Ω(2)    p(x2 |x1 )         L∞ (Ω(1) )


                                                     14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


A.2    A SYMPTOTIC EFFICIENCY

We will need a classical result about asymptotic convergence of M-estimators, under some mild
identifiability and differentiability conditions. For this section, n will denote the number of samples,
and Ê will denote an empirical average, that is the expectation over the n training samples. The
following result holds:
Lemma 5 (Van der Vaart (2000), Theorem 5.23). Consider a loss L : Θ 7→ R, such that L(θ) =
Ep [ℓθ (x)] for lθ : X 7→ R. Let Θ∗ be the set of global minima of L, that is
                                     Θ∗ = {θ∗ : L(θ∗ ) = min L(θ)}
                                                          θ∈Θ
Suppose the following conditions are met:
       • (Gradient bounds on lθ ) The map θ 7→ lθ (x) is measurable and differentiable at every
         θ∗ ∈ Θ∗ for p-almost every x. Furthermore, there exists a function B(x), s.t. EB(x)2 < ∞
         and for every θ1 , θ2 near θ∗ , we have:
                                     |lθ1 (x) − lθ2 (x)| < B(x)∥θ1 − θ2 ∥2

       • (Twice-differentiability of L) L(θ) is twice-differentiable at every θ∗ ∈ Θ∗ with Hessian
         ∇2θ L(θ∗ ), and furthermore ∇2θ L(θ∗ ) ≻ 0.
       • (Uniform law of large numbers) The loss L satisfies a uniform law of large numbers, that is
                                                                  p
                                           sup Êlθ (x) − L(θ) −
                                                               →0
                                           θ∈Θ

Then, for every θ∗ ∈ Θ∗ , and every sufficiently small neighborhood S of θ∗ , there exists a sufficiently
large n, such that there is a unique minimizer θ̂n of Êlθ (x) in S. Furthermore, θ̂n satisfies:
               √               d
                 n(θ̂n − θ∗ ) −→ N 0, (∇2θ L(θ∗ ))−1 Cov(∇θ ℓ(x; θ∗ ))(∇2θ L(θ∗ ))−1



A.3    H ERMITE P OLYNOMIALS

To obtain polynomial bounds on the moments of derivatives of Gaussians, we will use the known
results on multivariate Hermite polynomials.
Definition 8 (Hermite polynomial, (Holmquist, 1996)). The multivariate Hermite polynomial of
order k corresponding to a Gaussian with mean 0 and covariance Σ is given by the Rodrigues
formula:
                                                  (Σ∇x )⊗k ϕ(x; Σ)
                               Hk (x; Σ) = (−1)k
                                                       ϕ(x; Σ)
where ϕ(x; Σ) is the pdf of a d-variate Gaussian with mean 0 and covariance Σ, and ⊗ denotes the
Kronecker product.
Note that ∇⊗k                                                         ⊗k
            x can be viewed as a formal Kronecker product, so that ∇x f (x), where f : R → R
                                                                                            d
      k                           k
is a C -smooth function gives a d -dimensional vector consisting of all partial derivatives of f of
order up to k.
Proposition 4 (Integral representation of Hermite polynomial, (Holmquist, 1996)). The Hermite
polynomial Hk defined in Definition 8 satisfies the integral formula:
                                            Z
                              Hk (x; Σ) = (x + iu)⊗k ϕ(u; Σ)du

where ϕ(x; Σ) is the pdf of a d-variate Gaussian with mean 0 and covariance Σ.
Note, the Hermite polynomials are either even functions or odd functions, depending on whether k is
even or odd:
                                  Hk (−x; Σ) = (−1)k Hk (x; Σ)                                  (10)
This property can be observed from the Rodrigues formula, the fact that ϕ(·; Σ) is symmetric around
0, and the fact that ∇−x = −∇x .
We establish the following relationship between Hermite polynomial and (potentially mixed) deriva-
tives in x and µ, which we will use to bound several smoothness terms appearing in Section G.


                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma 6. If ϕ(x; Σ) is the pdf of a d-variate Gaussian with mean 0 and covariance Σ, we have:
                ∇kµ1 ∇kx2 ϕ(x − µ; Σ)
                                      = (−1)k2 Eu∼N (0,Σ) [Σ−1 (x − µ + iu)]⊗(k1 +k2 )
                     ϕ(x − µ; Σ)
                                                                                    k1 +k2
where the left-hand-side is understood to be shaped as a vector of dimension Rd              .

Proof. Using the fact that ∇x−µ = ∇x in Definition 8, we get:
                                                       (Σ∇x )⊗k ϕ(x − µ; Σ)
                           Hk (x − µ; Σ) = (−1)k
                                                          ϕ(x − µ; Σ)
Since the Kronecker product satisfies the property (A ⊗ B)(C ⊗ D) = (AC) ⊗ (BD), we have
(Σ∇x )⊗k = Σ⊗k ∇⊗kx . Thus, we have:

                          ∇kx ϕ(x − µ; Σ)
                                          = (−1)k (Σ−1 )⊗k Hk (x − µ; Σ)                         (11)
                           ϕ(x − µ; Σ)

Since ϕ(µ − x; Σ) is symmetric in µ and x, taking derivatives with respect to µ we get:
                                                          (Σ∇µ )k ϕ(µ − x; Σ)
                            Hk (µ − x; Σ) = (−1)k
                                                             ϕ(µ − x; Σ)
Rearranging again and using (10), we get:
                             ∇kµ ϕ(x − µ; Σ)
                                             = (Σ−1 )⊗k Hk (x − µ; Σ)                            (12)
                              ϕ(x − µ; Σ)

Combining (11) and (12), we get:
            ∇kµ1 ∇kx2 ϕ(x − µ; Σ)          ∇kµ1 [(Σ−1 )⊗k2 Hk2 (x − µ; Σ)ϕ(x − µ; Σ)]
                                  = (−1)k2
                 ϕ(x − µ; Σ)                               ϕ(x − µ; Σ)
                                             k1    k2
                                           ∇µ [∇µ ϕ(x − µ; Σ)]
                                  = (−1)k2
                                                 ϕ(x − µ; Σ)
                                             k1 +k2
                                           ∇ µ      ϕ(x − µ; Σ)
                                  = (−1)k2
                                               ϕ(x − µ; Σ)
                                   = (−1)k2 (Σ−1 )⊗(k1 +k2 ) Hk1 +k2 (x − µ; Σ)
Applying the integral formula from Proposition 4, we have:
            ∇kµ1 ∇kx2 ϕ(x − µ; Σ)
                                            Z
                                  = (−1) k2
                                              [Σ−1 (x − µ + iu)]⊗(k1 +k2 ) ϕ(u; Σ) du
                 ϕ(x − µ; Σ)
as we needed.

Now we are ready to obtain an explicit polynomial bound for the mixed derivatives for a multivariate
Gaussian with mean µ and covariance Σ. We have the following bounds:
Lemma 7. If ϕ(x; Σ) is the pdf of a d-variate Gaussian with mean 0 and covariance Σ, we have:
             ∇µk1 ∇kx2 ϕ(x − µ; Σ)                                               −(k +k2 )/2
                                         ≲ ∥Σ−1 (x − µ)∥k21 +k2 + d(k1 +k2 )/2 λmin 1
                  ϕ(x − µ; Σ)
                                     2
                                                                                    k1 +k2
where the left-hand-side is understood to be shaped as a vector of dimension Rd              .

Proof. We start with Lemma 6 and use the convexity of the norm
                 ∇kµ1 ∇kx2 ϕ(x − µ; Σ)
                                             ≤ Eu∼N (0,Σ) ∥[Σ−1 (x − µ + iu)]⊗(k1 +k2 ) ∥2
                      ϕ(x − µ; Σ)
                                         2



                                                     16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Bounding the right-hand side, we have:
Eu∼N (0,Σ) ∥[Σ−1 (x − µ + iu)]⊗(k1 +k2 ) ∥2 ≲ ∥Σ−1 (x − µ)∥k21 +k2 + Eu∼N (0,Σ) ∥Σ−1 u∥k21 +k2
                                                                                                           1
                                                     = ∥Σ−1 (x − µ)∥k21 +k2 + Ez∼N (0,Id ) ∥Σ− 2 z∥k21 +k2
                                                                                                  1
                                                     ≤ ∥Σ−1 (x − µ)∥k21 +k2 + ∥Σ− 2 ∥OP
                                                                                     k1 +k2
                                                                                            Ez∼N (0,Id ) ∥z∥k21 +k2
Applying Lemma 30 yields the desired result.

Similarly, we can bound mixed derivatives involving a Laplacian in x:
Lemma 8. If ϕ(x; Σ) is the pdf of a d-variate Gaussian with mean 0 and covariance Σ, we have:
           ∇kµ1 ∆kx2 ϕ(x − µ; Σ)  √                                           −(k +2k )/2
                                 ≲ dk2 ∥Σ−1 (x − µ)∥k21 +2k2 + d(k1 +3k2 )/2 λmin 1 2
                ϕ(x − µ; Σ)


Proof. By the definition of a Laplacian, and the AM-GM inequality, we have, for any function
f : Rd → R
                                                                        2
                                           Xd
                          k      2                 2   2         2
                       (∆ f (x)) =               ∂i1 ∂i2 · · · ∂ik f (x)
                                               i1 ,i2 ,...,ik =1
                                                         d
                                                         X                                        2
                                         ≤ dk                          ∂i21 ∂i22 · · · ∂i2k f (x)
                                                   i1 ,i2 ,...,ik =1

                                         ≤ d ∥∇2k
                                              k        2
                                               x f (x)∥2

Thus, we have
                        ∇kµ1 ∆kx2 ϕ(x − µ; Σ)                √          ∇kµ1 ∇2k
                                                                              x ϕ(x − µ; Σ)
                                                                                2

                                                         ≤       dk2
                             ϕ(x − µ; Σ)                                     ϕ(x − µ; Σ)
                                                     2                                                2

Applying Lemma 7, the result follows.



A.4    L OGARITHMIC DERIVATIVES

Finally, we will need similar bounds for logarithic derivatives—that is, derivatives of log p(x), where
p is a multivariate Gaussian.
We recall the following result, which is a consequence of the multivariate extension of the Faá di
Bruno formula:
Proposition 5 (Constantine & Savits (1996), Corollary 2.10). Consider a function f : Rd → R, s.t.
f is N times differentiable in an open neighborhood of x and f (x) ̸= 0. Then, for any multi-index
I ∈ Nd , s.t. |I| ≤ N , we have:
                                   |I|                                        s
                                                                                 ∂lj f (x)mj di=1 (Ii )!
                                   X      X                                  Y              Q
                ∂xI log f (x) =                   (−1)k−1 (k − 1)!
                                                                             j=1
                                                                                  f (x)mj mj !lj !mj
                                  k,s=1 ps (I,k)

                       s       d s       s      s
                                                                                                           Ps
  Ps ps (I, k) = {{li }i=1 ∈ (N ) , {mi }i=1 ∈ N : l1 ≺ l2 ≺ · · · ≺ ls ,
where                                                                                                          i=1 mi   =
k, i=1 mi li = I}.
The ≺ ordering on multi-indices is defined as follows: (a1 , a2 , . . . , ad ) := a ≺ b := (b1 , b2 , . . . , bd )
if:

      1. |a| < |b|
      2. |a| = |b| and a1 < b1 .


                                                             17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


      3. |a| = |b| and ∃k >= 1, s.t. ∀j ≤ k, aj = bj and ak+1 < bk+1 .

As a straightforward corollary, we have the following:
Corollary 1. For any multi-index I ∈ Nd , s.t. |I| is a constant, we have
                                                                          !
                                                                      |I|
                                                             ∂J f (x)
                         |∂xI log f (x)| ≲ max 1, max
                                                       J≤I    f (x)

where J ∈ Nd is a multi-index, and J ≤ I iff ∀i ∈ d, Ji ≤ Ii .

A.5   M OMENTS OF MIXTURES AND THE PERSPECTIVE MAP

The main strategy in bounding moments of quantities involving a mixture will be to leverage the
relationship between the expectation of the score function and the so-called perspective map. In
particular, this allows us to bound the moments of derivatives of the mixture score in terms of those
of the individual component scores, which are easier to bound using the machinery of Hermite
polynomials in the prior section.
Note in this section all derivatives are calculated at θ = θ∗ and therefore p(x, β) = pθ (x, β).
Lemma 9. (Convexity of perspective, Boyd & Vandenberghe  (2004)) Let f be a convex function. Then,
its corresponding perspective map g(u, v) := vf uv with domain {(u, v) : uv ∈ Dom(f ), v > 0} is

convex.

We will apply the following lemma many times, with appropriate choice of differentiation operator
D and power k.
Lemma 10. Let D : F 1 → F m be a linear operator that maps from the space of all scalar-valued
functions to the space of m-variate functions of x ∈ Rd and let θ be such that p = pθ . For k ∈ N,
and any norm ∥ · ∥ of interest
                                                 k                                                 k
                                 (Dpθ )(x|β)                                   (Dpθ )(x|β, i)
                 E(x,β)∼p(x,β)                       ≤ max Ex∼p(x|β,i)
                                  pθ (x|β)                β,i                   pθ (x|β, i)



Proof. Let us denote g(u, v) := v∥ uv ∥k . Note that since any norm is convex by definition, so is g, by
Lemma 9. Then, we proceed as follows:


                                 k                                               k
                  (Dpθ )(x|β)                            (Dpθ )(x|β)
 E(x,β)∼p(x,β)                       = Eβ∼r(β) Ex∼p(x|β)
                   pθ (x|β)                               pθ (x|β)
                                               Z
                                     = Eβ∼r(β) g((Dpθ )(x|β), pθ (x|β))dx
                                                 Z         K                          K
                                                                                                       !
                                                           X                          X
                                     = Eβ∼r(β)       g           wi (Dpθ )(x|β, i),         wi pθ (x|β, i) dx (13)
                                                           i=1                        i=1
                                                   K
                                                 Z X
                                     ≤ Eβ∼r(β)                wi g((Dpθ )(x|β, i), pθ (x|β, i))dx             (14)
                                                     i=1
                                                 K                                             k
                                                 X                         (Dpθ )(x|β, i)
                                     = Eβ∼r(β)         wi Ex∼p(x|β,i)
                                                 i=1
                                                                            pθ (x|β, i)
                                                                                 k
                                                                (Dpθ )(x|β, i)
                                     ≤ max Ex∼p(x|β,i)
                                        β,i                      pθ (x|β, i)
where (13) follows by linearity of D, and (14) by convexity of the function g.


                                                         18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


B    G ENERATORS AND SCORE LOSSES FOR DIFFUSIONS
In this section, we derive several expressions about generators, Dirichlet forms, and associated
generalized score matching losses for diffusions of the kind (7).
First, we derive the Dirichlet form of Itô diffusions of the form (7). Namely, we show:
Lemma 11 (Dirichlet form of continuous Markov Process). Suppose p vanishes at infinity. For an
Itô diffusion of the form (7), its Dirichlet form is:
                                                   p
                                      E(g) = Ep ∥ D(x)∇g(x)∥22

Proof. By Itô’s Lemma, the generator L of the Itô diffusion (7) is:
            (Lg)(x) = ⟨−[D(x) + Q(x)]∇f (x) + Γ(x), ∇g(x)⟩ + Tr(D(x)∇2 g(x))

The Dirichlet form is given by
                                                                                                                           
                                 Z
E(g) = −Ep ⟨Lg, g⟩ = −                 p(x) ⟨−[D(x) + Q(x)]∇f (x) + Γ(x), ∇g(x)⟩ + Tr(D(x)∇2 g(x)) g(x)dx
                                             |               {z                 } |       {z      }
                                                                            I                                   II


Expanding and using the definition of Γ, term I can be written as:
                                Z
                           I = p(x)⟨D(x)∇f (x), ∇g(x)⟩g(x)dx                                                         (15)
                                Z
                             + p(x)⟨Q(x)∇x f (x), ∇g(x)⟩g(x)dx                                                       (16)
                                Z       X
                             − p(x)         ∂j Dij (x)∂i g(x)g(x)dx                                                  (17)
                                                      i,j
                                           Z          X
                                       −       p(x)         ∂j Qij (x)∂i g(x)g(x)dx                                  (18)
                                                      i,j


We will simplify term II via a sequence of integration by parts:
                Z
         II = − p(x) Tr(D(x)∇2 g(x))g(x)dx
                                             
                Z          X
            = − p(x)          Dij (x)∂ij g(x) g(x)dx
                                 i,j
                 XZ
           =−                p(x)Dij (x)g(x)∂ij g(x)dx
                     i,j
                                                             ∞          Z                                       !
                 X
           =−               p(x)Dij (x)g(x)∂i g(x)                  −           ∂j [p(x)Dij (x)g(x)]∂i g(x)dx
                     i,j                                     x=−∞
               XZ
           =               ∂j [p(x)Dij (x)g(x)]∂i g(x)dx
               i,j
               XZ
           =               ∂j p(x)Dij (x)g(x)∂i g(x)dx                                                               (19)
               i,j
               XZ
           +               p(x)∂j Dij (x)g(x)∂i g(x)dx                                                               (20)
               i,j
               XZ
           +               p(x)Dij (x)∂j g(x)∂i g(x)dx                                                               (21)
               i,j



                                                               19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The term (19) cancels out with term (15), so that we get:
                          XZ
                                 ∂j p(x)Dij (x)g(x)∂i g(x)dx
                                    i,j
                                          XZ
                                    =                 p(x)∂j log p(x)Dij (x)g(x)∂i g(x)dx
                                          i,j
                                              Z
                                    =−             p(x)⟨D(x)∇x f (x), ∇x g(x)⟩g(x)dx

The term (20) cancels out with the term (17).
For term (16),
                                          Z
                                            p(x)⟨Q(x)∇x f (x), ∇x g(x)⟩g(x)dx
                                              Z
                                          = − ⟨Q(x)∇x p(x), ∇x g(x)⟩g(x)dx
                                            Z
                                          = ⟨∇x p(x), Q(x)∇x g(x)⟩g(x)dx
                                            Z X
                                          =       ∂j p(x)Qji (x)∂i g(x)g(x)dx
                                                      i,j
                                                   Z X
                                          =−                      ∂j p(x)Qij (x)∂i g(x)g(x)dx
                                                            i,j



Combining term (16) and term (18),
Z                                    Z     X
  p(x)⟨Q(x)∇x f (x), ∇x g(x)⟩g(x)dx − p(x)   ∂j Qij (x)∂i g(x)g(x)dx
                                                                               i,j
   Z X
=−    [∂j p(x)Qij (x) + p(x)∂j Qij (x)]∂i g(x)g(x)dx
                i,j
      XZ
=−                    ∂j [p(x)Qij (x)]∂i g(x)g(x)dx
          i,j
                                                      ∞               Z                               !
      X
=−                    p(x)Qij (x)∂i g(x)g(x)                      −       p(x)Qij (x)∂j [∂i g(x)g(x)]dx
          i,j                                         x=−∞
    XZ
=                p(x)Qij (x)[∂ij g(x)g(x) + ∂i g(x)∂j g(x)]dx
    i,j
                Z
    1X
=                     p(x){Qij (x)[∂ij g(x)g(x) + ∂i g(x)∂j g(x)] + Qji (x)[∂ji g(x)g(x) + ∂j g(x)∂i g(x)]}dx
    2 i,j
                Z
    1X
=                     p(x){Qij (x)[∂ij g(x)g(x) + ∂i g(x)∂j g(x)] − Qij (x)[∂ji g(x)g(x) + ∂j g(x)∂i g(x)]}dx
    2 i,j
=0

In the end, we are only left with term (21):
                                     XZ
                             E(g) =          p(x)Dij (x)∂j g(x)∂i g(x)dx
                                                      i,j
                                                      Z
                                                  =    p(x)⟨∇x g(x), D(x)∇x g(x)⟩dx
                                                        p
                                                  = Ep ∥ D(x)∇x g(x)∥22


                                                                          20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


We also calculate the integration by parts version of the generalized score matching loss for (4).
Lemma 12 (Integration by parts for the GSM in (4)). Suppose p vanishes at infinity. The generalized
score matching objective in (4) satisfies the equality
                               1
                                 Ep ∥B(x)∇ log q∥2 + 2Ep div B(x)2 ∇ log q + Kp

             DGSM (p, q) =
                               2

Proof. Expanding the squares in (4), we have:
                1
                    Ep ∥B(x)∇ log p∥2 + Ep ∥B(x)∇ log q∥2 − 2Ep ⟨B(x)∇ log p, B(x)∇ log q⟩

 DGSM (p, q) =
                2
The cross-term can be rewritten using integration by parts as:
                                                    Z
                 Ep ⟨B(x)∇ log p, B(x)∇ log q⟩ = ⟨∇p, B(x)2 ∇ log q⟩
                                                      x
                                                       Z
                                                  = − p(x)div B(x)2 ∇ log q

                                                        x
                                                  = −Ep div B(x)2 ∇ log q


C    A F RAMEWORK FOR A NALYZING G ENERALIZED S CORE M ATCHING
Lemma 13 (Hessian of GSM loss). The Hessian of DGSM defined in Theorem 2 satisfies
            ∇2θ DGSM (p, pθ∗ ) = Ep ∇θ ∇x log pθ∗ (x)⊤ D(x)∇θ ∇x log pθ∗ (x)


Proof. By a straightforward calculation, we have:
                                 p                ! p                     p              !
                                    D(x)∇x pθ (x)        D(x)∇x pθ (x)     D(x)∇x p(x)
    ∇θ DGSM (p, pθ ) = Ep ∇θ                                            −
                                       pθ (x)              pθ (x)              p(x)
                                 p                ! ⊤      p               !
                                    D(x)∇x pθ (x)            D(x)∇x pθ (x)
    ∇2θ DGSM (p, pθ ) = Ep ∇θ                         ∇θ
                                       pθ (x)                    pθ (x)
                          p                    p              ! ⊤       p               !
                             D(x)∇x pθ (x)        D(x)∇x p(x)        2    D(x)∇x pθ (x)
                      −                      −                    ∇θ
                                pθ (x)              p(x)                    pθ (x)
        √                      √
            D(x)∇x pθ∗ (x)         D(x)∇x p(x)
Since         pθ∗ (x)      =         p(x)      , the second term vanishes at θ = θ∗ .

                                                p               !⊤           p                 !
                                                  D(x)∇x pθ∗ (x)                  D(x)∇x pθ∗ (x) 
        ∇2θ DGSM (p, pθ∗ ) = Ep ∇θ                                 ∇θ
                                                    pθ∗ (x)                         pθ∗ (x)



Lemma 14 (Bound on smoothness). For lθ (x) defined in Theorem 2,
                        cov(∇θ lθ (x)) ≾ cov (∇θ ∇x log pθ (x)D(x)∇x log pθ (x))
                                       + cov ∇θ ∇x log pθ (x)⊤ div(D(x))


                                            + cov (∇θ Tr[D(x)∆ log pθ (x))



                                                        21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. We have
             1   h p                                                   i
∇θ lθ (x) =    ∇θ ∥ D(x)∇x log pθ (x)∥2 + 2div (D(x)∇x log pθ (x))
             2
           = ∇θ ∇x log pθ (x)D(x)∇x log pθ (x) + ∇θ ∇x log pθ (x)⊤ div(D(x)) + ∇θ Tr[D(x)∆ log pθ (x)]

By Lemma 2 in Koehler et al. (2022), we also have
                        cov(∇θ lθ (x)) ≾ cov (∇θ ∇x log pθ (x)D(x)∇x log pθ (x))
                                       + cov ∇θ ∇x log pθ (x)⊤ div(D(x))


                                         + cov (∇θ Tr[D(x)∆ log pθ (x)])
which completes the proof.

D      OVERVIEW OF C ONTINUOUSLY T EMPERED L ANGEVIN DYNAMICS
In this section, we provide several calculations around the score matching losses associated with
Continuously Tempered Langevin Dynamics.
Lemma 15 (β derivatives via Fokker Planck). For any distribution pβ such that pβ = p ∗
N (0, λmin βI) for some p, we have the following PDE for its log-density:
                  ∇β log pβ (x) = λmin Tr ∇2x log pβ (x) + ∥∇x log pβ (x)∥22


As a consequence, both p(x|β, i) and p(x|β) follow the above PDE.
                               √
Proof. Consider the SDE dXt = 2λmin dBt . Let qt be the law of Xt . Then, qt = q0 ∗N (0, λmin tI).
                                                  d
On the other hand, by the Fokker-Planck equation, dt qt (x) = λmin ∆x qt (x). From this, it follows
that
                                       ∇β pβ (x) = λmin ∆x pβ (x)
                                                   = λmin Tr(∇2x pβ (x))
Hence, by the chain rule,
                                                        λmin Tr(∇2x pβ (x))
                                     ∇β log pβ (x) =                                                   (22)
                                                              pβ (x)
Furthermore, by a straightforward calculation, we have
                                         ∇2x pβ (x)                                ⊤
                      ∇2x log pβ (x) =              − ∇x log pβ (x) ∇x log pβ (x)

                                            β
                                          p (x)
Plugging this in (22), we have
     λmin Tr(∇2x pβ (x))
                                        2      β

                                                                      β
                                                                                        β
                                                                                              ⊤
                         = λ min   Tr ∇ x log p  (x)  + Tr   ∇ x log p  (x)    ∇ x log p  (x)
           pβ (x)
                                                                             ⊤
                         = λmin Tr ∇2x log pβ (x) + Tr ∇x log pβ (x)            ∇x log pβ (x)


                         = λmin Tr ∇2x log pβ (x) + ∥∇x log pβ (x)∥22


as we needed.
Proposition 6 (Integration-by-part Generalized Score Matching Loss for CTLD). The loss DGSM in
the integration by parts form (Lemma 1) as DGSM (p, pθ ) = Ep lθ (x, β) + Kp , where
                                                              1                  2
    lθ (x, β) := lθ1 (x, β) + lθ2 (x, β), and lθ1 (x, β) :=     ∥∇x log pθ (x|β)∥2 + ∆x log pθ (x|β), and
                                                              2
               1
    lθ2 (x, β) :=(∇β log pθ (x|β))2 + ∇β log r(β)∇β log pθ (x|β) + ∆β log pθ (x|β)
               2
Moreover, all the terms in the definition of lθ1 (x, β) and lθ2 (x, β) can be written as a sum of powers of
partial derivatives of ∇x log pθ (x|β).


                                                        22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof of Lemma 6.
      DGSM (p, pθ )
        1                         2
      = Ep [ ∇(x,β) log pθ (x, β) 2 + 2∆(x,β) log pθ (x, β)]
        2
        1                      2                                        2
      = Ep [∥∇x log pθ (x, β)∥2 + 2∆x log pθ (x, β) + ∥∇β log pθ (x, β)∥2 + 2∆β log pθ (x, β)]
        2
        1                                    2
      = Ep [∥∇x log pθ (x|β) + ∇x log r(β)∥2 + 2∆x log pθ (x|β) + 2∆x log r(β)
        2
                                       2
      + ∥∇β log pθ (x|β) + ∇β log r(β)∥2 + 2∆β log pθ (x|β) + 2∆β log r(β)]
            1                  2
      = Ep [ ∥∇x log pθ (x|β)∥2 + ∆x log pθ (x|β)
            2
        1                  2
      + ∥∇β log pθ (x|β)∥2 + ∇β log r(β)∇β log pθ (x|β) + ∆β log pθ (x|β)] + C
        2

By Lemma 15, ∇β log pθ (x|β) is a function of partial derivatives of the score ∇x log pθ (x|β). Simi-
larly, ∇2β log pθ (x|β) can be shown to be a function of partial derivatives of the score ∇x log pθ (x|β)
as well:
       ∆β log pθ (x|β) = ∇β λmin (Tr(∇2x log pθ (x|β)) + ∥∇x log pθ (x|β)∥22 )
                       = λmin (Tr(∇2x ∇β log pθ (x|β)) + 2∇x ∇β log pθ (x|β)⊤ ∇x log pθ (x|β))


E      P OLYNOMIAL MIXING TIME BOUND : PROOF OF T HEOREM 3
The proof of Theorem 3 will follow by applying Theorem 6. Towards that, we need to verify the
three conditions of the theorem:

1. (Decomposition of Dirichlet form) The Dirichlet energy of CTLD for p(x, β), by the tower rule
   of expectation, decomposes into a linear combination of the Dirichlet forms of Langevin with
   stationary distribution p(x, β|i). Precisely, we have
                                                   X
                    E(x,β)∼p(x,β) ∥∇f (x, β)∥2 =       wi E(x,β)∼p(x,β|i) ∥∇f (x, β)∥2
                                                     i

2. (Polynomial mixing for individual modes) By Lemma 16, for all i ∈ [K] the distribution p(x, β|i)
   has Poincaré constant Cx,β|i with respect to the Langevin generator that satisfies:

                                        Cx,β|i ≲ D20 d2 λ9max λ−1
                                                               min

3. (Polynomial mixing for projected chain) To bound the Poincaré constant of the projected chain,
   by Lemma 19 we have
                                              C̄ ≲ D2 λ−1
                                                       min

Putting the above together, by Theorem 6.1 in Ge et al. (2018) we have:

                                                          C̄
                                     CP ≤ Cx,β|i 1 +
                                                          2
                                         ≤ Cx,β|i C̄
                                            ≲ D22 d2 λ9max λ−2
                                                            min


E.1     FAST M IXING W ITHIN A C OMPONENT

The first claim we will show is that we have fast mixing “inside” each of the components of the
mixture. Formally, we show:


                                                  23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma 16. For i ∈ [K], let Cx,β|i be the Poincaré constant of p(x, β|i). Then, we have Cx,β|i ≲
D20 d2 λ9max λ−1
              min .

The proof of this lemma proceeds via another (continuous) decomposition theorem. Intuitively,
what we show is that for every β, p(x|β, i) has a good Poincaré constant; moreover, the marginal
distribution of β, which is r(β), is log-concave and supported over a convex set (an interval), so has
a good Poincaré constant. Putting these two facts together via a continuous decomposition theorem
(Theorem D.3 in Ge et al. (2018), repeated as Theorem 7), we get the claim of the lemma.

Proof. The proof will follow by an application of a continuous decomposition result (Theorem D.3
in Ge et al. (2018), repeated as Theorem 7) , which requires three bounds:

1. A bound on the Poincaré constants of the distributions p(β|i): since β is independent of i, we
   have p(β|i) = r(β). Since r(β) is a log-concave distribution over a convex set (an interval), we
   can bound its Poincaré constant by standard results (Bebendorf, 2003). The details are in Lemma
             14D 2
   17, Cβ ≤ πλ  min
                    .

2. A bound on the Poincaré constant Cx|β,i of the conditional distribution p(x|β, i): We claim
   Cx|β,i ≤ λmax + βλmin . This follows from standard results on Poincaré inequalities for strongly
   log-concave distributions. Namely, by the Bakry-Emery criterion, an α-strongly log-concave
   distribution has Poincaré constant α1 (Bakry & Émery, 2006). Since p(x|β, i) is a Gaussian
   whose covariance matrix has smallest eigenvalue lower bounded by λmax + βλmin , it is (λmax +
   βλmin )−1 -strongly log-concave. Since β ∈ [0, βmax ], we have Cx|β,i ≤ λmax + βmax λmin ≤
   λmax + 14D2 .
                                                                     R ∥∇β p(x|β,i)∥22
3. A bound on the “rate of change” of the density p(x|β, i), i.e.         p(x|β,i)     dx    : This is
                                                                                          L∞
   done via an explicit calculation, the details of which are in Lemma 18.

By Theorem D.3 in Ge et al. (2018), the Poincaré constant Cx,β|i of p(x, β|i) enjoys the upper bound:
                       (                                                       !       )
                                                   ∥∇β p(x|β, i)∥22
                                               Z
         Cx,β|i ≤ max Cx|βmax ,i 1 + Cβ                             dx           , 2Cβ
                                                      p(x|β, i)         L∞ (β)

                                                  14D2 2                           28D2

                                         2                          8      16

                ≲ max λmax + 14D              1+        d max{λmax , D } ,
                                                  πλmin                            πλmin
                    20 2 9
                  D d λmax
                ≲
                     λmin
which completes the proof.
Lemma 17 (Bound on the Poincaré constant of r(β)). Let Cβ be the Poincaré constant of the
distribution r(β) with respect to reflected Langevin diffusion. Then,
                                                   14D2
                                           Cβ ≤
                                                   πλmin


Proof. We first show that r(β) is a log-concave distribution. By a direct calculation, the second
derivative in β satisfies:
                                                      14D2
                                ∇2β log r(β) = −                 ≤0
                                                   λmin (1 + β)3

Since the interval is a convex set, with diameter βmax , by Bebendorf (2003) we have
                                           βmax   14D2    1
                                    Cβ ≤        =       −
                                            π     πλmin   π
from which the Lemma immediately follows.


                                                 24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Lemma 18 (Bound on “rate of change" of the density p(x|β, i)).
                       ∥∇β p(x|β, i)∥22
                   Z
                                        dx        ≲ d2 max{λ8max , D16 }
                          p(x|β, i)        L∞ (β)



Proof.
                 ∥∇β p(x|β, i)∥22
             Z                                    Z
                                                                        2
                                  dx        =         (∇β log p(x|β, i)) p(x|β, i)dx
                   p(x|β, i)         L∞ (β)                                              L∞ (β)
                                                                                     2
                                             = sup Ex∼p(x|β,i) (∇β log p(x|β, i))
                                                  β

We can apply Lemma 15 to derive explicit expressions for the right-hand side:
    ∥∇β p(x|β, i)∥22
 Z                                                    h                           i2
                     dx        = sup Ex∼p(x|β,i) λ2min Tr(Σ−1                   2
                                                            β ) + ∥Σβ (x − µi )∥2
       p(x|β, i)        L∞ (β)    β

                                  1           h                                         i
                                  ≤ 2λ2min sup Tr(Σ−1
                                                   β  )2
                                                         + Ex∼p(x|β,i) ∥Σ β (x − µ )∥
                                                                                  i 2
                                                                                      4
                                             β
                                                                                   3    1
                                              h                                               i
                                  ≤ 2λ2min sup d2 ((1 + β)λmin )−2 + Ez∼N (0,I) ∥Σβ2 zΣβ2 ∥42
                                             β
                                                                           3         1
                                                 h                                                           i
                                  ≤ 2λ2min sup    d2 ((1 + β)λmin )−2 + ∥Σβ2 ∥4OP ∥Σβ2 ∥4OP Ez∼N (0,I) ∥z∥42
                                            β

                                  2
                                  ≤ 4 sup d2 (1 + β)−2 + λ2min ∥Σβ ∥8OP d2

                                       β

                                  = 4 sup d2 (1 + β)−2 + λ2min (λmax + βλmin )8 d2

                                       β

                                  = 4 d2 + λ2min (λmax + βmax λmin )8 d2


                                  3
                                  ≤ 4d2 + 4d2 λ2min (λmax + 14D2 )8
                                  ≤ 16d2 max{λ8max , 148 D16 }

In 1 , we use (a + b)2 ≤ 2(a2 + b2 ) for a, b ≥ 0; in 2 we apply the moment bound for the
Chi-Squared distribution of degree-of-freedom d in Lemma 30; and in 3 we plug in the bound on
βmax .

E.2      M IXING BETWEEN COMPONENTS

Next, we show the “projected” chain between the components mixes fast:
Lemma 19 (Poincaré constant of projected chain). Define the projected chain M̄ over [K] with
transition probability
                                                          wj
                             T (i, j) =         2
                                        max{χmax (p(x, β|i), p(x, β|j)), 1}
where χmax (p, q) = max{χ (p, q), χ2 (q, p)}. If j̸=i T (i, j) < 1, the remaining mass is assigned
         2                     2
                                                     P

to the self-loop T (i, i). The stationary distribution p̄ of this chain satisfies p̄(i) = wi . Furthermore,
the projected chain has Poincaré constant
                                             C̄ ≲ D2 λ−1
                                                      min .


The intuition for this claim is that the transition probability graph is complete, i.e. T (i, j) ̸= 0 for
every pair i, j ∈ [K]. Moreover, the transition probabilities are lower bounded, since the χ2 distances


                                                      25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


between any pair of “annealed” distributions p(x, β|i) and p(x, β|j) can be upper bounded. The
reason for this is that at large β, the Gaussians with mean µi and µj are smoothed enough so that
they have substantial overlap; moreover, the distribution r(β) is set up so that enough mass is placed
on the large β. The precise lemma bounding the χ2 divergence between the components is stated as
Lemma 20.


Proof. The stationary distribution follows from the detailed balance condition wi T (i, j) = wj T (j, i).
We upper bound the Poincaré constant using the method of canonical paths (Diaconis & Stroock,
1991). For all i, j ∈ [K], we set γij = {(i, j)} to be the canonical path. Define the weighted length
of the path
                                             X
                           ∥γij ∥T =                        T (k, l)−1
                                       (k,l)∈γij ,k,l∈[K]

                                   = T (i, j)−1
                                       max{χ2max (p(x, β|i), p(x, β|j)), 1}
                                   =
                                                      wj
                                        14D2
                                   ≤
                                       λmin wj

where the inequality comes from Lemma 20 which provides an upper bound for the chi-squared
divergence. Since D is an upper bound and λmin is a lower bound, we may assume without loss of
generality that χ2max ≥ 1.
Finally, we can upper bound the Poincaré constant using Proposition 1 in Diaconis & Stroock (1991)
                                                     X
                                  C̄ ≤ max                      ∥γij ∥T wi wj
                                         k,l∈[K]
                                                   γij ∋(k,l)

                                     = max ∥γkl ∥T wk wl
                                         k,l∈[K]

                                       14D2 wmax
                                     ≤
                                         λmin
                                       14D2
                                     ≤
                                       λmin


Next, we will prove a bound on the chi-square distance between the joint distributions p(x, β|i) and
p(x, β|j). Intuitively, this bound is proven by showing bounds on the chi-square distances between
p(x|β, i) and p(x|β, j) (Lemma 21) — which can be explicitly calculated since they are Gaussian,
along with tracking how much weight r(β) places on each of the β. Moreover, the Gaussians are
flatter for larger β, so they overlap more — making the chi-square distance smaller.
Lemma 20 (χ2 -divergence between joint “annealed” Gaussians).

                                                                      14D2
                                  χ2 (p(x, β|i), p(x, β|j)) ≤
                                                                      λmin



                                                      26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. Expanding the definition of χ2 -divergence, we have:
                             Z                   2
                                 p(x, β|i)
 χ2 (p(x, β|i), p(x, β|j)) =                − 1 p(x, β|i)dxdβ
                                 p(x, β|j)
                             Z βmax Z +∞                         2
                                             p(x|β, i)r(β)
                           =                                 − 1 p(x|β, i)r(β)dxdβ
                              0      −∞      p(x|β, j)r(β)
                             Z βmax
                           =        χ2 (p(x|β, i), p(x|β, j))r(β)dβ
                                 0
                                Z βmax
                                                      7D2

                            ≤            exp                          r(β)dβ                               (23)
                                 0                 λmin (1 + β)
                                Z βmax
                                                      7D2                                  7D2

                                                                          1
                            =            exp                                      exp −                    dβ
                                 0                 λmin (1 + β)       Z(D, λmin )       λmin (1 + β)
                                  βmax
                            =
                                Z(D, λmin )

where in Line 23, we apply our Lemma 21 to bound the χ2 -divergence between two Gaussians with
                                                                  2
                                                                                   7D 2         7D 2 1
identical covariance. By a change of variable β̃ := λmin7D     (1+β) , β = λmin β̃ − 1, dβ = − λmin β̃ 2 dβ̃,
we can rewrite the integral as:
                              Z βmax
                                                       7D2

             Z(D, λmin ) =            exp −                         dβ
                                0                λmin (1 + β)
                                                7D 2
                                  7D2
                                      Z λ (1+β                     1
                                           min       max )
                           =−                              exp   −β̃           dβ̃
                                 λmin λ7D2                                β̃ 2
                                          min
                                           2
                                   2 Z λ7D
                              7D         min
                                                                1
                           =                           exp    −β̃         dβ̃
                              λmin λ (1+β   7D 2
                                                     )
                                                                     β̃ 2
                                       min       max
                                           2
                                   2 Z λ7D
                              7D         min

                           ≥                           exp    −2 β̃   dβ̃
                              λmin λ (1+β   7D 2
                                                     )
                                                 max
                                       min
                                7D2                        14D2                         14D2

                           =            exp −                                − exp −
                              2λmin                λmin (1 + βmax )                     λmin

                                                                                     2
Since D is an upper bound and λmin is a lower bound, we can assume λDmin ≥ 1 without loss of
                                         2
generality. Plugging in βmax = 14D
                               λmin − 1, we get

                                               7
                            Z(D, λmin ) ≥        (exp (−1) − exp (−14)) ≥ 1
                                               2

Finally, we get the desired bound
                                                                         14D2
                             χ2 (p(x, β|i), p(x, β|j)) ≤ βmax =               −1
                                                                         λmin



The next lemma bounds the χ2 -divergence between two Gaussians with the same covariance.
Lemma 21 (χ2 -divergence between Gaussians with same covariance).
                                                            7D2

                       χ2 (p(x|β, i), p(x|β, j)) ≤ exp
                                                         λmin (1 + β)



                                                        27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. Plugging in the definition of χ2 -distance for Gaussians, we have:
    χ2 (p(x|β, i), p(x|β, j))
                 1               − 12
        det(Σβ ) 2
    ≤               det Σ−1 β
         det(Σβ )
                                    ⊤
           1                                                         1
    exp        Σ−1  (2µ  j −  µi )    (Σ  −1 −1
                                             )     Σ −1
                                                        (2µj − µi ) +   µ⊤ −1
                                                                           Σ  µi − µ⊤ −1
                                                                                      Σ   µj        (24)
           2     β                        β          β
                                                                       2 i β        j   β

              1                         ⊤                                1 ⊤ −1
    = exp         Σ−1β (2µj − µi )        (Σ−1
                                             β )
                                                 −1
                                                      Σ−1
                                                        β (2µj − µi ) + µi Σβ µi
              2                                                          2

              ⊤ −1
    exp −µj Σβ µj

              1              ⊤ −1                     1 ⊤ −1
    ≤ exp       (2µj − µi ) Σβ (2µj − µi ) + µi Σβ µi                                               (25)
              2                                       2
                            2            2

              ∥2µj − µi ∥2 + ∥2µi ∥2
    ≤ exp
                    2λmin (1 + β)
              (∥2µj ∥2 + ∥µi ∥2 )2 + 4∥µi ∥22

    ≤ exp
                       2λmin (1 + β)
                       2
              2∥2µj ∥2 + 2∥µi ∥22 + 4∥µi ∥22

    ≤ exp
                       2λmin (1 + β)
                   7D2

    ≤ exp
              λmin (1 + β)

In Equation 24, we apply Lemma G.7 from Ge et al. (2018) for the chi-square divergence between
two Gaussian distributions. In Equation 25, we use the fact that Σ−1
                                                                  β is PSD.


F    A SYMPTOTIC NORMALITY OF GENERALIZED SCORE MATCHING FOR CTLD
The main theorem of this section is proving asymptotic normality for the generalized score matching
loss corresponding to CTLD. Precisely, we show:
Theorem 8 (Asymptotic normality of generalized score matching for CTLD). Let the data distribution
p satisfy Assumption 1. Then, the generalized score matching loss defined in Proposition 6 satisfies:
      1. The set of optima
                     Θ∗ := {θ∗ = (µ1 , µ2 , . . . , µK )|DGSM (p, pθ∗ ) = min DGSM (p, pθ )}
                                                                          θ
         satisfies
         θ∗ = (µ1 , µ2 , . . . , µK ) ∈ Θ∗ if and only if ∃π : [K] → [K] satisfying ∀i ∈ [K], µπ(i) = µ∗i , wπ(i) = wi }

      2. Let θ∗ ∈ Θ∗ and let C be any compact set containing θ∗ . Denote
                              C0 = {θ ∈ C : pθ (x) = p(x) almost everywhere }

         Finally, let D be any closed subset of C not intersecting C0 . Then, we have:

                                                                       ∗
                                 lim Pr inf D  \ GSM (θ)  < D\ GSM  (θ   )  →0
                                 n→∞       θ∈D


      3. For every θ∗ ∈ Θ∗ and every sufficiently small neighborhood S of θ∗ , there exists a
         sufficiently large n, such that there is a unique minimizer θ̂n of Êlθ (x) in S. Furthermore,
         θ̂n satisfies:
                                         √               d
                                           n(θ̂n − θ∗ ) −
                                                        → N (0, ΓSM )
         for some matrix ΓSM .


                                                  28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. Part 1 is shown in Lemma 22: the claim roughly follows by classic results on the identifiability
of the parameters of a mixture (up to permutations of the components) (Yakowitz & Spragins, 1968).
Part 2 is shown in Lemma 24: it follows from a uniform law of large numbers.
Finally, Part 3 follows from an application of Lemma 5—so we verify the conditions of the lemma
are satisfied. The gradient bounds on lθ are verified Lemma 23—and it largely follows by moment
bounds on gradients of the score derived in Section G. Uniform law of large numbers is shown in
Lemma 24, and the the existence of Hessian of L = DGSM is trivially verified.

For the sake of notational brevity, in this section, we will slightly abuse notation and denote
DGSM (θ) := DGSM (p, pθ ).
Lemma 22 (Uniqueness of optima). Suppose for θ := (µ1 , µ2 , . . . , µK ) there is no permutation
π : [K] → [K], such that µπ(i) = µ∗i and wπ(i) = wi , ∀i ∈ [K]. Then, DGSM (θ) > DGSM (θ∗ )

Proof. For notational convenience, let DSM denote the standard score matching loss, and let us
denote DSM (θ) := DSM (p, pθ ). For any distributions pθ , by Proposition 1 in Koehler et al. (2022),
it holds that
                                                        1
                          DSM (θ) − DSM (θ∗ ) ≥              KL(pθ∗ , pθ )
                                                    LSI(pθ )
where LSI(q) denotes the Log-Sobolev constant of the distribution q. If θ = (µ1 , µ2 , . . . , µK ) is
such that there is no permutation π : [K] → [K] satisfying µπ(i) = µ∗i and wπ(i) = wi , ∀i ∈ [K], by
Yakowitz & Spragins (1968) we have KL(pθ∗ , pθ ) > 0. Furthermore, the distribution pθ , by virtue of
being a mixture of Gaussians, has a finite log-Sobolev constant (Theorem 1 in Chen et al. (2021)).
Therefore, DSM (θ) > DSM (θ∗ ).
However, note that DGSM (pθ ) is a (weighted) average of DSM losses, treating the data distribution
as pβθ∗ , a convolution of pθ∗ with a Gaussian with covariance βλmin Id ; and the distribution being
fitted as pβθ . Thus, the above argument implies that if θ ̸= θ∗ , we have DGSM (θ) > DGSM (θ∗ ), as
we need.
Lemma 23 (Gradient bounds of lθ ). Let lθ (x, β) be as defined in Proposition 6. Then, there exists a
                  1                            1
constant C(d, D, λmin ) (depending on d, D, λmin ), such that

                                              2                1
                               E∥∇θ l(x, β)∥ ≤ C d, D,
                                                              λmin

Proof. By Proposition 6,
        lθ (x, β) = lθ1 (x, β) + lθ2 (x, β), and
                      1                      2
        lθ1 (x, β) := ∥∇x log pθ (x|β)∥2 + ∆x log pθ (x|β)
                      2
                      1
        lθ2 (x, β) := (∇β log pθ (x|β))2 + ∇β log r(β)∇β log pθ (x|β) + ∆β log pθ (x|β)
                      2

Using repeatedly the fact that ∥a + b∥2 ≤ 2 ∥a∥2 + ∥b∥2 , we have:
              2                     2                 2
 E ∥lθ (x, β)∥2 ≲ E lθ2 (x, β) 2 + E lθ2 (x, β) 2
              2                               4                    2
 E lθ1 (x, β) 2 ≲ E ∥∇x log pθ (x, β)∥2 + E (∆x log pθ (x, β))
              2                               4                              2                             2
 E lθ2 (x, β) 2 ≲ E (∇β log pθ (x|β)) + E (∇β log r(β)∇β log pθ (x|β)) + E (∆β log pθ (x|β))
We proceed to bound the right hand sides above. We have:
                  2                               4                    2
  E lθ1 (x, β) 2 ≲ E ∥∇x log pθ (x, β)∥2 + E (∆x log pθ (x, β))
                                                            4                                          2
                      ≲ max Ex∼p(x|β,i) ∥∇x log pθ (x|β, i)∥2 + max Ex∼p(x|β,i) (∆x log pθ (x|β, i))
                         β,i                                     β,i
                                                                                                   (26)

                                    1
                      ≤ poly d,                                                                    (27)
                                   λmin


                                                      29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Where (26) follows by Lemma 10, and (27) follows by combining Corollaries 2 and 1.
The same argument, along with Lemma 15, and the fact that maxβ (∇β log r(β))4 ≲ D8 λ−4
                                                                                    min by a
direct calculation shows that
              2                             4                                           2                          2
 E lθ2 (x, β) 2 ≲ E (∇β log pθ (x|β)) + E (∇β log r(β)∇β log pθ (x|β)) + E (∆β log pθ (x|β))

                                 1
                ≤ poly d, D,
                               λmin



Lemma 24 (Uniform convergence). The generalized score matching loss satisfies a uniform law of
large numbers:
                                                         p
                           sup D  GSM (θ) − DGSM (θ) −  →0
                                 \
                                     θ∈Θ


Proof. The proof will proceed by a fairly standard argument, using symmetrization and covering
number bounds. Precisely, let T = {(xi , βi )}ni=1 be the training data. We will denote by ÊT the
empirical expectation (i.e. the average over) a training set T .
We will first show that

                                                                  1
                                                      C K, d, D, λmin
                      ET supθ∈Θ D
                                \GSM (θ) − DGSM (θ) ≤      √                                                     (28)
                                                              n
from which the claim will follow. First, we will apply the symmetrization trick, by introducing a
“ghost training set” T ′ = {(x′i , βi′ )}ni=1 . Precisely, we have:

     ET supθ∈Θ D GSM (θ) − DGSM (θ) = ET supθ∈Θ ÊT lθ (x, β) − DGSM (θ)
               \

                                                 = ET supθ∈Θ ÊT lθ (x, β) − ET ′ ÊT ′ lθ (x, β)                (29)
                                                                          n
                                                                      1X
                                                 ≤ ET,T ′ supθ∈Θ            (lθ (xi , βi ) − lθ (x′i , βi′ ))    (30)
                                                                      n i=1
where (29) follows by noting the population expectation can be expressed as the expectation over
a choice of a (fresh) training set T ′ , (30) follows by applying Jensen’s inequality. Next, consider
Rademacher variables {εi }ni=1 . Since a Rademacher random variable is symmetric about 0, we have
                     n                                                       n
                  1X                                                      1X
 ET,T ′ supθ∈Θ          (lθ (xi , βi ) − lθ (x′i , βi′ )) = ET,T ′ supθ∈Θ       εi (lθ (xi , βi ) − lθ (x′i , βi′ ))
                  n i=1                                                   n i=1
                                                                               n
                                                                           1X
                                                       ≤ 2ET supθ∈Θ              εi lθ (xi , βi )
                                                                           n i=1

For notational convenience, let us denote by
                                        v
                                        u n
                                        u1 X
                                   R := t        ∥∇θ lθ (xi , βi )∥2
                                           n i=1

We will bound this supremum by a Dudley integral, along with covering    Pn number bounds. Considering
T as fixed, with respect to the randomness in {εi }, the process n1 i=1 εi lθ (xi , βi ) is subgaussian
with respect to the metric
                                                      1
                                     d(θ, θ′ ) := √ R∥θ − θ′ ∥2
                                                       n
In other words, we have
                                  n
                                                                       !
                              1X
                                    εi (lθ (xi , βi ) − lθ′ (xi , βi )) ≤ exp λ2 d(θ, θ′ )

                E{εi } exp λ                                                                       (31)
                              n i=1


                                                         30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


The proof of this is as follows: since εi is 1-subgaussian, and
                          |lθ (xi , βi ) − lθ′ (xi , βi )| ≤ ∥∇θ lθ (xi , βi )∥∥θ − θ′ ∥

        Pn εi (lθ (xi , βi ) − lθ′ (xi , βi )) is subgaussian with variance
we have that                                                             Pproxy ∥∇θ (xi , βi )∥2 ∥θ − θ′ ∥2 .
                                                                            n
Thus, n1 i=1 εi lθ (xi , βi ) is subgaussian with variance proxy n12 i=1 ∥∇θ lθ (xi , βi )∥2 ∥θ − θ′ ∥22 ,
which is equivalent to (31).
The Dudley entropy integral then gives
                                      n                      Z ∞p
                                  1X
                         supθ∈Θ         εi lθ (xi , βi ) ≲       log N (ϵ, Θ, d)dϵ                      (32)
                                  n i=1                         0

where N (ϵ, Θ, d) denotes the size of the smallest possible ϵ-cover of the set of parameters Θ in the
metric d.
Note that the ϵ in the integral bigger than the diameter of Θ in the metric d does not contribute to the
integral, so we may assume the integral has an upper limit
                                                     2
                                                M = √ RD
                                                      n
Moreover, Θ is a product of K d-dimensional balls of (Euclidean) radius D, so
                                                               Kd !
                                                         RD
                            log N (ϵ, Θ, d) ≤ log   1+ √
                                                           nϵ
                                                      KdRD
                                                  ≤    √
                                                         nϵ

Plugging this estimate back in (32), we get
                                     n                                        Z M
                             1X
                                                            q            √           1
                      supθ∈Θ       εi lθ (xi , βi ) ≲           KdRD/ n              √ dϵ
                             n i=1                                               0    ϵ
                                                            q                √
                                                        ≲  M KdRD/ n
                                                             r
                                                               Kd
                                                        ≲ RD
                                                               n
Taking expectations over the set T (keeping in mind that R is a function of T ), by Lemma 23 we get
                                       n                            r
                                    1X                                Kd
                      ET supθ∈Θ          εi lθ (xi , βi ) ≲ ET [R]D
                                   n i=1                               n

                                                                         1
                                                            C K, d, D, λmin
                                                          ≲        √
                                                                     n
This completes the proof of (28). By Markov’s inequality, (28) implies that for every ϵ > 0,

                    h                                      i C K, d, D, λ 1
                                                                               min
               PrT supθ∈Θ D   \ GSM (θ) − DGSM (θ) > ϵ ≤               √
                                                                         nϵ
Thus, for every ϵ > 0,
                                h                              i
                         lim PrT supθ∈Θ DGSM (θ) − DGSM (θ) > ϵ = 0
                                        \
                         n→∞

Thus,
                                                                         p
                                   sup DGSM (θ) − DGSM (θ) −
                                                           →0
                                       \
                                   θ∈Θ
as we need.


                                                       31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


G    P OLYNOMIAL SMOOTHNESS BOUND : PROOF OF T HEOREM 4

First, we need several easy consequences of the machinery developed in Section A.3, specialized to
Gaussians appearing in CTLD.
Lemma 25. For all k ∈ N, we have:
                                  max Ex∼p(x|β,i) ∥Σ−1          2k   k −k
                                                    β (x − µi )∥2 ≤ d λmin
                                   β,i


Proof.
                                                                                   −1
                       Ex∼p(x|β,i) ∥Σ−1          2k                     2k
                                     β (x − µi )∥2 = Ez∼N (0,Id ) ∥Σβ z∥2
                                                                     2



                                                         ≤ Ez∼N (0,Id ) ∥Σ−1 k     2k
                                                                          β ∥OP ∥z∥2

                                                         ≤ λ−k                  2k
                                                            min Ez∼N (0,Id ) ∥z∥2
                                                         ≤ dk λ−k
                                                               min



where the last inequality follows by Lemma 30.

Combining this Lemma with Lemmas 7 and 8, we get the following corollary:
Corollary 2.
                                                                      2k
                                           ∇kµ1i ∇kx2 p(x|β, i)                           −(k +k2 )k
                   max Ex∼p(x|β,i)                                         ≲ d(k1 +k2 )k λmin 1
                       β,i                       p(x|β, i)
                                                                      2k
                                           ∇kµ1i ∆kx2 p(x|β, i)                            −(k +3k2 )k
               max E(x,β)∼p(x|β,i)                                         ≲ d(k1 +3k2 )k λmin 1
                 β,i                             p(x|β, i)


Finally, we will need the following simple technical lemma:
Lemma 26. Let X be a vector-valued random variable with finite Var(X). Then, we have
                                           ∥Var(X)∥OP ≤ 6E∥X∥22



Proof. We have
                                           h                       i
                                                                 ⊤
                             ∥Var(X)∥OP = E (X − E[X]) (X − E[X])
                                                                                           OP
                                                                  2
                                           ≤ E ∥X − E[X]∥2                                                 (33)
                                           ≤ 6E∥X∥22                                                       (34)
where (33) follows from the subadditivity of the spectral norm, (34) follows from the fact that
                             ∥x + y∥22 = ∥x∥22 + ∥y∥22 + 2⟨x, y⟩ ≤ 3(∥x∥22 + ∥y∥22 )
                                                                                                   2
for any two vectors x, y, as well as the fact that by Jensen’s inequality, ∥E[X]∥2 ≤ E∥X∥22 .

Given this lemma, it suffices to bound E∥(∇θ ∇x,β log p⊤              2                       2
                                                       θ ∇x,β log pθ ∥2 and E∥∇θ ∆x,β log pθ ∥2 ,
which are given by Lemma 27 and Lemma 28, respectively.
Lemma 27.

                                                         2                                         1
               E(x,β)∼p(x,β) ∇θ ∇x,β log p⊤
                                          θ ∇ x,β log pθ 2 ≤ poly  D, d,
                                                                                              λmin



                                                        32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Proof. Recall that θ = (µ1 , µ2 , . . . , µK ), where each µi is a d-dimensional vector, and we are
viewing θ as a dK-dimensional vector.

                                                                        2
                    E(x,β)∼p(x,β) ∇θ ∇x,β log p⊤
                                               θ ∇x,β log pθ 2
                                   h                                    i
                                                     2                2
                    ≤ E(x,β)∼p(x,β) ∥∇θ ∇x,β log pθ ∥OP ∥∇x,β log pθ ∥2
                       q                                  q
                    ≤ E(x,β)∼p(x,β) ∥∇θ ∇x,β log pθ ∥4OP E(x,β)∼p(x,β) ∥∇x,β log pθ ∥42

where the last step follows by Cauchy-Schwartz. To bound both factors above, we will essentially
first use Lemma 10 to relate moments over the mixture, with moments over the components of the
mixture. Subsequently, we will use estimates for a single Gaussian, i.e. Corollaries 2 and 1.
Proceeding to the first factor, we have:
                                               4
  E(x,β)∼p(x,β) ∥∇x,β ∇θ log pθ (x, β)∥OP
                                                   4                                          4
   ≲ E(x,β)∼p(x,β) ∥∇x ∇θ log pθ (x, β)∥OP + E(x,β)∼p(x,β) ∥∇β ∇θ log pθ (x, β)∥2
                                                   4                                          4
   ≲ E(x,β)∼p(x,β) ∥∇x ∇θ log pθ (x|β)∥OP + E(x,β)∼p(x,β) ∥∇β ∇θ log pθ (x|β)∥2
                                                       4                                              4
   ≲ max Ex∼p(x|β,i) ∥∇x ∇θ log pθ (x|β, i)∥OP + max Ex∼p(x|β,i) ∥∇β ∇θ log pθ (x|β, i)∥2 (35)
          β,i                                                     β,i

   ≤ poly(d, 1/λmin )                                                                                     (36)
where (35) follows from Lemma 10, and (36) follows by combining Corollaries 2 and 1 and Lemma
15.
The second factor is handled similarly4 . We have:
E(x,β)∼p(x,β) ∥∇x,β log pθ (x, β)∥42
                                                                                  4
≲ E(x,β)∼p(x,β) ∥∇x log pθ (x, β)∥42 + E(x,β)∼p(x,β) (∇β log pθ (x, β))
                                                                              4                            4
≲ E(x,β)∼p(x,β) ∥∇x log pθ (x|β)∥42 + E(x,β)∼p(x,β) (∇β log pθ (x|β)) + Eβ∼r(β) (∇β log r(β))
≲ max Ex∼p(x|β,i) ∥∇x log pθ (x|β, i)∥42 + max Ex∼p(x|β,i) (∇β log pθ (x|β, i))4 + max(∇β log r(β))4
       β,i                                             β,i                                        β
                                                                                                          (37)
≤ poly(d, D, 1/λmin )                                                                                     (38)
where (37) follows from Lemma 10, and (38) follows by combining Corollaries 2 and 1 and Lemma
15, as well as the fact that maxβ (∇β log r(β))4 ≲ D8 λ−4
                                                       min by a direct calculation.

Together the estimates (36) and (38) complete the proof of the lemma.
Lemma 28.

                                                                                      1
                           E(x,β)∼p(x,β) ∥∇θ ∆x,β log pθ (x, β)∥22 ≤ poly    d,
                                                                                  λmin


Proof.
                ∇θ ∆(x,β) log pθ (x, β)                                                                   (39)
                = ∇θ ∆x log pθ (x, β) + ∇θ ∇2β log pθ (x, β)                                              (40)
                = ∇θ ∆x log pθ (x|β) + ∇θ ∆x log r(β) + ∇θ ∇2β log pθ (x|β) + ∇θ ∇2β log r(β)
                = ∇θ ∆x log pθ (x|β) + ∇θ ∇2β log pθ (x|β)                                                (41)
where (39) follows by exchanging the order of derivatives, (40) since β is a scalar, so the Laplacian
just equals to the Hessian, (41) by dropping the derivatives that are zero in the prior expression.
   4
       Note, ∇β f (β) for f : R → R is a scalar, since β is scalar.


                                                             33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


To bound both summands above, we will essentially first use Lemma 10 to relate moments over the
mixture, with moments over the components of the mixture. Subsequently, we will use estimates for
a single Gaussian, i.e. Corollaries 1 and 2. Precisely, we have:
      E(x,β)∼p(x,β) ∥∇θ ∆x,β log pθ ∥22
         ≲ E(x,β)∼p(x,β) ∥∇θ Tr(∇2x log pθ (x|β))∥22 + E(x,β)∼p(x,β) ∥∇θ ∇2β log pθ (x|β)∥22
                                                2                                            4
                              ∇θ ∆x pθ (x|β, i)                     ∇θ ∇x pθ (x|β, i)
         ≲ max Ex∼p(x|β,i)                        + max Ex∼p(x|β,i)                                   (42)
            β,i                  pθ (x|β, i)    2    β,i               pθ (x|β, i)    OP
         ≤ poly(d, 1/λmin )                                                                           (43)
where (42) follows from Lemma 10 and Lemma 15, and (43) follows by combining Corollaries 1 and
2.



H     T ECHNICAL L EMMAS
H.1      M OMENTS OF A CHI - SQUARED RANDOM VARIABLE

For the lemmas in this subsection, we consider a random variable z ∼ N (0, Id ) and random variable
                                          2
x ∼ N (µ, Σ) where ∥µ∥ ≤ D and Σ ⪯ σmax       I.
Lemma 29 (Norm of Gaussian). The random variable z enjoys the bound
                                                     √
                                            E∥z∥2 ≤ d

Proof.
                                                    2
                                           (E∥z∥2 ) ≤ E∥z∥22                                          (44)
                                                              d
                                                              X
                                                         =E         zi2
                                                              i=1
                                                         =d                                           (45)
where (44) follows from Jensen, and (45) by plugging in the mean of a chi-squared distribution with
d degree of freedom.
Lemma 30 (Moments of Gaussian). Let z ∼ N (0, Id ). For l ∈ Z+ , E∥z∥2l  l
                                                                     2 ≲d .

                                                    Pd
Proof. The key observation required is ∥z∥22 =                2
                                                         i=1 zi is a Chi-Squared distribution of degree d.


                                                     l
                               E∥z∥2l       2
                                   2 = E ∥z∥2            = Eq∼χ2 (d) q l
                                           (d + 2l − 2)!!
                                       =                  ≤ (d + 2l − 2)l
                                             (d − 2)!!
                                       ≲ dl



I     A DDITIONAL RELATED WORK
Decomposition theorems and mixing times The mixing time bounds we prove for CTLD rely
on decomposition techniques. At the level of the state space of a Markov Chain, these techniques
“decompose” the Markov chain by partitioning the state space into sets, such that: (1) the mixing time
of the Markov chain inside the sets is good; (2) the “projected” chain, which transitions between sets
with probability equal to the probability flow between sets, also mixes fast. These techniques also can
be thought of through the lens of functional inequalities, like Poincaré and Log-Sobolev inequalities.


                                                     34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024


Namely, these inequalities relate the variance or entropy of functions to the Dirichlet energy of the
Markov Chain: the decomposition can be thought of as decomposing the variance/entropy inside the
sets of the partition, as well as between the sets.
Most related to our work are Ge et al. (2018); Moitra & Risteski (2020); Madras & Randall (2002),
who largely focus on decomposition techniques for bounding the Poincaré constant. Related “multi-
scale” techniques for bounding the log-Sobolev constant have also appeared in the literature Otto &
Reznikoff (2007); Lelièvre (2009); Grunewald et al. (2009).

Learning mixtures of Gaussians Even though not the focus of our work, the annealed score-
matching estimator with the natural parametrization (i.e. the unknown means) can be used to learn the
parameters of a mixture from data. This is a rich line of work with a long history. Identifiability of the
parameters from data has been known since the works of Teicher (1963); Yakowitz & Spragins (1968).
Early work in the theoretical computer science community provided guarantees for clustering-based
algorithms (Dasgupta, 1999; Sanjeev & Kannan, 2001); subsequent work provided polynomial-time
algorithms down to the information theoretic threshold for identifiability based on the method of
moments (Moitra & Valiant, 2010; Belkin & Sinha, 2010); even more recent work tackles robust
algorithms for learning mixtures in the presence of outliers (Hopkins & Li, 2018; Bakshi et al., 2022);
finally, there has been a lot of interest in understanding the success and failure modes of practical
heuristics like expectation-maximization (Balakrishnan et al., 2017; Daskalakis et al., 2017).

Techniques to speed up mixing time of Markov chains SDEs with different choices of the drift
and covariance term are common when designing faster mixing Markov chains. A lot of such schemas
“precondition” by a judiciously chosen D(x) in the formalism of equation (7). A particularly common
choice is a Newton-like method, which amounts to preconditioning by the Fisher matrix (Girolami
& Calderhead, 2011; Li et al., 2016; Simsekli et al., 2016), or some cheaper approximation thereof.
More generally, non-reversible SDEs by judicious choice of D, Q have been shown to be quite helpful
practically (Ma et al., 2015)
“Lifting” the Markov chain by introducing new variables is also a very rich and useful paradigms.
There are many related techniques for constructing Markov Chains by introducing an annealing
parameter (typically called a “temperature”). Our chain is augmented by a temperature random
variable, akin to the simulated tempering chain proposed by Marinari & Parisi (1992). In parallel
tempering (Swendsen & Wang, 1986; Hukushima & Nemoto, 1996), one maintains multiple particles
(replicas), each evolving according to the Markov Chain at some particular temperature, along with
allowing swapping moves. Sequential Monte Carlo (Yang & Dunson, 2013) is a related technique
available when gradients of the log-likelihood can be evaluated.
Analyses of such techniques are few and far between. Most related to our work, Ge et al. (2018)
analyze a variant of simulated tempering when the data distribution looks like a mixture of (unknown)
Gaussians with identical covariance, and can be accessed via gradients to the log-pdf. We compare
in more detail to this work in Section 4. In the discrete case (i.e. for Ising models), Woodard et al.
(2009b;a) provide some cases in which simulated and parallel tempering provide some benefits to
mixing time.
Another way to “lift” the Markov chain is to introduce a velocity variable, and come up with
“momentum-like” variants of Langevin. The two most widely known ones are underdamped Langevin
and Hamiltonian Monte Carlo. There are many recent results showing (both theoretically and
practically) the benefit of such variants of Langevin, e.g. (Chen & Vempala, 2019; Cao et al., 2023).
The proofs of convergence times of these chains is unfortunately more involved than merely a bound
on a Poincaré constant (in fact, one can prove that they don’t satisfy a Poincaré constant) — and it’s
not so clear how to “translate” them into a statistical complexity analysis using the toolkit we provide
in this paper. This is fertile ground for future work, as score losses including a velocity term have
already shown useful in training score-based models (Dockhorn et al., 2021).


                                                   35
